

Stammers versus Akron Securities Limited Matter No 40521/94 [1997] NSWSC 270 (23 July 1997) 
Alfred John Stammers versus Akron Securities Ltd 
CA 40521/94; CD 50271/92 July 1997 
Mason P, Meagher JA, Beazley JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: COMMERCIAL DIVISION - Appeal from Rolfe J 
FILE NO/S: CA 40521/94; CD 50271/92 
DELIVERED: 23 JULY 1997 
HEARING DATE/S: 25 & 26 MARCH 1997 
PARTIES: Alfred John STAMMERS versus AKRON SECURITIES LTD 
JUDGMENT OF: MASON P; MEAGHER JA; BEAZLEY JA 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: A VRISAKIS 
Respondent: B A COLES QC, M CASHION 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: ALECO VRISAKIS 
Respondent: KEMP STRANG & CHIPPENDALL 
CATCHWORDS: 
Illegal contract - offer or invitation to the public - Effect of breach of ss170 & 171 Companies Code - Remedy for breach of s215C Exemption 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
NO OF PAGES: 43 
Alfred John STAMMERS versus AKRON SECURITIES LIMITED 
In 1988 a number of investors, including the appellants, entered into a horse- breeding venture which involved execution of an Investor Agreement, Sale
Agreement, Lease Agreement, Loan Agreement and a Charge. The appellant also took up an offer of minimum receipts insurance.

In 1991, the manager of the venture, Bernborough Breeding & Racing Ltd, went into receivership and the venture was later wound up. No further proceeds were available to investors, and the investors did not meet any further contractual obligations.

Akron sued the appellant for moneys owing to it under the Lease Agreement and the Loan Agreement. Before Rolfe J, Akron was successful.

The appellant's claim is that the Loan Agreement and Lease Agreements were tainted with illegality stemming from breaches of ss170 and 171 of the
Companies Code. The issue on appeal concerned the effect of those breaches and the scope of an exemption granted to Akron under s215C of the Companies Code.

Held: 
Even though the exemption was granted to Akron as distinct from Akron
Investment Services (AIS) (who was the promoter of the venture), Akron was entitled to the benefit of the exemption as agent of AIS.

Despite AIS having breached conditions of its exemption, the appropriate remedy is provided by s215C(5). Consequently, breach of a condition did not invalidate the exemption.

The distribution of the brochure and explanatory notes to the appellant as a member of the public constituted a breach of s170 and s171. However, because the issue of shares was made after the exemption was granted, the contract was not tainted with illegality. In other words, the express conferral of validity upon the act of formation of the contracts is not overridden by an implied invalidity principle deriving from contravention of an earlier duty.

Hurst versus Vestcorp Ltd [(1988) 12 NSWLR 395] applied. 
ORDERS 
Appeal dismissed with costs.
 
Alfred John STAMMERS versus AKRON SECURITIES LTD 
JUDGMENT 
MASON P: The appellant challenges the judgment entered against him for moneys due as an Investor in the Bernborough 1988 Breeding Venture ("the Venture"). It is contended that the taint of illegality blocks the respondent both on a contractual and a restitutionary basis. Alternatively, the change of position defence is invoked in response to the restitutionary claim. 
THE BERNBOROUGH 1988 BREEDING VENTURE 
The promoters of the Venture included the respondent ("Akron") and Bernborough
Breeding and Racing Ltd ("Bernborough" or the "Manager"). What was offered in the Investment Proposal issued in early June 1988 may be summarised as follows :
Akron would purchase "appropriate interests" in 38 broodmares at the valuation figure determined by Dalgety Bloodstock International. That figure was $7,245,000.
The Venture would be divided into 200 equal undivided part interests ("Ownership Shares"). 80 of these were to be subscribed for by Bernborough, the company that would become the Manager of the Venture. These Ownership
Shares were in fact undivided interests as tenant in common in (a) the leasehold interests in the 38 broodmares and (b) the ownership of 20 weanlings which had been separately valued by Dalgety at $1,970,000.
The Manager offered to provide all management and control for the mares and progeny, including marketing. Its primary objective was to derive profits from breeding the mares to produce high quality progeny for commercial yearling market sales. All progeny were to be sold: no horses were to be retained or acquired for racing.
The broodmares acquired at the Dalgety valuation were to be mated in 1988 and later years. Investors would derive income from the sale of yearlings each year commencing in 1989 and the sale of all the bloodstock on hand when the business was wound up in the year ending 30 June 1992 (unless extended beyond that date with the consent of all Investors).
Investors would acquire Ownership Shares by entering into a four year fixed interest lease from Akron as Lessor in respect of the broodmare component of each Ownership Share; and either paying cash, or negotiating a loan, to cover outlays totalling $37,986 per share for Fiscal 1988. These outlays for Fiscal 1988 were made up as follows: 
First annual lease rental  $10,754  
Purchase of weanlings  ,850  
Payment of insurance & service fees for the 1988 stud season (which commenced September 1988)  ,928  
Payment on account of other bloodstock related expenses, to be applied to meet those expenses as incurred (agistment, veterinary etc)  ,862  
Commission fees payable by Investors  ,592  $37,986 
Investors were given the option of borrowing this sum of $37,986 from
Akron on certain terms, including execution of a charge over the Investor's interests in the horses. The loan would be an interest-only loan, with interest of $5,900 being payable annually in advance. Thus, if the loan option were taken up (and it was by the appellant), the Investor in one Ownership
Share would pay on that account $5,900 in June 1988, 1989, 1990 and 1991 and repay the principal of $37,986 in June 1992.
Investors would be required to pay rentals of $10,754 per Ownership Share in June 1989, 1990 and 1991, with the lease residual of $5,440 being payable in June 1992.
In each of the fiscal years 1989-1992 inclusive, Investors would earn taxable income to the extent that receipts to Investors from the sale of yearlings (together with insurance recoveries) exceeded the total of the lease rentals and running expenses incurred in the relevant fiscal year, and the
Manager's entitlement to 15 per cent of the surplus income over running expenses.
Because the Manager "confidently" expected that receipts from the sale of yearlings would exceed running expenses, the Manager was prepared to carry the risk of any shortfall, but only until termination of the Venture. Accordingly,
Investors were informed that they would not be obliged to make any contribution to running expenses (including stallion service fees) in fiscal , 1990 and 1991.
It was indicated that the maximum outlays required by Investors taking out loans in those years would be: 
Fiscal Lease Lease Loan Loan 
Year Rental Residual Interest Principal TOTAL $ $ $ $ $ 10,754 - 5,900 - 16,654 10,754 - 5,900 - 16,654 10,754 - 5,900 - 16,654 * - 5,440 - 37,986 43,426 93,388 * The guarantee of maximum outlay did not apply to 1992. 
It was obvious that the Venture offered taxation incentives and that these were a significant inducement to all Investors. Prospective Investors were informed of counsel's opinion that each would be carrying on the business of "primary production" as defined in s6(1) of the Income Tax Assessment Act, with attendant advantages. They were also told that, for an outlay of $5,900 per share in June 1988 (ie prepayment of the first year's interest on the loan), they would have deductions for Fiscal 1988 totalling $31,174 per share, made up as follows: 
First annual lease rental $ 10,754 
Payment of insurance and service fees for 1988 stud season 10,928 
Commission fees payable by Investors 3, 592 ,274 
Interest on loan 5,900 $31,174
The Venture was to continue until the termination date of 2 January 1992, whereupon the Manager was to sell the horses then on hand and pay the proceeds of such sale to the Investor. All horses were to be sold by 30 June 1992. This termination date would only be extended by unanimous agreement of Investors.
An Investor acquiring one share would execute the following contracts: 
An Investment Agreement, regulating the Investor's rights vis a vis the
Manager; 
A Sale Agreement, whereby Bernborough (the Manager) would sell an undivided 1/200th part interest in the weanlings for $9850 per share; 
A Lease Agreement between Akron as Lessor and the Investor as Lessee. This would lease an undivided 1/200th part interest in the mares acquired by the
Lessor for the purpose of the Breeding Venture. The term was four years with rentals of $10,754 payable in June 1988, 1989, 1990 and 1991. The Lease stated an agreed residual value of $5,440. Interest accrued on outstanding moneys.
 (If the loan option were taken up) a Loan Agreement between Akron as
Lender and the Investor as Borrower. If the loan was not duly repaid it carried interest at 20 per cent.
 (If an offer of "Minimum Receipts Insurance" offer were taken up) a
Minimum Receipts Agreement with Bernborough, for a "premium" of $1303.

THE APPELLANT ENTERS THE VENTURE 
The appellant took up one ownership share in the Venture. His application was made on 29 June 1988 in a form addressed to Akron Investment Services Pty Ltd ("AIS"). I shall return to the relationship between Akron and AIS.

On 30 June 1988 the appellant executed a Thoroughbred Investor Agreement, a
Sale Agreement, a Lease Agreement, a Loan Agreement, and a Charge. He returned these to Akron with a cheque in the sum of $6,241. The cheque represented $5,900 being the advance interest payment on the loan of $37,986 plus $341 for
Stamp and FID Duty. He authorised Akron to apply the proceeds of the loan in the following manner:- $10,928 to Bernborough for insurance, service fees and other bloodstock related expenses; $3,592 commission to be retained by Akron; $9,850 to Bernborough, being the purchase price of the weanlings; $10,754 to pay the first annual rental in respect of the broodmare component of each ownership share; $2,862 on account of other bloodstock-related expenses, to be applied to meet those expenses as incurred.

The appellant also executed a document in relation to the minimum receipts guarantee and paid $1,303 for that benefit.

Rolfe J found that: "by entering into various agreements the defendants borrowed money which, prima facie, they came under a liability to repay conformably with those agreements. The money was not received by them but paid, by their authority, to another party in contemplation that they would receive various financial advantages. One of those financial advantages, which was received, was a reduction in the amount of income tax payable by them." (Judgment p63) 
Thereafter payments and receipts by the appellant were as follows: 
Lease rental Loan Interest Profits distributed 
June 1989 $10,754 $5,900 
June 1990 $10,754 $5,900 
Nov 1990 ($3,135) $21,508 $11,800 $3,135 was the only distribution made per share in the Venture. In April 1991
Bernborough went into receivership. The Venture was later wound up, but no further proceeds were available to investors. Nor did the investors meet any further of their contractual obligations after 1990. In consequence, Akron terminated the respective Leases in June 1991 and demanded payment of outstanding loan moneys (with interest) in July 1991.

The upshot was that the appellant paid to Akron a net $36,073, calculated as follows: 
Lease payments $21,508 (ie 1989 & 1990) 
Loan interest payments 17,700 (ie 1988, 1989 & 1990) 
Distribution 12.11.90 (3,135) $36,073 
THE VENTURE FAILS 
Over the life of the Venture the prices needed to be obtained for yearlings to meet expenses were not achieved, and in April 1991 the directors of
Bernborough appointed a receiver to the company. Sales in yearlings had plummeted. The Investors made no further payments. At the end of the Venture the proceeds of sale of the horses were insufficient to provide any surplus and, because Bernborough was itself the minimum receipts "insurer", those who had taken out minimum receipts insurance did not receive its benefit. Unlike the Investor who was the respondent in Akron Securities Ltd versus Iliffe [(1997) 143 ALR 457], the appellant in the present case was not the recipient of a representation that the "minimum receipts" guarantee was backed by NZI
Securities Australia Ltd ("NZI"). And, unlike the respondent in that case, the appellant here has raised the illegality issue on appeal.

THE CLAIMS AND CROSS CLAIMS IN THE COURT BELOW 
Akron sued the appellant and a large number of other Investors for moneys owing to it under the Lease Agreement and the Loan Agreement. If the
Agreements stood, these moneys were clearly due. So too was default interest on the unpaid moneys due under the Loan and Lease Agreements.

The Investors raised numerous defences to Akron's claims. Except for three
Investors (not including the appellant), all defendants failed, and judgment was entered in Akron's favour against each Investor. As to the attacks made by all of the Investors about representations made concerning the "quality" of the Venture, the trial judge held : "My evaluation of the totality of the evidence is that when the representations were made they were not fraudulent, did not offend against s52, even when assisted by s51A, they were not unreasonable and they did not constitute negligent misstatements. Nor did they contravene the provisions of the [Fair Trading Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/). I consider, for reasons I shall seek to give, that on the available information and acting reasonably and properly, the plaintiff was entitled to make the representations it did, ie the statements appearing in the documents in the context in which they appeared.

It may be asked why people were prepared to enter into such a Venture if it involved risk factors. The answer is, of course, that it was essentially "tax driven" and, whatever else may happen, the defendants would obtain the benefits of income tax deductions and deferrals. There was no risk element about that." (judgment p320) 
Judgment was entered for Akron against the appellant for $97,308.36 made up as follows: 
Lease Account 
Termination Date 1.8.91 
Present value of residual discounted @ 17% 4,726.12 
Credit fees "Once Bitten" (1,434.79) 
Rental Arrears & Default Interest 
Rental Due 1.8.91 10,754.00 
Default Interest 1.8.91 344.19 ,386.53 
Default Interest 11,139.28 
Balance Owing 15.8.94 25,528.81 $25,528.81 
Loan Account 
Default Date 1.8.91 
Principal 1.6.91 37,899.00 
Default Interest 1,389.29 ,288.29 
Default Interest 32,491.26 ,779.55 $71,779.55 $97,308.36 ("Once Bitten" was a horse that was brought into the Venture but suffered some mishap.) 
THE ISSUES IN THE APPEAL 
The appellant contends that Rolfe J should not have ordered the payment of moneys due on account of the Lease Agreement and the Loan Agreement because each of those Agreements was tainted with illegality stemming from breaches of provisions of the Companies Code designed to protect members of the public acquiring "prescribed interests". The illegality is said to provide the appellant with a defence to the alternative contractual and restitutionary claims raised by Akron in its pleadings. It was not in issue that the appellant's ownership share in the Venture was a "prescribed interest".

The appellant submits that: 
The issue of the interest, and the advertising that preceded it, involved various breaches of the Companies Code ("the Code") that tainted the Lease
Agreement with illegality; 
An Exemption granted to AIS on 24 June 1988 did not cover any or all of the breaches; 
The Loan Agreement was not severable, and was therefore similarly tainted; 
Illegality precluded both contractual and restitutionary recovery by
Akron; 
If restitution was otherwise available, the defence of change of position was available.

BREACHES OF THE CODE 
Summary of issues involved 
The appellant alleges a number of breaches of the Code on the part of Akron.
None are covered by the Exemption, so it is claimed, because it was AIS (not
Akron) that was exempted, and because the conditions of the Exemption were not met. (I will address the scope of the Exemption in the next section.) 
In summary, the following contraventions by Akron are alleged: 
Breach of s170(1) by publishing circular letters in May 1988 and on 10 June 1988; causing an advertisement to be published in "The Australian" on June 1988; and sending to the appellant in early June ("in the mail unsolicited") the Investment Proposal brochure with its explanatory notes.

Breach of s171(1) by making an issue, offer or invitation to the public of a prescribed interest at a time when there was not in force, in relation to the interest, a deed which is an approved deed.

Breach of ss99 and 100 (as extended by s170(3)) in that the publications referred to in (a)(i)-(iii) were notices and reports that invited the purchase of a prescribed interest. (This point does not appear to have been pleaded.) 
The relevant parts of ss99, 100, 170, 171 and 174 will be set out: 
SECTION 99 CERTAIN NOTICES, & c, NOT TO BE PUBLISHED (1) [Interpretation] In this section - "notice" includes a circular and an advertisement but does not include a registered prospectus or a report, statement, notice, circular or advertisement the publication of which is permitted under section 100; "publish" includes issue.
 (2) [Publishing of a notice] A reference in this section to the publishing of a notice is a reference to the publishing of the notice by any means, including the publishing in a newspaper or periodical, by broadcasting or television or in a film.
 (3)[Certain notices not to be published] Subject to sub-section (4), a person shall not publish a notice that - offers to the public for subscription or purchase shares in, or debentures of, a corporation or proposed corporation; invites the public to subscribe for or purchase shares in, or debentures of, a corporation or proposed corporation; or refers or calls attention, whether directly or indirectly, to - a prospectus; an offer or intended offer to the public for subscription or purchase shares in, or debentures of, a corporation; an invitation or intended invitation to the public to subscribe for or purchase shares in, or debentures of, a corporation; or another notice that refers or calls attention, whether directly or indirectly, to a prospectus or such an offer, intended offer, invitation or intended invitation, not being a notice referred in sub-section (4).
 (4) [Exceptions] Sub-section (3) does not apply to or with respect to the publishing of a notice that refers to a registered prospectus and - states that allotments or issues of, or contracts for the subscription for or purchase of, shares or debentures to which the prospectus relates will be made only on receipt of a form of application referred to in and attached to a copy of the prospectus but contains no other statements other than statements as to any or all of the following: ...
 (6) [Contravention] A person shall not contravene, or authorize or permit an act that constitutes a contravention of, this section.
 (7) [Offence] Where a notice relating to a corporation is published in contravention of this section by or with the authority or permission of an officer of the corporation, the corporation is guilty of an offence.

Penalty: $2,500 or imprisonment for 6 months, or both.

SECTION 100 CERTAIN REPORTS REFERRING TO 
PROSPECTUSES NOT TO BE PUBLISHED ...
 (3) Subject to sub-section (4), a person who is aware that a prospectus relating to an issue of shares or debentures - is in course of preparation by or on behalf of a corporation or in respect of a proposed corporation, for registration under the law or any State or Territory; or has been issued by or on behalf of a corporation, shall not publish a report that is reasonably likely to induce persons to apply for those shares or debentures.
 
SECTION 170 STATEMENT TO BE ISSUED (1) [Statement in writing to be registered] A company or an agent of a company shall not issue to the public, offer to the public for subscription or purchase, or invite the public to subscribe for or purchase, any prescribed interest unless a statement in writing in relation to that prescribed interest has been registered by the Commission under Division 1.
 ...
 (3) [Application of laws relating to prospectuses] Subject to sub- sections (4) and (5), all provisions of this Code and rules of law relating to -
 prospectuses; the offering or intended offering to the public of shares for subscription or purchase; the inviting or intended inviting of the public to subscribe for or purchase shares; and the issuing or intended issuing of forms of application for shares, shall, with such adaptations as are necessary, apply and have effect in relation to prescribed interests as if - the prescribed interests were shares that were offered or intended to be offered to the public for subscription or purchase or that the public were invited or intended to be invited to subscribe for or purchase; persons accepting any offers or making offers pursuant to any invitation in respect of, or subscribing for or purchasing, any such prescribed interests were subscribers for shares; the references in paragraph 99(4)(a) to the corporation were references to the financial or business undertaking or scheme, the common enterprise or the investment contract to which the statement relates; the reference in sub-paragraph 99(4)(a)(iv) to the directors of the corporation were a reference to the management company for the prescribed interest and the directors of that company; and the reference in sub-paragraph 99(4)(a)(vi) to debentures were a reference to prescribed interests and the reference in that sub-paragraph to the trustee for the debenture holders were a reference to the trustee for, or representative of, the holders of the prescribed interest.

SECTION 171 NO ISSUE WITHOUT APPROVED DEED (1) [Prohibition of issue of prescribed interest without approved deed] A person shall not issue to the public, offer to the public for subscription or purchase, or invite the public to subscribe for or purchase, any prescribed interest unless, at the time of the issue, offer or invitation, there is in force, in relation to the interest, a deed that is an approved deed.
 ....

SECTION 174 PENALTY FOR BREACH OF CERTAIN PROVISIONS OR COVENANTS (1) [Offences] A person shall not - contravene or fail to comply with a provision of section 169, 170 or 171; or fail to comply with a covenant contained or deemed to be contained in any deed that is or at any time has been an approved deed.

Penalty: $20,000 or imprisonment for 5 years, or both.
 (2) [Civil liability preserved] A person is not relieved from any liability to any holder of a prescribed interest by reason of any contravention of, or failure to comply with, a provision of this Division.

Does breach result in contractual illegality? 
Before addressing the facts in detail, it is appropriate that I should identify the legal consequences of finding that any occurred, assuming it was not covered by the Exemption. According to the appellant, the outcome is that both the Lease Agreement and the Loan Agreement resulted from unexempted breaches and are therefore illegal and void.

The appellant's case is that Hurst versus Vestcorp Ltd [(1988) 12 NSWLR ]
effectively determines the legal issue. I agree. The case has many similarities to the present one. Borrowings and investments had been made as a result of a tax saving scheme offered by means of a circular letter distributed by an accountant who was held to be the agent of the company involved in promoting the scheme. When investors were sued for moneys owing on loan agreements relating to the scheme, they pleaded the illegality of those agreements by virtue of the promoters' involvement in breaches of Part IV,
Division 5 of the [Companies Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/ca1961107/) (ss76-89).
The [Companies Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/ca1961107/) was the governing law at the time, and s82 provided in effect that, before a company issued or offered to the public for subscription or purchase or invited the public to subscribe for or purchase any interest, the company was required to issue a statement in the nature of a prospectus setting out prescribed matters. Section 83(1) also provided that "a person shall not issue or offer to the public for subscription or purchase or invite the public to subscribe for or purchase any interest ... unless, at the time of the issue, offer or invitation, there is in force, in relation to the interest and deed that is an approved deed". (It can readily be seen that ss82 and 83 were the predecessors of ss170 and 171 of the Companies Code See also Explanatory Memorandum to [Companies Bill 1980](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/bill/cb1980117/) , notes to clauses 170 and 171.) 
In Hurst, the offers had been made without compliance with s82 (concerning a statement in the nature of a prospectus) or s83 (concerning an approved deed). It was held (by majority) that the offers had been made "to the public" (see per Kirby P at 407-8, McHugh JA at 438-41). Kirby P was also of the view that "interests" had been issued to the public (see at 409).

Kirby P identified the mischief of the legislation as the protection of the investing public through adequate information and minimum standards, and recognised that a purposive approach to the meaning and operation of s82 was called for (see at 402-405). In his words: "The section [s82] is a beneficial and protective one. It is designed to ensure that minimum conditions are observed in the raising of investment moneys from the public." (at 404-5) 
The Court then addressed the consequences of breaches of ss82 and 83 and held that a contract which resulted from the offer of an interest made in breach of ss82 and 83 was unenforceable: see per Kirby P at 410-13,
Mahoney JA at 427-9, McHugh JA at 441-3. I shall not set out the reasoning in detail. It is sufficient to observe that the Court considered its task to be that of applying the principles in Yango Pastoral Co Pty Ltd versus First
Chicago Australia Ltd <case>; [(1978) 139 CLR 410] to a legislative scheme that imposed criminal sanctions for breaches but did not address in terms the civil consequences of breach. The drastic consequences of a finding of illegality based upon minor, technical or formal breaches were recognised. In the end the purpose of the legislative scheme was seen to support the conclusion that illegality and unenforceability descended upon "a transaction made as a direct consequence of a breach" (per
Kirby P at 412) or "a contract made in consequence of a breach" (per McHugh JA at 442. See also at 443D).

Some support was drawn from the implication inherent in s86(2) of the 1961
Act: see per Kirby P at 413, McHugh JA at 443. Cf Mahoney JA at 429. This, like other provisions considered in Hurst has a direct descendant in the
Companies Code. That descendant is s174(2) of the Code, which I have already set out.

In so concluding, the members of the Court recognised that the illegality doctrine was a blunt instrument, although they noted that its rigours were somewhat attenuated by the doctrine of severability.

The correctness of Hurst was not challenged before us. I would respectfully follow it in any event, as did the Appeals Division of the
Victorian Supreme Court: see O'Brien versus Melbank Corporation Ltd [(1991) 7
ACSR 19](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281991%29%207%20ACSR%2019 "View LawCiteRecord" ) at 31, 48. Akron argued, somewhat faintly, that the reasoning in the decision does not apply to the provisions of the Companies Code with which this case is involved, but I can see no relevant distinction. See also
Henderson versus Amadio (No 1) <case>; [(1995) 62 FCR 1] at 184; Henderson versus Amadio (No 2) [(1996) 62 FCR ]
at 227-8.

Two possible points of distinction should, however be noted. Hurst proceeded upon the apparent basis that the court had no power to relieve against minor or technical breaches. At least nothing seems to have been said to the contrary. In fact the [Companies Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/ca1961107/) had such a provision: see s366 (cf s539 of the Code and s1322 of the Corporations Law).
In the circumstances the contrary not having been argued, I think that we should proceed on the basis that the power to relieve a person "from any civil liability in respect of a contravention" (s539(4)(c)) of a Code provision does not displace Hurst. Had that power been exercised it would be a different matter.

A second possible point of distinction lies in the presence of a power of administrative exemption that is found in the later Code (s215C) and
Corporations Law (s1084). In Hurst (at 403) Kirby P noted the absence of a similar power in the [Companies Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/ca1961107/). Once again, this distinction may be noted, but it does not to my mind alter the legal position established in Hurst. If a contravening transaction is not protected by an exemption, then the principles discussed in Hurst continue to apply. (I deal later with the separate situation of breach of a condition of an exemption.) 
What breaches were pleaded and established, subject to the operation of the Exemption? 
The civil taint of illegality is said to flow from breaches of nominated provisions. Akron's principal defence to these allegations is reliance upon the Exemption. Since, however that reliance is said by the appellant to be misplaced, I should first address the extent to which the allegations of breach were (a) open on the pleadings, (b) established by the evidence, and shown to have resulted in the appellant executing the contractual undertakings that represented his part in the issue of the prescribed interest.

Since the alleged contraventions are also criminal offences that carry substantial penalties (see ss99(7), 174(1)), it is essential that the appellant establish his case in accordance with the well known principles laid down in Briginshaw versus Briginshaw <case>; <case>; [(1965) 112 CLR 517.] For similar reasons, it is appropriate to require that an allegation of the relevant breach should be raised clearly in the pleadings. I do not understand these principles to be disputed by the appellant.

Paragraph 46 of the Amended Defence filed by the appellant pleaded the illegality defence in answer to the whole of the Statement of Claim. The matters raised in support of that defence were as follows, with the extent that they were pressed on appeal being indicated in square brackets: the interests in the Venture were prescribed interests which were the subject of offers, invitations and an issue to the appellant as a member of the public; [It has never been in dispute that prescribed interests were involved. And Rolfe J's conclusion that the appellant was a member of the public in relation to the offers, invitations and issue is not challenged on appeal.] contrary to s170 of the Code, no statement in relation to those prescribed interests had been registered; [No statement was registered.] contrary to s171 of the Code, there was not in force at the time of the offer, the invitation or the issue an approved deed in relation to those interests; [No deed had been approved.] the Lease and Loan agreement were entered into by the defendant pursuant to and as part of the defendant's acceptance of the offer and the invitation and the issue of the prescribed interest; [This is disputed on evidentiary grounds, at least as regards the offer and invitation.] the offer, invitation and issue were contrary to and in breach of an
Exemption obtained by AIS in respect of compliance with ss170 and 171.
(Detailed particulars were provided.); [The scope of the Exemption, and its availability to the appellant, were principal issues in the appeal.] in the premises, the Lease and Loan Agreement were void for illegality or alternatively contrary to public policy and unenforceable.

Paragraph 47A pleaded that, by reason of the matters pleaded in para 46 and other breaches of fiduciary duty, the plaintiff was disentitled to enforce its right (if any) of restitution.

It can be seen that breaches of ss99 and 100 were not pleaded. Nor do they appear to have been referred to in argument below, or mentioned in the judgment of Rolfe J. In these circumstances it is not in my view appropriate that this court should consider that part of the appellant's argument suggesting relevant breaches of ss99 and 100. There is an additional reason for rejecting this part of the case, based on the appellant not having seen the advertisement and circular letters, to which I shall return.

The documents which the appellant pleaded that "the promoters" used to offer the Venture to the public are identified in para 46(e), Particular (iii) A.
There it is asserted that the promoters, by AIS, issued an advertisement in "The Australian" on 17 June 1988; circular letters in May 1988 and on 10 June 1988; and the brochure, with its explanatory notes.

The advertisement purports to be published on behalf of AIS. It offers the opportunity to invest "through shares in Breeding Ventures packaged by Akron
Investment Services Pty Ltd". Reference is made to the taxation advantages, special features and anticipated growth of the investment. The advertisement states that "Shares in Akron's Breeding Ventures may only be obtained by completing the application form attached to the prospectus". Readers are invited to phone or fax AIS requesting a prospectus. (The pleading refers to a further advertisement in the Financial Review, but this was not proved.) 
Three letters are referred to in the appellant's Amended Defence. The first (dated May 1988) is addressed "Dear Investor". It is on the letterhead of
Akron and signed by Michael Sissian as Chief Executive. The letter extols the benefits of the 1988 Venture. It concludes: "If you are interested in obtaining further information about this Breeding
Venture, please telephone our Pauline Bollard or Beverley Tso for a brochure, which contains all the relevant information. Shares may only be obtained by completing the Application Form attached to the brochure." 
This letter was not proved to have been sent to or received by the appellant.

The second letter (dated 2 May 1988) is similarly from Akron and contains a typed signature of Mr Sissian. It is addressed to Mr R J Stephens (who was one of the appellant's co-defendants). It extols the benefits of the 1988 Venture, as well as referring to the 1987 Venture in which Mr Stephens was also apparently an investor. According to the letter the terms of the offer were conveyed "exclusively to our existing investors" until 10 May 1988. The "marketing list" for Breeding Ventures in June 1987 contains no reference to the appellant. This, when read with the appellant's witness statement, confirms that he was not an investor in 1987 and that he was not a recipient of any copy of the second letter.

The third letter (dated 10 June 1988) is addressed by Akron (signed by Mr
Sissian) to Mr A E Gallagher, who was also one of the appellant's co- defendants at the outset of the proceedings. Like the earlier letters it outlines and extols the offered investment. Like the advertisement in the
Australian, it insists that the only way in which Mr Gallagher can apply is on the application contained in the prospectus.

The brochure is the Investment Proposal discussed at the beginning of this judgment. Accompanying it are three pages of Explanatory Notes in the form of a letter from Akron signed by Mr A F Peterson who is a director of both AIS and Akron. The letter summarises the nature of the investment and the financial outlays involved. It refers to the brochure being attached, and directs that any application for shares must be made on the Application Form in the brochure. It was these two documents which the appellant received "in the mail unsolicited" in or about early June 1988. There appears to be no direct evidence as to who sent it to the appellant: cf Wigmore on Evidence rd ed SSSS2148-2150. Since, however, Akron concedes that the distribution of the brochure, without more, would have been a contravention of ss170 and 171 (apparently by or touching the rights of Akron) I am content to do likewise.
The appellant, who is a solicitor, read the documents (on an unknown date) and applied to AIS on about 28 June 1988 on the forms provided for an ownership share and loan. As previously indicated, the appellant forwarded a cheque for $6241 for loan interest payment and stamp duty and a cheque for $1303 for the minimum receipts guarantee.

Rolfe J held that the advertisement and the letters were not caught by s170 because they did not offer or invite a subscription for or purchase of a prescribed interest. They drew attention to the investment but were not capable of acceptance. While they solicited interest they did not, he held, amount to an offer or invitation to invest in the Venture.

In the appeal Akron supports these reasons. But it makes a more direct response: there is no evidence or finding that the circular letters were sent to, received by, or otherwise brought to the attention of the appellant. Nor is there evidence that the appellant read the advertisement. I do not understand the appellant to dispute these factual assertions. His witness statement makes no reference to having read any document apart from the brochure and its accompanying explanatory notes. In my view, this response disposes of the case of illegality stemming in various ways through ss170(1) and 171(1) from the advertisement and the letters. It would also answer any case based on breach of ss99 or 100 in relation to the advertisement and circular letters, were it open on the pleadings. This is because the defence of illegality which results from breaches of prospectus provisions like ss99, , 170 and 171 is only available to a party who can demonstrate that the contract sued upon resulted from that illegality: see Hurst at 412G per
Kirby P, 442F-G and 443D per McHugh JA.

But these considerations do not apply with respect to the brochure and its explanatory notes. The brochure was the relevant offer or invitation, as Rolfe
J found, and it was received by the appellant as a member of the public. The respondent apparently concedes involvement in its distribution to the public and to the appellant. The appellant responded to that offer or invitation by reading it and using the application form contained within it to apply for a share in the Venture. Since the brochure did not comply with the law's requirements at the time relating to prospectuses, and since there was no approved deed in relation to the relevant prescribed interest, a prima facie breach of ss170 and 171 was established. So too was the requisite causal link between the proscribed offer or invitation to the public and the lease contract pursuant to which the appellant was sued. The question whether the loan contract was severable from the taint of illegality was raised, but it will not be necessary for me to consider this argument.

The Exemption and its legal effect 
Section 215C of the Companies (Victoria) Code conferred power on the
Commissioner for Corporate Affairs for Victoria to exempt from compliance with all or any of the provisions of Part IV Division 6 (relating to prescribed interests). Relevantly s215C provided: "215C(2) The Commission may, by instrument in writing, exempt a person, as specified in the instrument and subject to such conditions (if any) as are specified in the instrument, from compliance with all or any of the provisions of [Div 6]....

A person shall not contravene or fail to comply with a condition to which an exemption under subsection (2) is subject.

Where a person has contravened or failed to comply with a condition to which an exemption under sub-section (2) is subject, the Court may, on the application of the Commission, order the person to comply with the condition.

In the present case an exemption was granted on 24 June 1988 under the hand of the Assistant Commissioner for Corporate Affairs for Victoria. It was in the following form: "COMPANIES (VICTORIA) CODE 
SECTION 215C 
EXEMPTION 
The Commissioner for Corporate Affairs for the State of Victoria, Delegate of the National Companies and Securities Commission, pursuant to sub-section
C(2) of the Companies (Victoria) Code and the Companies Code ("the
Code") hereby exempts AKRON INVESTMENT SERVICES PTY LTD ("the Company") from complying with the provisions of Section 170 and 171 of Division 6 of Part IV of the Code in respect of any prescribed interest or prescribed interests offered to the public for subscription or purchase ("Prescribed Interests") in 
BERNBOROUGH 1988 BREEDING VENTURE ("the Syndicate"), a Syndicate formed for the purpose of the syndication of a thoroughbred Broodmares and Weanlings.

The exemption is subject to the following terms and conditions:
The Company must hold a dealer's licence pursuant to Section 43 of the
Securities Industry (Victoria) Code.
Neither the Company nor any person acting or purporting to act for, by arrangement with or on behalf of the Company shall - issue to the public the Prescribed Interests otherwise than pursuant to the receipt of an application form, a copy of which has been lodged with the
NSW Bloodhorse Breeders Association of Australia Ltd ("BBA").
 accept from the public or any member of the public an application for subscription or purchase of or any offer to subscribe for or purchase the
Prescribed Interests which is made on any form other than a copy of the application form lodged with the BBA.
 offer to the public for subscription or purchase or invite the public to subscribe for or purchase the Prescribed Interests or issue, place or make or cause to be issued, placed or made any advertisement or public announcement in respect of the Prescribed Interests in any communication, document, publication, circular or in the press or other media other than means of: the Promoters Statement lodged with the BBA.
 the Syndicate Agreement lodged with the BBA.
 advertising in a form approved by the BBA which does not contain anything not also contained in the Promoter's Statement and does not contain material that is misleading or deceptive or likely to mislead or deceive in the form or context in which it occurs. 
The Company must at all times and in all respects comply with the
Australian Rules of Racing as adopted from time to time by the Victorian
Racing Club and in the case of breeding syndicates, the rules and by-laws of the proprietors of the Australian Stud Book insofar as they apply to the
Company.
The Company shall not accept from any member of the public an application for Prescribed Interests in a Syndicate unless the Company is reasonably satisfied that the applicant has net assets equal to or greater than five times the cost of an ownership share in the Syndicate or $300,000 whichever is the greater.
The Company shall at all times comply with sub-section 33(3) of the
Companies (Victoria) Code.

DATED AT MELBOURNE this 24th day of June, 1988." 
Whether or not the Exemption would have validated contravening conduct referable to the advertisement or the circular letters which occurred prior to June 1988 is an issue which does not arise, in the light of my earlier conclusions about those documents not having come to the attention of the appellant. However the availability of the Exemption to Akron as a means of deflecting the contractual illegality argument referable to the brochure (and its explanatory notes) is subject to three further contentions by the appellant. The appellant submits that:- 
The Exemption is not available to Akron as distinct from AIS, the company to whom it is addressed; 
The Exemption is not available because its conditions were breached in certain respects; and 
The Exemption did not have retrospective effect, and therefore could not validate contracts formed as the result of an offer or invitation to the public which the appellant received before the exemption was granted.

To whom is the Exemption available? 
The Exemption is in favour of AIS and exempts that company from complying with ss170 and 171. Section 215C (set out above) authorises the Commission to exempt "a person". While the singular would include the plural (Acts
Interpretation Act 1901 (Cth), s23(b)), the section is to be contrasted with the corresponding provision in the later-enacted Corporations Law (s1084), which allows exemption of "a particular person or persons or a particular class of persons". The attributes of a particular company or the identity of the persons in control of a particular company may be material to the administrative discretion. This is reflected in the first condition of the
Exemption, which is that "the Company" (ie AIS) hold a dealer's licence pursuant to s43 of the Securities Industry (Victorian) Code. (AIS held such a licence.) 
There is no basis for construing the Exemption as dispensing any person other than AIS from the duty to comply with ss170 and 171. Nevertheless, since AIS was a company it would be expected to act through agents. The opening words of condition 2 recognise this in contemplating that there would be persons who would "act or purport ... to act for, by arrangement with or on behalf of the
Company". To construe s215C as precluding this, or as requiring every conceivable agent involved in the issue, offer or invitation to be nominated in advance would stultify the provision.

Rolfe J held that it was AIS that was the promoter (judgment p349). This finding was, in my view, amply supported by the evidence showing that company's involvement in the circular letters of May and June, and the procuring of the Exemption itself. AIS held a dealer's licence under s43 of the Securities Industry (Victorian) Code. The advertisements were placed in its name. It was stated to be the "promoter/licensed dealer" in the brochure.
The Application Form in the back of the brochure, which the appellant used, was addressed to AIS.

The appellant submits that Rolfe J effectively pierced the corporate veil of
AIS. I disagree. AIS and Akron were part of the Akron group of companies. Each had as their directors Mr Michael Peter Sissian and Mr Anthony Francis
Peterson. The mere fact that AIS was a wholly owned subsidiary of Akron did not prevent it from using its holding company as agent.

Rolfe J held that "there was no differentiation within the Akron Group between the staff of the plaintiff and AIS and ... those who undertook a consideration of the applications were part of the overall Akron Group staff" (judgment p46). Based on this, he concluded that Akron had the benefit of the exemption given to AIS. I would prefer to express the matter slightly differently, although there is probably no difference in substance. I prefer to ask whether the appellant has proved that Akron, as distinct from AIS, breached ss170 and 171. This is because, unless a distinct breach by Akron is shown, it has no need for the Exemption. In my view, the evidence does not establish that Akron acted, except perhaps as agent of AIS, in any way that would constitute a breach of ss170 or 171, at least as regards the appellant.
In this context it is critical that the appellant show that his contract was causally related to Akron's breach of ss170 or 171, and he has not done so. In his Defence, the appellant pleaded that it was AIS that made the offer to the public through the advertisement, the circular letters, the brochure and the explanatory notes. I do not think that the evidence established otherwise, at least as regards the appellant. The brochure which he received "in the mail unsolicited" purported to be from AIS as promoter. The "prescribed interest" was the bundle of contractual and proprietary rights obtained by the appellant upon entry into the venture. That bundle was offered by AIS as promoter. And it was to AIS that the Application Form was addressed.
It is true that the explanatory notes were on Akron letterhead. But they enclosed and summarised the brochure.

I would therefore reject the first argument relating to the Exemption.

Breach of the conditions of the Exemption? 
The appellant next contends that the conditions of the Exemption were breached in a number of respects. In particular it was submitted that: 
AIS breached condition 4 in accepting applications from members of the public without being reasonably satisfied that each applicant had assets equal to or greater than $300,000 (in breach of condition 4); 
AIS used advertising that did not comply with condition 2(iii) in several respects.

Before Rolfe J, the appellant submitted that the effect of these breaches was that AIS lost the benefit of the Exemption, so that it was then exposed to the full consequences of non-compliance with s170; or alternatively that the breach of the conditions constituted statutory illegality which precluded the enforcement of any contract entered into in reliance upon the Exemption.

Rolfe J rejected these two arguments below. He held that the only statutory consequence of contravention of or failure to comply with a condition, to which an exemption is subject, is provided by s215C(5). His Honour added: "It would seem that this provision over-rides the general penalty provision contained in s570" (judgment p36). Later, he held that subsection (4) does not set up a potentially separate regime, which could bring into operation the penalties laid down in s570. "The reason for sub-s.4 was to provide a basis for sub-s.5. The view appears to have been taken that unless the statute expressly prohibited contravention or failure to comply, the remedy in sub-s.5 could not be exercised. In the result the Commission may, by application to the Court, seek to enforce compliance with the condition" (judgment p52).

It is far from clear whether the appellant presses both arguments on appeal. I read the appellant's submission (SS1.13) as maintaining only the first. In any event I would reject both, for the reasons which follow.

I agree with Rolfe J that an Exemption operates to relieve the person exempted from the duty to comply with the provisions stipulated in the Exemption.
Exemption having been granted, the way in which the promoter is to conduct itself is to be found within the conditions of the Exemption. The sanctions for non-compliance with a condition include exposure to application for an order that the person involved comply with the condition (s215C(5)). And, with respect to Rolfe J, they also include exposure to a penalty for breach of s215C(4) which, in terms, prohibits contravention or failure to comply with a condition and thereby attracts s570 which exacts a penalty for contravention of provisions of the Code which do not themselves provide that contravention is an offence. Breach of a condition may also be a matter which the Commission might properly take into account in responding to a later application for exemption by the party involved.

But I can see no proper basis for going further, as suggested in the two alternative arguments advanced by the appellant in the court below. The Act does not say that breach of a condition invalidates the Exemption. Nor, for that matter, does the Exemption itself (cf Elderslie Finance Corp Ltd v
Australian Securities Commission [(1993) 11 ACLC 787] at 791).
In fact, the implication is the other way, because compliance with the condition may be enforced pursuant to subsection (5) (Prioris Pty Ltd v
Inscorp Holdings Ltd [(1995) 13 ACLC 915] at 921-2).
The Act does not equate an exemption condition with a provision of the Act.
The virtually infinite variety of conditions that the Commission might properly impose would include those which would be fundamental and those which would be not. Non-compliance may be due to a wide range of factors, including harmless inadvertence. Unlike the situation being addressed in Hurst, no provision equivalent to s86(2) of the [Companies
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/ca1961107/) (s174(2) of the Code) carries the implication that unenforceability is an additional consequence of breach of condition. The presence of that section was important in the reasoning of the Court (cf Kirby P at 411, 413; McHugh JA at 443) in distinguishing the situation in Hurst from that discussed in Yango
Pastoral. The lastmentioned case emphasises the need to exercise care to avoid the undiscriminating operation of the law of illegality: Yango
Pastoral at 429. See also Fitzgerald versus F J Leonhardt Pty Ltd <case>; [(1997) 143 ALR 569.] 
For these reasons I would not hold that breach of a condition imposed by the
Commission would spell contractual invalidity on either of the two bases argued before Rolfe J.

Accordingly, it is unnecessary to consider whether any condition was breached by AIS/Akron. In any event, I doubt whether the appellant established any breach so far as he was concerned. As to condition 4 (which relevantly required AIS to be reasonably satisfied that each applicant had assets more than $300,000) this condition was clearly met as regards the appellant, although not as regards some other Investors. I agree with Rolfe J who held that persons in the fortunate situation of the appellant could not plead what
I would regard as a jus tertii in relation to less prosperous investors. As regards the contention that condition 2(iii) was breached, Rolfe J found otherwise in relation to the brochure (judgment p349), which was the critical document that led the appellant to enter the Venture. However, I need not pursue this issue further in view of my conclusion about the legal effect of breach of Exemption condition.

The prospectivity of the Exemption 
Finally, the appellant contends that the Exemption is not available with respect to antecedent breaches of ss170 and 171. In the light of my earlier conclusions about the newspaper advertisement and the circular letters it is sufficient to concentrate upon the brochure. The Exemption "exempts [AIS] from complying with [ss170 and 171] in respect of any prescribed interest or prescribed interests offered to the public for subscription or purchase".

Rolfe J held: "Although brochures may have been sent out before the exemption was received
I am of the opinion that the issue of the exemption validated that, provided there was otherwise compliance with the conditions it contained. The evidence is clear that no applications were accepted, in the sense that no transactions consequential upon an application were entered into, until after the exemption was issued. In my opinion the effect of the exemption is to provide exemption from the requirements of the Act provided that the conditions are met." (judgment p46) 
The appellant received his copy of the brochure and explanatory notes "in the mail unsolicited" in early June 1988. He read them on an undisclosed date and applied for a share and loan on about 28 June 1988. The application was accepted in the sense that he received a bundle of documents from Akron on 30
June 1988. These were signed that day.

The unsolicited delivery of the brochure to the appellant as a member of the public was the conduct which prima facie contravened ss170 and 171. This is because the brochure invited the subscription or purchase of a prescribed interest when there was not a registered statement in the nature of a prospectus (s170) or an approved deed (s171) in relation to that prescribed interest. Nothing would have prevented the appellant from applying forthwith, ie before the Exemption was granted on 24 June 1988.

In my view, it is clear that s215C operated prospectively, in the sense that it related only to identified later conduct that would otherwise have contravened inter alia Division 6. This is the fair reading of the section and is reinforced by contrasting s539 of the Code which authorises the
Court to relieve against the consequences of past contraventions. It follows that the Exemption does not purport in terms to excuse antecedent breaches of ss170 or 171.

It is important to observe that both s170 and s171 distinguish between the issue of a prescribed interest and the offer or invitation to subscribe for or purchase a prescribed interest. It follows that AIS contravened the two provisions both when it distributed the brochure to members of the public (if it did so), and when it "issued" prescribed interests to members of the public.

The difficulty lies in distinguishing the two steps when it comes to the application of Hurst. It is to be remembered that Hurst establishes that a contract made in consequence of a breach of the prospectus provisions is unenforceable. Stepping back from the legal issue, it may fairly be said that the appellant offered to enter into the investment contract as a direct result of reading the brochure. He was not privy to the intention (if any) of AIS/Akron to delay processing applications until exemption had been obtained.

But is this enough to invalidate the contracts? I have not found this to be an easy question to answer, but I do so in the negative. I think that the key lies in an understanding of how s215C was intended to operate. Section 215C was inserted in the Code in 1983 (see [Companies and Securities Legislation (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/caslaa1983586/), [s68](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/caslaa1983586/s68.html) which inserted a new Division 10). Section 215C reenacted and extended more limited powers that the Commission already had to exempt compliance with particular provisions: see Companies Act (Cth) 1981, ss109, 172(6) and 176(1), each of which were repealed in 1983. The Explanatory Memorandum relating to the 1983 Act indicated (in SS338) that experience with similar exempting powers had shown that it had been possible to reduce the costs of compliance with the relevant provisions while maintaining investor protection or to enable compliance without loss of the investor protection which the provisions were designed to provide.

What is clear is that an Exemption was intended to have effect in accordance with its terms. As s215C (set out above) indicated, the Commission could stipulate the provisions from which compliance was exempted. In the present case, the Exemption nominated ss170 and 171 "in respect of any prescribed interest ... offered to the public for subscription or purchase... in
BERNBOROUGH 1988 BREEDING VENTURE". Section 170(3)(f) (also set out above) stipulated in effect that the making of an offer pursuant to an invitation was the equivalent of subscription to purchase a share for the purpose of all provisions of the Code.

Translated into the present context, the Exemption meant that the acceptance by Akron of the appellant's application to take up the congeries of contracts that formed the relevant prescribed interest did not constitute a breach of
AIS/Akron's duty not to issue such interests to members of the public. It meant that the issue (ie the act of acceptance of the appellant's offer) did not involve contravention of ss170 or 171, notwithstanding the absence of a statement in the nature of a prospectus or an approved deed. It must follow that the direct operation of Hurst upon the formation of those contracts with the appellant was saved (exempted) from possible illegality. This express conferral of validity upon the act of formation of the contracts cannot, in my view, be overridden by an implied invalidity principle deriving from contravention of an earlier duty (ie not to issue invitations to the public to enter into such contracts). The ultimate search is for the implied will of the legislature (see Yango at 413-4, 426-7; Hurst at 411, 442-3).

Since the "legislature cannot speak with a forked tongue" (Waugh v
Kippen <case>; [(1986) 160 CLR 156] at 165 Gibbs CJ, Mason J, Wilson J and Dawson J), its intention expressed in the Exemption given on 24 June 1988 with reference to the Bernborough 1988 Breeding Venture drowns out the muted voice of Hurst in its application to the pre-24 June 1988 invitation to the public which (ex hypothesi) culminated in the contracts (validly) issued to the public after 24 June 1988.

For these reasons the Exemption was effective. It is therefore unnecessary to consider the argument that the Loan Agreement was severable from the consequences of illegality. It also becomes unnecessary to address Akron's alternative restitutionary argument. Fortunately the relevant principles are discussed elsewhere with pellucid clarity: see Carter & Harland,
Contract Law in Australia 3rd ed SSSS1727-1737.

The appeal should be dismissed with costs.

Alfred John STAMMERS versus AKRON SECURITIES LTD 
JUDGMENT 
MEAGHER JA: I agree with Mason P.

Alfred John STAMMERS versus AKRON SECURITIES LTD 
JUDGMENT 
BEAZLEY JA: I agree with Mason P. * * * 
