

Regina versus Eng-Chong Yeo [1996] NSWSC 305 (26 July 1996) 
R versus ENG-CHONG YEO /95 
FRIDAY 26 JULY 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, SULLY J, HULME J 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: In this matter I will ask Sully J to give the first judgment.

SULLY J: On 27 April 1995 three men, of whom the present applicant Mr Eng-Chong Yeo was one, appeared before his Honour the Chief Judge of the District Court, and pleaded, individually, guilty to a charge of having knowingly taken part in the supply of a prohibited drug, namely, heroin, the amount being not less than the commercial quantity applicable by the relevant law to that proscribed drug.

On 18 May 1995 his Honour imposed upon the present applicant a sentence of imprisonment of 11 years, apportioned between a minimum term of eight years, and an additional term of three years. The applicant seeks leave to appeal against that sentence.

In support of that appeal he has filed handwritten grounds of appeal which are in the following terms: (1) That he was not more involved that his co-accused in the original aspects of the drug deal; (2) That the police interpretation of conversations between himself and Ah Chai were not correct; (3) That he did not arrange any shipment; (4) That he only learned that drugs were involved in his third trip to Australia and had previously thought he was only involved in laundering money; (5) That the Court was not informed of his attempts to assist the police; and (6) That he was declined the opportunity to give evidence.

The applicant has appeared this morning unrepresented. He has appeared with the assistance of Mr Bian, an interpreter in the applicant's native tongue; and the Court has had to do the best that it can in those circumstances to get a clear understanding of what it is that the applicant wishes to put forward by way of detailed submissions in support of any or all grounds of appeal as notified.

It has not been at all easy to do this; and I think that the fairest way of approaching the matter is simply to deal with the literal terms of the handwritten grounds of appeal, they having been prepared, as it would seem, with the assistance of a legal aid solicitor who was then available to advise and to help the applicant.

The amount of heroin in question was 6.4 kilograms. There was clear evidence, which the learned sentencing Judge accepted, that that heroin had been imported into this country pursuant to a scheme which had been orchestrated from Singapore by a Singapore national, named Ah Chai. The role of the applicant in that particular enterprise was found by his Honour to have been more than that of a mere courier but less than that of a "mastermind". In my view it was entirely open to his Honour thus to evaluate the role in the relevant operation of the present applicant. The present applicant's position was not assisted by the fact that, at his invitation, the learned sentencing
Judge took into account on a Form 2 schedule two offences relating, respectively, to significant sums of money: a little more than $4,000 in one case; and $37,000 in the other; which might reasonably be supposed to have represented the proceeds in the hands of the applicant of sales of heroin.

His Honour took the view, and in my respectful opinion was entirely entitled to do, that evidence before him of transcripts of intercepted telephone conversations passing between the applicant and Ah Chai in Singapore, indicated that the present applicant had a personal contact with Ah Chai; and a personal contact that related, in a real and significant sense, to the ongoing organisation of the on-the-ground operations designed to introduce into this country significant quantities of heroin.

His honour took into account that the applicant had been travelling at material times on a false passport; and, as I have said, his Honour came to the conclusion that the applicant was somewhat more involved than his two co- accused who stood with him for sentence. In my opinion it was entirely open for his Honour to come to those conclusions. His honour denounced, in terms with which I respectfully agree and need not repeat, the enormity of the crime of importing heroin into this country. His Honour took note, - and it was in my opinion a significant matter going to the sentence of the present applicant, - that he, the present applicant, was not himself a user of heroin; and that he fell, therefore, into what might be thought, on a fair view, the worst class of heroin related offenders: that is to say, those who push heroin, but do not themselves use it. I have myself expressed in this
Court on a number of prior occasions the view, to which I adhere, that people who fall into that category can expect very little sympathy from sentencing
Courts and, indeed, are entitled to very little sympathy from sentencing courts. There is no motive for what they do except the motive of greed. In my opinion that is not only to be denounced, but visited with condign punishment, in the hope that over time the message will get through to the appropriate quarters overseas that the running of heroin into this country will simply not be tolerated by any of society's relevant institutions, the Courts not the least of them.

The actual sentence that his Honour imposed was, in my view, well within the range of a sound sentencing discretion. The submissions put in by the Crown in connection with the present applicant draw together helpfully a number of comparative cases which, in my view, give support to that conclusion.

In deference to the fact the applicant has had to make his application unassisted except for the interpreter I would grant him leave to appeal; but I have no doubt that the sentence imposed was entirely commensurate with the offences to which he pleaded guilty, and was in every other reasonable sense appropriate. I dismiss the substantive application and make orders accordingly.

GLEESON CJ: I agree.

HULME J: I agree.

GLEESON CJ: The orders will be as proposed by Sully J.
 * * * 
