

Regina versus Wen Hui Li [1996] NSWSC 539 (11 November 1996) 
REGINA v. Wen Hui LI /95 November 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES CRIMINAL LAW DIVISION 
SMART J 
Remarks On Sentence 
SMART J: Wen Hui Li has pleaded guilty to murdering Tung Lui Shirley Wong at Blacktown on 13 June 1995. He has been in custody since 14 June 1995.

Ms Wong was aged 23 at the time of her death. She lived with her mother and stepfather at unit 35, 5 Tenby Street, Blacktown, was attending the University and doing some part time work. Her stepfather was protective of her.

She and Mr Li had a boyfriend/girl friend relationship from about 18 months to years prior to her death until she terminated that relationship about one to two months before her death. Mr Li tried to keep the relationship on foot and became angry and upset when he discovered that she was going out with another young man.

Mr Li, entered Australia on 7 August 1990 on a temporary permit which allowed him to remain in Australia until 13 February 1991. He applied for refugee status and permanent residency in Australia. His application for refugee status was refused. His application for permanent residence was refused by the
Immigration Department. His appeal against the refusal of permanent residence was successful.

The Immigration Review Tribunal remitted his application to the Department for further consideration. No further steps have been taken pending the finalisation of these proceedings. From the history obtained by Dr Westmore, psychiatrist, it appears that Mr Li had to leave China because of his political activities. I am unable to verify whether this is correct. His parents live in China. He has no family members in Australia, just a few friends.

He has spent his time in Australia working in restaurants and learning the
English language. He does not seem to have progressed very far with his
English studies.

For at least one month prior to 13 June 1995 Mr Li pursued Ms Wong, who maintained contact with him. In the past she had often been at the house where
Mr Li boarded and had often telephoned him there. About 23 May 1995 Mr Li brought Ms Wong to that house. On the evening of 12 June 1995 she telephoned and asked to speak to Mr Li but he was not at home. She told Mrs Guo, the owner, that she was telephoning from the police station but on being asked Ms
Wong did not give an explanation.

About a month before her death the stepfather noticed that Ms Wong was scared while she was talking on the telephone. He spoke with her and with the caller,
Li, and told him to come to his house. The stepfather had not previously known that Ms Wong was going out with any men. As arranged Li came round to the stepfather's house. The stepfather told Li to leave his daughter alone and not to telephone her.

Ms Wong's boyfriend (Toh) with whom she had been going out since late March went to her home on the night of 8 June 1995. She was distressed. On 12
June 1995 Toh picked her up from her home about 12.45 p.m. Li who had been waiting nearby in his black Honda followed them, drawing very close on occasions, flashing his lights and motioning Toh to pull over. When Li persisted in this conduct Toh drove to the police station and stopped. The accused drove away. Toh and Ms Wong spoke to the police. On leaving the police station Toh stayed with Ms Wong for a period and left. He did not see the black Honda of Li again that day.

On 13 June 1995 Ms Wong and Toh attended at the Blacktown Police Station. She spoke to a police officer and a welfare worker. With the assistance of the police she obtained an Apprehended Violence Order but it did not come to Li's notice until after he had killed her. Ms Wong spent the rest of the day with
Toh and at the University. About 9.30 p.m., her father collected her from
Blacktown Railway Station and drove to the family home.

In the meantime, Li after seeing Ms Wong & Toh go to the police station, on 12 June 1995 purchased a long knife on 13 June 1995. I do not accept the version he gave to Dr B Westmore at a later stage. About 7 p.m. he drove his vehicle to the vicinity of the family home and parked on a grassy area about metres from that home. He sat in the car smoking for about two hours. He had the long knife and some rope in the pocket of his jacket. He left the car about 9 p.m. intending to harm Ms Wong as he had planned during the day. Li told the police that he wished to damage her face with a knife because she had not been loyal to him and had harmed his heart. He wanted revenge.

About 10 minutes before Ms Wong and her stepfather arrived home Li hid about 6 metres from the door to her home. He was carrying the knife.

The stepfather's car pulled up about half a car's length from his garage door which was opened by activating a remote control device. When the door was open
Ms Wong alighted from the car and walked into the garage. Li ran across the front of that car into the garage and stabbed Ms Wong in the left side of the stomach with a long knife. She fell to the garage floor. She got up and ran outside the garage to the pathway that leads to the front door of the family home. She fell to the ground. Li stabbed her again. The stepfather thought it was about 3 times. He called out to Li to stop. Li was still standing over her. As the stepfather walked towards Li and his stepdaughter, Li turned and ran towards the stepfather holding out the knife. Li chased the stepfather around his car. Neighbours came out in response to the stepfather's cries for help. As they approached Li, he ran away. The neighbours assisted the stepfather to rush Ms Wong to hospital. A short time later a doctor told the stepfather that she was dead. The direct cause of death was multiple stab wounds to the trunk. The pathologist's report refers to 4 stab wounds and injuries of much severity. I will not relate the distressing details.

In addition to the powerful eyewitness evidence of the stepfather there was much other evidence which pointed to Li being the killer and the killing being murder. A long knife with blood on it was found a short distance from the murder scene. The knife had a fingerprint of Li upon it. There were 2 other knives and a sheaf near by. The accused's jacket was found near the crime scene. A key to his black Honda car was in the pocket. That car had been left on the grassy reserve near the stepfather's home. The accused had gone to a service station shop after the incident. Subsequently he caught a taxi home where he was arrested some hours later. It is unnecessary to refer to the other Crown evidence. It was a very strong Crown case.

The Court was notified about a week before the trial was due to start that there would be a plea of guilty. This saved considerable expense as the trial was estimated to take four weeks and avoided the need for family members and many others to give evidence. It also avoided the risk of any mishap during the trial. Although Li did not admit in his ERISP interview to murdering Ms
Wong and remained silent on some major points he made some useful admissions.

Li had no previous convictions. He was born on 27 February, 1970.

Dr Westmore saw Li on 12 October 1996, interviewing him with the aid of a
Cantonese interpreter for about one and a half hours. Li told Dr Westmore that he intended to plead not guilty on the basis that he did not intend to kill Ms
Wong, that he was out of control and that the killing was by mistake. The facts did not support a plea of not guilty. Li stated that he did not think he could live without Ms Wong and that he could not let the relationship end.

In his discussion with Dr Westmore Li unjustifiably tended to minimise his culpability and to attach some blame to the stepfather. I reject those attempts. It was apparent from what Li told Dr Westmore that Li could not accept Ms Wong having other boyfriends, her family's disapproval of their relationship and that she wanted to end their relationship. Li thought she was confused. He felt that if he lost her, life would be meaningless. Li told Dr
Westmore that his sleep was grossly disturbed, that he was not eating and that he felt quite weak and listless. He lost about 10 kilograms. He was tearful.
He did not work for about three weeks before her death he was so upset.

In his report Dr Westmore raised the possibility of diminished responsibility. 
Correctly, that was not pursued at the sentence hearing.

Dr Westmore wrote: "Mr view would be therefore that this man did suffer an abnormality of mind at the time of this killing, this abnormality arose following the development of a reactive depressive condition with a biological component or a full blown biological depression, this condition followed the termination of his relationship with his girlfriend, something which he was apparently completely unable to accept." 
I drew the attention of counsel to the many matters in Dr Westmore's report which depended upon the truth of the history given by Li. I gave Li an adjournment to enable him and his legal advisers to consider whether he wished to give evidence. Upon resumption the court was told that it was not proposed to call Li. Counsel drew my attention to s.60 of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/). I am not prepared to accept as true all that what was said by Li to Dr Westmore. I have earlier indicated some matters which I do not accept. On the materials and in the absence of evidence from Li I am unable to make any findings as to his contrition.

I think that Li was appreciably psychologically disturbed and jealous. He was a lonely man without any family in Australia and relatively few friends here.
Li had invested heavily in Ms Wong who appears to have been an intelligent and attractive young lady. He was unable to cope with what was happening. His initial intention may have been limited to inflicting really serious bodily injury upon Ms Wong by using the knife to deface her. However, at the time he attacked her and stabbed her four times on the trunk he intended to kill her.
He had worked himself up into a fury.

Li submitted that the court should find that there were special circumstances and set a longer than usual additional term. Counsel relied upon this being
Li's first crime and first custodial sentence. His English language expression and comprehension appear to be poor and he will need extended support and supervision upon release as he attempts to readjust to life after a long period in gaol. Counsel for the Crown submitted that there was no warrant for a longer than usual additional term because Li would be deported after completing his minimum term. It may well be that Li will be so deported.
However, I cannot be sure of that and provision should be made in case that does not happen. I would not like to make a forecast as to the attitude of the
Chinese Authorities many years hence. There are special circumstances and there should be a slightly longer additional term than usual.

I take into account all the circumstances. I have particular regard to Li's background, his past troubles, his disturbed state of mind, his age and his spending some of the best years of his life in gaol, his gaoling having a harsher effect on him because of language problems, cultural differences and absence of family visits, no prior offences and his plea of guilty. However, the crime is one of the utmost gravity and that is the paramount consideration. Public and private deterrence are important.

Mr Li is convicted of the murder of Tung Lui Shirley Wong. The appropriate total sentence is one of seventeen years penal servitude.

Wen Hui Li is sentenced to penal servitude for 17 years comprising a minimum term of 12 years 6 months starting on 14 June 1995 and ending on 13 December and an additional term of 4 years 6 months starting on 14 December 2007 and ending on 13 June 2012.
 * * * 
