

Regina versus Kenny Matter No Cca 60111/97 [1997] NSWSC 352 (29 August 1997) 
Last Updated: 27 February 1998 
Regina versus Nils John Kenny /97 August 1997 
Smart J, Grove J, Studdert J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal from District Court (Shillington DCJ) 
FILE NO: 060111/97 
DELIVERED: Friday 29 August 1997 
HEARING DATE: Monday 25 August 1997 
PARTIES: REGINA versus NILS JOHN KENNY 
JUDGMENT OF: SMART J, GROVE J, STUDDERT J 
COUNSEL: * APPELLANT - S J ODGERS * RESPONDENT - R D COGSWELL 
SOLICITORS: * APPELLANT - MEREDITH RICHARDSON & ASSOCIATES * RESPONDENT - S E O'CONNOR 
RESULT: ALLOWED 
CATCHWORDS: Criminal law and procedure - judge's summing-up - sexual offences committed upon children - no complaint for nine years - necessity for appropriate directions concerning such delay 
NO OF PAGES: 27 
REGINA versus NILS JOHN KENNY 
The appellant was charged with eight sexual offences, four against each of two complainant children. The jury found him guilty of four acts of homosexual intercourse, one of an attempt to commit that offence and of acts of indecency and of gross indecency. There was a delay of approximately nine years before complaint was made concerning the appellant's misconduct.

In the summing-up the trial judge gave the jury no instruction as to delay and its possible bearing upon the credibility and reliability of the evidence given by the complainants. Nor did the summing-up contain direction as to the significance of prejudice to the appellant by reason of the delay in meeting the complaints.

HELD: The absence of appropriate directions concerning those matters gave rise to a risk of a miscarriage of justice. 
Crofts versus The Queen <case>; [(1996) 186 CLR 427]; Longman versus The Queen <case>; [(1989) 168 CLR 79] followed.

ORDERS
Appeal against conviction allowed;
Convictions and sentences quashed;
New trial ordered.

REGINA versus Nils John KENNY 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: I agree with Studdert J.

REGINA versus NILS JOHN KENNY 
JUDGMENT 
GROVE J: I agree with Studdert J.

REGINA versus NILS JOHN KENNY 
JUDGMENT 
STUDDERT J: The appellant, Nils John Edward Kenny, stood trial before his
Honour Judge Shillington of Queen's Counsel and jury in the District Court in
February 1997 on an indictment containing eight counts charging him with a number of sexual offences against two brothers, C and W.

The first four counts related to the child C and charged the appellant with the commission of offences in 1986 when that complainant was nine or ten years of age. Two of the charges alleged the commission of acts of homosexual intercourse, one of the charges an act of indecency and the other an act of gross indecency.

The remaining four counts concerned W, the older of the two complainants, and related to three alleged offences of homosexual intercourse and one of an act of indecency.

The jury found the appellant guilty of seven of the eight offences and in relation to the remaining charge of homosexual intercourse with C, the appellant was found guilty of an attempt to commit that offence.

Following conviction the appellant was sentenced for each of the various offences of homosexual intercourse and the attempt to commit that offence to a total sentence of six years with a minimum term of two years. For each of the remaining offences of acts of indecency and of gross indecency, the appellant was sentenced to a fixed term of twelve months. All of the sentences were ordered to be served concurrently.

The appellant appeals against his conviction and seeks leave to appeal against the severity of the sentences imposed.

The Crown case was that each of the offences took place when the appellant's grandmother, Mrs Nelson, was babysitting the complainants whilst their parents were out. Most of the offences occurred on the Crown case on a Saturday night at the complainants' family home, but there were others that occurred at Mrs
Nelson's home nearby where the appellant also lived. On the Crown case the offences occurred in the first part of 1986 when the complainant C was in Year at school and when the complainant W was in Year 6.

The complainant C gave evidence that the appellant would sometimes come over to his house whilst Mrs Nelson was babysitting. He said that sometimes the appellant brought pornographic literature and there was an occasion on which the appellant showed C and his brother a pornographic magazine which included a picture of a man ejaculating. The appellant then said he would show the boys how this was done and masturbated in front of the children. This activity gave rise to the charge in count one of the indictment.

According to C, the appellant on that occasion, or on another occasion, placed the boy's penis in his mouth and this gave rise to count two.

There was another occasion when C said he was playing with some Lego in his bedroom and the appellant attempted to put his penis into C's mouth. This event was the subject of count three on which the jury found the appellant guilty of an attempt at an act of homosexual intercourse.

According to C on that same occasion the appellant, having made that attempt, then sat against the door with his pants down and his penis erect and attempted to draw C towards him. C said that the appellant was interrupted in this attempt by his grandmother coming to the door. This event was the subject of count four in the indictment.

On most occasions C said that the appellant gave him money.

The older complainant, W, gave evidence that Mrs Nelson began to babysit half way through 1985 and continued to do so until half way through 1986. It was his recollection that the appellant had come to the home at least ten times. W thought that the first time anything untoward happened was late in 1985. He said that on the occasion of the appellant's first visit the appellant had placed the child's penis in his mouth. This was the subject of count five.

W said there was another occasion when the appellant masturbated himself in
W's presence and this was the subject of count six.

Then on an occasion when his parents had gone out to celebrate his father's birthday, W said the appellant placed the boy's penis in his mouth. This event was the subject of count seven.

Finally, count eight related to another occasion, this time at the Nelson home, when W said the appellant took him into his room in that home and placed the boy's penis in his mouth.

The parents of the two complainants each gave evidence that Mrs Nelson had been engaged to babysit for the children over a period from early 1985 until mid 1986. The parents were each able to give some specific dates of Saturday nights when they went out leaving the children in the care of Mrs Nelson during the year of 1986. Both parents said that they recalled occasions when they saw the appellant at their home after they had been out in 1986.

It was not until May 1995 that complaint was first made about the appellant's conduct; the police officer in charge was Det. Sergeant Devine of the Child
Protection Unit and he took a statement from C on 7 June 1995 and a statement from W on 8 June 1995. On 20 September 1995 the appellant attended upon Det.
Sergeant Devine and denied the allegations made against him.

The appellant gave sworn evidence denying the commission of the offences. He said that there were only two occasions when he went to the complainants' house whilst his grandmother was babysitting and those occasions were in 1984.
Once he went there to take a television guide to his grandmother and the other occasion was to take a cardigan to her. On the first occasion he did not see either complainant; on the second occasion he saw one of them only, but on that occasion he was only in the house for two minutes. According to the appellant his grandmother did not babysit the complainants after she returned from an overseas trip in August 1985. The appellant's evidence was that he was actively involved in the Young Liberal movement and on most Saturday nights in he was attending functions for that organisation. A number of witnesses were called who gave evidence about the appellant's involvement with the Young
Liberals and the functions he attended in 1986. There was evidence of the appellant's good character.

Against the above background, I turn to consider the various grounds of appeal.

Ground 1: The trial judge erred in failing to properly warn the jury regarding the evidence of the complainants 
The direction which the trial judge gave appears at pp 12-13 of the summing- up: "Now I must remind you, members of the jury, that the Crown evidence relies substantially on the evidence of C and W. You would have to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of their accounts as to what happened before you would return verdicts of guilty. You, of course, must bear in mind that it could not be said that the two boys have given independent accounts, that is, accounts unaffected by their contact and relationship with one and the other, both being brothers, both living in the same house, both obviously having discussed these matters. You would have to bear those matters in mind when you assess the evidence of these two boys. You would have to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accounts that they gave were reliable accounts of what happened." 
His Honour then went on to remind the jury of circumstances which it was suggested afforded support for the evidence of the children: the evidence of W that the accused was circumcised as was acknowledged to be the case by the appellant; the evidence of the father of the complainants of a gesture that he observed the appellant to have made when he was driving W in Coogee early in ; (the admission of this evidence is the subject of Ground 3); the evidence that the children both described there being in the accused's bedroom photographs or cuttings from magazines showing women either scantily clad or naked. Their evidence was supported by evidence to the like effect that emerged in the case for the accused.

At the end of the summing-up counsel for the accused asked the judge whether he was prepared "to say something to the jury about the uncorroborated evidence of the complainants". Notwithstanding Mr Odgers' submission to the contrary, I do not regard that request as addressing the complaints the subject of this first ground of appeal. In my opinion the ground is confronted with the obstacle of [rule ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/s4.html) of the [Criminal Appeal
Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/).

Before this Court Mr Odgers submitted that the instruction given to the jury in the passage from the summing-up set out above, coupled with the later reference to the suggested supporting evidence to which I have referred above, was insufficient. It was submitted that the jury should have been directed to have regard to the delay that had occurred in assessing the credibility and the reliability of the complainants. It was further submitted that the jury should also have been alerted in appropriate terms to the difficulties that delay presented for the appellant in meeting the accusations made against him.
Some nine years elapsed between the commission of the last of the alleged offences and the police being informed about them.

The appellant was represented by very experienced senior counsel at his trial.
Neither complainant was cross-examined as to why earlier complaint had not been made and it was not directly suggested to either complainant in cross- examination that the delay affected his credibility or his reliability.

The younger complainant was cross-examined upon the basis that he wrongly implicated the appellant in the events and that he was "just totally mistaken as to what occurred involving him". He was asked whether he thought he may be mistaken because he had been babysat by a wide variety of people. In the case of the older complainant, he was cross-examined about the schizophrenia from which he suffered and it was put to him that this had a bearing on his ability to recall events that occurred in 1986. It was also put to him that he was a bit confused about dates and events. It was also put to him that he had "fixated" the appellant into his mind, and that he was simply determined to press on with the allegations whether they were right or wrong.

When the trial judge in his summing-up briefly reviewed the competing submissions made by counsel, delay was not mentioned. At the conclusion of the summing-up counsel did not ask the trial judge to say anything about delay either in the context of the review of what had been put to the jury in counsel's address or otherwise. I am prepared therefore to assume that counsel did not focus on delay when he addressed the jury.

Nevertheless the delay was substantial and the jury was given no instruction about this feature of the case other than in the context of a direction that the Crown was confined by the dates expressed in the indictment as to when the offences occurred. The defence case raised an issue as to whether the offences could have been committed in 1986 because by then, according to the defence,
Mrs Nelson had ceased to babysit the complainants. The issue was raised as to whether, if the complainants were sexually abused, they were mistaken about who had done it and that such a mistake could have occurred by reason of the passage of time. It seems to me that the effluxion of time was a very material consideration in assessing the reliability of the complainants' evidence.

In Crofts versus The Queen <case>; [(1996) 186 CLR 427], a case involving many charged offences of a sexual nature, there was delay in complaining of up to six years. The trial judge directed the jury pursuant to <case> of the Victorian Crimes Act (the equivalent of s 405B(2) of the New South Wales Crimes Act) that they could not draw certain inferences from the delay in complaint but he declined to further direct the jury about the extent to which it could have regard to the delay.
It was held that the trial miscarried, and in the course of their joint judgment, Toohey, Gaudron, Gummow and Kirby JJ said at 450: "... Here the delay was objectively substantial, being a matter of years.
Delays of that order require a trial judge to give `the jury a direction which [is] meaningful, and which [is] adequate to enable the jury to make a responsible evaluation of the matter.' (R versus Preval [[1984] 3 NSWLR ]
at 651, per Street CJ)" 
In Crofts the jury had been given certain directions as to ways in which it could not use delay, and the trial judge had been asked to give further directions as to how it was permissible for delay to be used. Both those features are absent in the present case. Nevertheless the statement of principle in the above cited passage is clear and unequivocal and it called for suitable expression in the present case.

I therefore accept Mr Odgers' submission that the jury should have been instructed as to delay and its possible bearing upon the credibility and the reliability of the evidence given by the complainants. I consider that Mr
Odgers is also correct in his further submission that the jury should have been alerted to the practical difficulties that arose for the appellant in meeting the charges against him, by reason of the delay that had occurred, and the significance of this factor in evaluating the complainants' evidence.

The following passage from the judgment of Brennan J (as he then was) and of
Dawson and Toohey JJ in Longman versus The Queen <case>; [(1989) 168 CLR 79] at 91 is in point: "Had the allegations been made soon after the alleged event, it would have been possible to explore in detail the alleged circumstances attendant upon its occurrence and perhaps to adduce evidence throwing doubt upon the complainant's story or confirming the applicant's denial. After more than twenty years that opportunity was gone and the applicant's recollection of them could not be adequately tested. The fairness of the trial had necessarily been impaired by the long delay (see Jago versus District Court (N.S.W.)) and it was imperative that a warning be given to the jury. The jury should have been told that, as the evidence of the complainant could not be adequately tested after the passage of more than twenty years, it would be dangerous to convict on that evidence alone unless the jury, scrutinizing the evidence with great care, considering the circumstances relevant to its evaluation and paying heed to the warning, were satisfied of its truth and accuracy. To leave a jury without such a full appreciation of the danger was to risk a miscarriage of justice. The jury were told simply to consider the relative credibility of the complainant and the appellant without either a warning or a mention of the factors relevant to the evaluation of the evidence. That was not sufficient." 
It is the fact that no appropriate direction was sought by counsel in the present case. Moreover, it is evident that the appellant was able to gather together a considerable body of evidence to address the Crown case. The appellant had available to him his diaries from 1984 onwards. He was also in possession of his passport and airline tickets to establish the absence of his grandmother and himself overseas on a visit to the United States in 1985 and he had some other evidence directed to proving that his grandmother did not babysit the complainants after that trip. The appellant had documentary evidence to establish another trip he took overseas in December 1985-January
He identified at the trial his air ticket and boarding pass for a flight to Brisbane and Cairns in June 1986. The appellant was able to call witnesses who proved his involvement in the activities of the Young Liberal Party on
Saturday evenings in 1986 and he was able to call evidence directed at establishing he was elsewhere on 15 February 1986, which was a date upon which on the Crown case one of the offences was committed.

Whilst recognising the evidence that the appellant was able to muster, it seems to me that inevitably the appellant was disadvantaged by the passage of time. The various witnesses called to prove the appellant's activities in 1986 were cross-examined by the Crown as to the dependability of their evidence having regard to the time that had elapsed, as indeed was the appellant, and the appellant's grandmother, Mrs Nelson, had become unfit to give evidence by reason of the development of dementia.

In all the circumstances, in my opinion the jury should have been alerted to the difficulties confronting the appellant in fully testing the evidence of the complainants after so many years and they should have been directed as to the requirement in consequence for added care in the scrutiny of the evidence of the complainants.

I have concluded that the absence of appropriate directions as to delay and the possible significance of it in the areas considered above gave rise to a risk of a miscarriage of justice. It is regrettable that counsel at the trial did not seek the relevant directions but in my opinion the possible significance of the delay is such as to warrant that leave to rely upon this ground as argued should be granted.

Mr Odgers also submitted that the jury should have been warned that there was a need for added care in assessing the evidence of W because he suffered from a condition of schizophrenia. The evidence did not suggest that the complainant was suffering from such a condition at the time these offences were committed and, indeed, the evidence of both W and his father was that this condition did not become manifest until 1990. I do not consider that any further direction than was given about W's schizophrenia was essential.

For the above reasons concerning Ground 1, I do not consider the conviction can be allowed to stand, but I propose nevertheless to consider the remaining grounds, one of which (Ground 7), if made good, would warrant a verdict of acquittal.

Ground 2: (a) The learned trial judge erred in failing to direct the jury that they must not use the evidence of one complainant in respect of the counts relating to that complainant to support the evidence of the other complainant in respect of the counts relating to that other complainant.

The learned trial judge erred in failing to direct the jury that they must not use the evidence of one complainant in respect of the counts relating to the other complainant unless satisfied that the evidence was not tainted by collusion.

This ground was abandoned.

Ground 3: The learned trial judge erred in admitting evidence of an incident involving the appellant in 1993 
The complainant's father gave evidence that early in 1993 he was driving in
Coogee with his son W as a passenger. He said that he saw the appellant look in their direction and the appellant put his finger in his mouth and "pulled it in and out". It was recorded that the witness demonstrated by putting his forefinger in his mouth and taking it out on a number of occasions. The complainant Warwick gave no evidence of that incident and the appellant denied that it happened.

Counsel for the appellant who appeared at the trial objected to the evidence being introduced but the judge allowed it. It is submitted here that it was not admissible and that it could only have been relevant, if the jury accepted it was made, to show some intimacy between the complainant and the accused in , if the jury accepted that the gesture showed such at all. It was submitted that it did not tend to establish intimacy in 1986.

It is also submitted that the introduction of this evidence breached the tendency rule referred in ss 97 and 101 of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/).

In my opinion there is no substance in this ground. The evidence was not admissible to prove a tendency to act in a particular way within the meaning of <case> but it was admissible as going to the proof of a degree of sexual intimacy. As to the recency of the observation made by the father, it was the appellant's evidence that he never saw either complainant after his brief encounters at their home whilst his grandmother was babysitting there. If the evidence was considered by the jury to be a gesture with a sexual connotation, and it was open to the jury to so regard it, then on the evidence any relevant association must have been one that occurred whilst Mrs Nelson was babysitting the complainants.

The judge directed the jury that if they accepted that the event described by the complainant's father did occur they would also have to be satisfied that it had some sexual connotation before it could be regarded as affording any evidence of intimacy with W. That was a proper direction.

I do not consider, having regard to its probative value, that his Honour erred in refusing to admit this evidence under <case> of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/).

Ground 4: The learned trial judge erred in failing properly to direct the jury regarding the evidence of the incident involving the appellant in 1993 
It was submitted that the directions concerning the incident referred to in
Ground 3 were inadequate. It was submitted that the jury should have been directed: that the evidence was only relevant to the charges concerning W; since W gave no evidence about the event the trial judge ought to have given a Jones versus Dunkell direction <case>; [(1951) 101 CLR 298]; that the trial judge ought to have directed the jury that if the evidence showed some intimacy in 1993 they could not use that evidence to prove a similar tendency in 1986.

What the trial judge did tell the jury was this: "It is also put to you that the events which occurred at Coogee in early 1993 on the account given by the father of the boys, [Mr M], would suggest that there was some intimacy between [W] and the accused. This, of course, relies on the evidence of the father of the boys when he was driving [W] in Coogee at a time which he said was early 1993, that [W] pointed out the accused and he said that the accused looked at them both and made the sign with his finger in his mouth. Well, members of the jury, you again would have to bear in mind that there was no account given by [W] of these events. You would have to be satisfied that if these events did occur as described by the father that they did suggest some sexual connotation. That is again a matter for you being the judges of the facts." 
The judge invited the jury to consider that evidence as being available to suggest, depending upon the view the jury took of the evidence, "some intimacy between [W] and the accused". The jury was not invited to consider that the evidence in some way was relevant to the charges concerning C.

It is true that the jury was not given a Jones versus Dunkel direction but it was told that W gave no account of the incident in his evidence. Obviously counsel was satisfied with that direction and I do not consider that the failure of the judge to go further involved any risk of a miscarriage occurring.

The evidence as to what W's father observed the appellant to do was not tendency evidence. It was admissible for reasons I have expressed under Ground , and the third direction proposed by Mr Odgers in relation to Ground 4 would not have been appropriate.

None of the above directions formulated by Mr Odgers was sought at the trial, and r 4 operates. I would refuse leave to rely upon this ground.

Ground 5: The learned trial judge erred in reminding the jury, without comment, of the Crown Prosecutor's assertion that the complainants had no motive to lie 
In the course of the summing-up his Honour briefly reminded the jury of the submissions of counsel, one of which he expressed in his review in these terms: "Very briefly let me remind you of the way the cases are put. The Crown submits to you that you would accept the evidence of [C] and [W] as to the events and times of those events. The Crown says to you that you would find no reason why these two boys would concoct false stories..." 
It was submitted that the trial judge endorsed that submission by reminding the jury of it without comment.

The authorities make it plain that it is not appropriate to pose for the jury's consideration a speculative issue as to why a complainant would lie where no motive to lie has been asserted in relation to a witness in the particular case: see R versus E [(1996) 39 NSWLR 450] in particular at 464; and R versus Uhrig (unreported, Court of Criminal Appeal, 24
October 1996).

The submission advanced by the Crown and about which the judge reminded the jury invited illegitimate speculation because it suggested an onus on the appellant. It is my opinion that if the Crown advanced the argument referred to in this passage of the summing-up, the learned judge should have reminded the jury of it only in the context of directing them not to speculate in that way.

However, in the circumstances of this case where it had not been put to either complainant that he had concocted his evidence in conjunction with the other complainant, and where the focus of the defence appeared to be not that each complainant had lied in his evidence but rather that he was mistaken in accusing the appellant or confused in doing so, the reminder of this submission by the Crown without comment did not, in my opinion, involve any risk of a miscarriage. This must have been the view taken by counsel for the appellant at his trial because no redirection on the issue was sought.

In the circumstances I would not grant leave to the appellant to rely upon this ground.

Ground 6: The learned trial judge erred in directing the jury that they could return verdicts of guilty if satisfied that the alleged misconduct `occurred in 1986 or within a week or so at the beginning of 1986' 
Each of the counts in the indictment charged the commission of an offence "between 1 January 1986 and 31 December 1986." However whilst C placed the events as having occurred in that year, W thought that the first of the alleged offences occurred late in 1985. W's evidence prompted the following direction to the jury: "What I must put to you, members of the jury, is that before you would return verdicts of guilty you must be satisfied that the allegation that the alleged misconduct occurred in 1986 or within a week or so at the beginning of 1986...
If you are not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the events did occur in the last week or so of 1985 and generally in 1986, then the verdict should be one of not guilty in respect of the count being considered; if you are not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the events did occur in that time span." 
It was submitted that the direction was objectionable since no application had been made to amend dates in the indictment.

The transcript records that W gave the evidence inviting the direction in point on 4 February 1997. Two days later the trial judge heard counsel on the extent to which, if at all, the Crown ought to be permitted to extend the period in relation to the commission of any offence to cover a date earlier than 1 January 1986. Trial counsel indicated the difficulties that he would face if he had to meet the period "November-December 1985". Having reflected upon the matter overnight the trial judge on 7 February 1997 made a ruling reflected in the direction later given to the jury. In other words, the Crown was entitled to rely upon anything that happened in the last week of December .

I do not consider that that ruling and the direction that followed was incorrect.

Counsel at the trial did not point to any specific prejudice referable to that limited extension of the time frame. The appellant had available to him his diaries and he was in a position to prove overseas travel which took him out of Australia between 28 December 1985 and 31 January 1986. Indeed, the appellant had his passport, his ticket and his boarding pass evidencing that absence and his evidence concerning that absence overseas had been proved before the trial judge made the ruling in point.

In Reg versus Dossi [[1918] 13 Cr App R 158] at -160 Atkin J said: "From time immemorial a date specified in an indictment has never been a material matter unless it is actually an essential part of the alleged offence... Thus, though the date of the offence should be alleged in the indictment it has never been necessary that it should be laid according to truth unless time is of the essence of the offence." 
That passage was cited with approval in this court in R versus VHP (unreported, 7
July 1997). It was observed in VHP that substantive fairness might restrict the capacity of the Crown to depart from particulars in a given case.
Moreover, as the Chief Justice made clear in his judgment in VHP, circumstances of a particular case might otherwise make time of the essence of an offence.

However, in the present case it does not seem to me that rigid restriction to the period between 1 January 1986 and 31 December 1986 was required or that the appellant was unfairly prejudiced by having to direct his attention to the last week in December 1985 when the evidence already adduced in his case demonstrated that he had directed his preparations for the trial to that very period.

Ground 6 fails.

Ground 7: The convictions are unsafe and unsatisfactory 
In support of this ground Mr Odgers advanced the following: the delay in complaint; the age of the complainants at the time; the evidence of W's schizophrenia; the evidence of Mrs Austin who said that Mrs Nelson babysat full time for her between September 1985 and 1992 during which time the surname of the complainants was not mentioned by Mrs Nelson. It is to be observed though that according to Mrs Austin, Mrs Nelson attended to the Austin children full time during the week but on Saturday nights only if Mrs Austin went out; there was considerable evidence directed at establishing the appellant's commitment with the Young Liberal movement on Saturday nights in 1986; there was evidence of the appellant's good character.

Mr Odgers submitted that the material displayed on the appellant's bedroom wall could have been seen by the complainants when they went to Mrs Nelson's place to be looked after by her and when the appellant was out. The evidence revealed that the material displayed included pictures of naked and scantily dressed women.

Mr Odgers submitted that the evidence that the appellant was circumcised was of little probative value given the prevalence of such a practice at the time that the appellant was born.

Whilst I have outlined above the various features of the evidence that Mr
Odgers relied upon to support Ground 7, the consideration of this ground of course involves a consideration and evaluation of all the evidence given at the trial, and an application of the criteria expressed in M versus The Queen [(1994) 181 CLR 487.] 
The evidence placed before the jury in the defence case directed to proving the appellant's movements on Saturday nights by no means excluded opportunity for the appellant to have attended the home of the complainants' parents during 1986. The jury had the appellant's diary which did not contain entries for every Saturday and this diary, the appellant conceded in cross- examination, recorded entries of appointments which the appellant did not necessarily keep. Evidence of other members of the Young Liberal movement that the appellant regularly attended functions in 1986 was not so comprehensive as to establish, if it was accepted, that the appellant had no opportunity in to attend the home of the complainants on a number of Saturday nights.

Having read the transcript of the evidence in this case, it seems to me that the jury's advantage in seeing the witnesses and hearing them give their evidence was of critical importance. Recognising the advantage which the jury enjoyed and which this Court has not had, it is my conclusion not only that there was evidence to sustain the verdicts that the jury reached but that on the whole of the evidence it was open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt as to the guilt of the appellant.

Ground 7 has not been established.

Proposed orders 
The appellant has been in custody since 14 February 1997 so that he has served in excess of six months of the minimum term of the sentences imposed for the more serious offences. Mr Odgers submitted that in the event that the appeal was allowed a new trial should not be ordered. He submitted that the gravity of the offences did not warrant a second trial. In Mr Odgers' submission these offences were towards the bottom of the scale for offences of their type and the sentences which were passed were manifestly excessive.

I do not agree. The appellant was convicted of four counts of homosexual intercourse of the type earlier described and of a further count of an attempt to commit such an offence. The victims were young children and the appellant, although only nineteen at the time, was many years their senior. I do not regard the sentences which were imposed as being outside the permissible range and I am of the opinion that a new trial should be ordered.

I therefore propose the following orders: that the appeal be allowed; that the convictions and sentences be quashed; that a new trial be ordered.
 * * * 
