

Rochester Communications Group P/L and Ors versus Adler and Ors [1996] NSWSC (7 May 1996) 
ROCHESTER COMMUNICATIONS GROUP P/L & ORS versus RODNEY STEPHEN ADLER &
ORS /96 
TUESDAY 7 May 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
ABADEE J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: I propose to adjourn this application. I have before me, as a matter of urgency, a summons which seeks a number of orders. The first order sought is that pursuant to <case> of the [Jurisdiction of Courts (Cross-vesting) Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/joca1987427/) proceedings no. CT 1110/96 commenced in the Industrial Court of New South Wales be removed from the Industrial Court of New South Wales to this Court, and that pursuant to [s 5](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/joca1987427/s5.html) of the [Jurisdiction of Courts (Cross-vesting) Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/joca1987427/) that such proceedings as commenced in the Industrial Court of New South Wales be removed to this Court and be transferred to the Federal Court of Australia, Sydney Registry.

The plaintiffs in respect of the summons are also the same plaintiffs as have commenced proceedings in the Federal Court. The defendants in respect of the statement summons are defendants named in the proceedings instituted by the several plaintiffs in the Federal Court.

On 12 March 1996 the plaintiffs in these proceedings apparently commenced proceedings in the Federal Court of Australia by way of statement of claim.
Relief in various respects is sought. It is not necessary for me to detail the relief sought in the Federal Court proceedings at this stage or indeed otherwise.

It is said that the proceedings before the Industrial Court of New South Wales relate to the dispute as set out in the statement of claim filed in the
Federal Court of Australia. By the proceedings commenced in the Industrial
Court of New South Wales the applicants seek relief pursuant to <case> of the
Industrial Relations Act which relief it is said arises out of exactly the same facts and matters and circumstances which give rise to the proceedings in the Federal Court of Australia.

It is asserted that the applicants both in the proceedings of the Federal
Court of Australia and the Industrial Court of New South Wales seek orders avoiding and/or the contracts arrangements or collateral agreements between them which are more particularised in the plaintiffs' statement of claim in the Federal Court.

The plaintiffs in the proceedings before me submit that the issues in the proceedings in the Industrial Court of New South Wales potentially are the same issues and arise out of the same stratum of facts as in the proceedings commenced in the Federal Court of Australia. It is claimed that if the proceedings are litigated both in the Industrial Court of New South Wales and the Federal Court of Australia then the parties will duplicate the costs and expenses of the proceedings.

It appears that when the summons was issued in the proceedings before me it was contemplated that the proceedings before the Federal Court of Australia would be the subject of further directions on 3 May 1996. The matter has somewhat advanced and the proceedings were before the Federal Court on 3 May
On that day Beaumont J made a number of orders.

It is appropriate to observe that such orders struck out certain paragraphs of the plaintiffs' statement of claim in the Federal Court proceedings. Liberty was granted to replead the amended statement of claim. As I understand it, it is proposed that amendments be made to the statement of claim. It also appears that in respect of the statement of claim even as presently filed, whilst some particulars have been furnished to some of the defendants, there is a dispute in relation to the furnishing of other particulars. The first three defendants, who are associated with what has been called the FAI interests in the affidavit of Mr Michael Charles Quinlan, dispute that proper particulars have, in fact, been furnished in response to requests made on behalf of the
FAI interests.

Thus, it seems to me that as the situation presently stands the statement of claim in the Federal Court is to be repleaded and, secondly, further particulars are to be furnished in relation to the proceedings in the Federal
Court. Whether or not further particulars may be sought in relation to a further amended statement of claim in the Federal Court is not something that emerges on the evidence. One will just have to wait and see.

Another matter that has emerged more clearly during the course of the proceedings before me this morning and which have been brought on as a matter of urgency is that it appears that on 11 April 1996 counsel for the FAI interests, being the first, second and, third defendants in the proceedings before me, apparently obtained a return date for a jurisdictional challenge to the industrial claim aspect of the Federal Court proceedings and which apparently had been earlier foreshadowed as being a matter that would be taken up by and on behalf of the FAI interests. It appears that that was a matter that was also dealt with by Beaumont J on 3 May 1996.

Senior counsel appearing for the Klein interests as described in para 3 of Mr
Quinlan's affidavit and who are the defendants in the instant proceedings before me apparently at the hearing before Beaumont J foreshadowed the commencement of proceedings in the Industrial Court of New South Wales followed by an application to cross-vest those proceedings from the Industrial
Court of New South Wales via the Supreme Court of New South Wales to the
Federal Court. No detail of the nature of the proposed Industrial Court proceedings was given at the time.

As I understand the matter, the question of whether or not the Federal Court had jurisdiction to entertain what I would call the industrial proceedings aspect of the proceedings commenced before that court pursuant to <case> of the
Federal Court Act 1976, and it was, in fact, litigated before Beaumont J on 3 May 1996. As I understand from the evidence and what has been said from the bar table, Beaumont J on 3 May 1996 held that the Federal Court had no jurisdiction to entertain the industrial proceedings aspect of the Federal
Court proceedings in his court. Mr Rothman SC, on behalf of the plaintiffs, has indicated from the bar table that it is not very probable that there will be an appeal from the decision of Beaumont J. However, having said that, he also indicated that he was not in a position to bind his client as to whether or not, an appeal would be brought in relation to the jurisdictional order made by Beaumont J. Time for seeking leave to appeal from that decision, of course, has commenced to run.

According to Mr Quinlan's affidavit, the FAI interests proposed to file a notice of motion returnable in the Industrial Court of New South Wales on 6
June 1996 seeking orders inter alia that the summons before the Industrial
Court in so far as it concerns the FAI interests, the Adler interests and
Landerer interests, be struck out.

It is appropriate for me to observe that if there is an application for leave to appeal Beaumont J's jurisdictional decision and if that application is successful and if an appeal following that application also is successful, then it would seem to me that the application in relation to calling up the
Industrial Court proceedings to this Court and then cross-vesting such proceedings to the Federal Court would become an academic question and prima facie unnecessary.

Against the background of what I have said, it seems to me that in the circumstances it is not appropriate for me to hear and determine to finality the summons that has been brought by and on behalf of the plaintiffs. My three reasons may be summarised briefly as follows: First, an amended statement of claim is to be filed in the Federal Court. Second, there is the question of outstanding particulars still to be dealt with, and associated with that matter is the possibility that when an amended statement of claim is filed in the Federal Court there may even be a request for further particulars. Third, it seems to me that because there is the possibility that the jurisdictional order of Beaumont J may be the subject of appeal proceedings in the Federal
Court, which in turn deals with the question of the Federal Court having jurisdiction in relation to the Industrial Court proceedings. These matters jointly, severally, or, in the alternative, justify my concluding that it is premature to make final orders or, indeed, to hear and determine to finality the summons that is before me.

I observe, in passing, that once certain matters became perhaps more apparent during the course of argument and submissions that all of the defendants accepted the desirability of adjourning the summons in these proceedings and, indeed, adjourning the summons in the proceedings until 6 June. By that point of time one would know in the ordinary course of events whether an application for leave had been made in respect of the Federal Court order made on 3 May and one would also know whether or not the statement of claim has been again amended. Finally, one would also know whether particulars have been furnished.

I have said enough to indicate that in my view the summons, therefore, be adjourned to a date after 6 June. I do not treat myself as being part-heard in the proceedings. My commitment during the course of the year would not permit me to return to this matter. The summons may be heard upon the basis that it is not to be regarded as being part-heard by a judge available after 6 June .

I stand this matter over for mention to the applications list on Tuesday 11
June 1996.

I am not going to make any orders in relation to costs because it seems to me that to do so would be somewhat premature. Issues have been emerging since this application has been filed.

Costs of this adjournment are reserved.
 * * * 
