

Regina versus Murray Matter No Cca 60792/93 [1998] NSWSC 374 (11 September )

Last Updated: 29 September 1998 
REGINA versus JAMES FRANCIS MURRAY 
CCA 60792/93 September 1998 
Smart J, Newman J, Ireland J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal against conviction 
FILE NO/S: 60792/93 
DELIVERED: Friday, 11 September 1998 
HEARING DATE: Tuesday, 9 December 1997 
PARTIES: REGINA versus James Francis MURRAY 
JUDGMENT OF: SMART, NEWMAN, IRELAND JJ 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: H Di Suvero 
Respondent: A M Blackmore 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: Jeffreys & Associates 
Respondent: S E O'Connor 
CATCHWORDS: IDENTIFICATION EVIDENCE - DELAY IN PROSECUTING APPEAL 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed 
NO. OF PAGES: 44 
REGINA versus James Francis MURRAY 
HEADNOTE 
Held: - The directions as to the identification evidence were extensive and detailed and would have been readily understood by the jury. The jury would have understood the potential dangers, the need to scrutinise it with special care, the major areas of challenge to it and what needed to be considered. In the course of dealing with the general principles and the matters to be assessed the judge referred appropriately to the salient facts of the case.
The directions were adequate. There was no misdirection.
 - The judge is not required to refer to every piece of evidence or to deal with every discrepancy. He is only required to deal with matters which could reasonably be regarded as amounting to a significant weakness.
 - It was open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the appellant's guilt. The Crown case was strong. The verdict was not unsafe or unsatisfactory.
 - Having regard to the way in which the trial was conducted, the absence of relevant requests for further directions, the extensive directions of the judge covering the major matters and the delay in prosecuting the appeal leave to raise objections to the identification directions should be refused.

ORDER 
Appeal dismissed.

REGINA versus James Francis MURRAY 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: James Francis Murray appeals against his conviction in October 1993 of robbery while armed with a sawn-off shotgun on 5 April 1991 and the allied offence of stealing a motor vehicle, being the get-away car. The main issue at the trial was that of identification. The appellant challenges the adequacy and accuracy of the identification directions of the trial judge and contends that the verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory. 
None of the present objections to the identification directions was taken at the trial so that the leave of the Court is required to raise them. One unusual feature is the length of time which it has taken for the appeal to be heard. It came on to be heard over four years after the trial concluded and six and two thirds years after the alleged offence. With such a lapse of time it would be hard for the Crown and the accused to obtain a satisfactory retrial and a considerable strain on the witnesses and their memories would be imposed.

If an appellant proceeds diligently it has always been possible to have an appeal against conviction heard within six to eight months of the conclusion of the trial. Often it was heard more quickly. Even if there had been less than full diligence appeals against conviction were listed within twelve months of the trial concluding. Any greater delay was very unusual and tended to indicate an appeal in which everything was done very slowly and sometimes deliberately so.

At the trial there was a subsidiary issue whether certain alleged oral admissions were made. The Crown also contended that a certain sawn-off shotgun allegedly found in the appellant's possession on 23 April 1991 was that used in the armed robbery of 5 April 1991. The appellant relied on an alibi of which he and a number of witnesses gave evidence.

The appellant was acquitted on a third charge of possession of a 12 gauge shortened shotgun on 23 April 1991. This was allegedly found by the police in a bag of the appellant in his bedroom. The appellant was not present when the search warrant was executed. He contended that the shotgun had been planted by the police. The appellant also gave evidence of prior corrupt conduct against him by the detective sergeant in charge of the search. The officer was unable to give evidence at the trial as he was suffering from a psychiatric illness.

The Crown alleged that on 5 April 1991 the appellant was one of three men who attended at the Woolworths Store, Stockland Mall, Baulkham Hills about 12.15 pm and carried out an armed robbery which yielded some $93,000. Three men, who were not able to be identified, were seen together in the Stockland Mall from about 11.45 am. Initially, they were in the newsagency looking at street directories.

An Armaguard security truck was carrying out a particular run in the Hills
District, collecting and delivering cash to a number of commercial premises.
The truck was staffed by 3 men, known as the driver (Jones), the passport and the third man (Davey). The truck was parked in the Mall in front of the Woolworths store. Messrs Buckley and Davey left the truck and went through the Woolworths store to the office. They took some cash notes and coins in sealed bags to the office. They each obtained one bag containing notes, representing Woolworths takings from the previous day. Messrs Buckley and Davey left the first floor office and proceeded to walk through the store towards the front door winding their way past the shoppers and through the line of cash registers.

In the meantime two men in the store aroused the suspicions of some of the staff. Ms Bradbury, a supervisor who was at the service desk, made an announcement over the public address system that someone was acting suspiciously. She saw a fairly thick set man with a beard and moustache and wearing a dark coloured hat with a brim in the produce section. He was of average height. She saw a second man, walking from near the back of the check out registers into one of the aisles. A few minutes later she heard a man's voice saying "get down, get down." She glanced around and saw a male with a gun. On finding the office phone was engaged, she then called over the public address system "Leanne ring the police immediately." The man with the gun came down the side of the smoke booth and said to Mrs Bradbury "I will shoot you."
He moved away towards the corner of the store near the bakery. Mrs Bradbury kept putting calls over the public address system advising customers to keep down. She was intent on protecting the customers and staff. She noticed that an Armaguard officer went to the floor after the robber called out "get down, get down." 
I return to the point where the Armaguard officers had passed through the line of cash registers. At that point a robber with a sawn off shotgun came up close to Mr Davey and confronted him. The robber was no more than 24 inches away and had the barrel under Mr Davey's chin and said "get down, get down" very loudly. Mr Davey did not obey the robber immediately. He said that he looked at the robber for 5 to 8 seconds, possibly a second or two longer. He released the bag of money he was carrying as he went down onto the floor or as he was lying there. He felt his gun being removed from his holster.

Mr Davey stated that the robber waived the gun from side to side across him and under his chin. The robber was shorter than Mr Davey who was about 6 feet inches tall and looked down upon the robber and his gun. As Mr Davey put it his statement of 9 April 1991 "... I was nearly standing over the top of him when he had the sawn-off shotgun pointed at me." 
Mr Davey agreed in cross examination that he got a pretty good look at the gun. He took in many of the details of the shotgun which the robber was holding. He gave this evidence in cross examination: "Q: In fact you were able to supply all this detail to the police officer on 5
April in relation to the gun that you saw? 
A: Yes.

Q: Well how much time did you spend looking at this gun? 
A: Well, as I said it went from about 5 to 8 or 10 seconds or possibly a few more seconds.

Q: How much of the time did you spend looking at the gun do you think? 
A: I have just answered that question.

Q: How much time did you spend at his face? 
A: Well they were both within my vision at the same time and I went up and down from one section to the other in my angle of vision." 
In his statement of 5 April 1991 Mr Davey gave this description: "He was an Australian male, about 5 foot 7 to about 5 foot 8 inches tall, he was about 35 to 40 year of age, he was medium to small build with dark hair in a pony tail and he was wearing long dark trousers and a coat or jacket of some type. He seemed to be in a very agitated state and when he spoke it was with an Australian accent." 
Mr Davey agreed that when he had given evidence he also said that the robber had a dark moustache, was very tanned and wrinkled and had dark sunglasses with square light gold wire frames. Mr Davey said that he recollected these matters after going over his statement at home and reflecting upon what he had seen. On the day of the robbery or the following day, he had made a note of the matters which he had omitted on his copy statement. He denied that he had obtained these details after discussion with Mr Buckley or after looking at some photographs shown to him by Det Sgt Hall and Det James.

On 9 April 1991, without prior notice, Det Sgt Hall and Det James attended at
Armaguard's premises and handed Mr Davey a group of 14 photographs. He went through the bundle and picked out a photograph as being that of the robber. It was a photograph of the appellant. Mr Davey was positive that the man shown in that photograph was the robber. There was no room for doubt. He had no reservations.

Mr Davey denied that Det Sgt Hall had given him a bit of a hint. The meeting on 9 April 1991 had been conducted formally and there had been no informal exchanges or familiar conduct. He had made a statement on 9 April 1991, attesting to his positive identification of the applicant as the robber.

Mr Davey agreed that the man shown in the photograph was very tanned and very wrinkled. He insisted that he had made a note of these characteristics previously and that he had not added them after seeing the photograph.

No-one would reasonably expect any witness making a statement shortly after such an upsetting event to write down or relate every detail. It is reasonable that on later and calmer review that Mr Davey should note matters not covered in his statement.

Mr Davey was a retired Chief Inspector of Police with 37 years service in the police force. His evidence made it plain that he exercised considerable self control during the robbery and had taken considerable care to observe the robber closely.

Mr Davey agreed that as a former police officer, he was aware that a limited time for observation can be a difficulty in an identification case. Mr Davey had no difficulty in the circumstances of the present identification. The applicant attached much significance to this passage in Mr Davey's evidence: "HIS HONOUR: Q: When this was sprung upon you suddenly, it took you by surprise? 
A: Yes.

Q: Did you have sufficient time to collect your wits and to try and make a careful examination of the weapon and the person holding it or were you just so taken by surprise that you were unable to do those things? 
A: No, I was able to control my situation, having in mind the people present, the circumstances under which we were placed, and I was somehow aware there were other offenders in the vicinity, so I just took control of myself and did what I thought was the best thing for everybody concerned." 
The judge's question was an unfortunate one. It puts two different propositions and was hard to answer. As I read the answer of Mr Davey the "no" relates to the second half and not the first half of what the judge was stating or asking. Mr Davey was asserting that he was not so taken by surprise that he was unable to collect his wits and make a careful examination of the weapon and the person holding it. He went on to explain that he took control of himself and did what he thought was the best thing for everybody concerned.

Upon hearing Mrs Bradbury's message, Mr R A Single, the store manager, left his office and went to the smoke shop and spoke to her. He gave an account of the movements of the three robbers in the store, the firearms which they carried and a description of them. One was referred to at the trial by Mr
Single as heavily built, having a beer-barrel stomach, and about 5 feet 10 to feet 11 inches tall. The second man Mr Single saw was about 5 feet 7 inches tall, of a skinny build with an anaemic appearance. He had pale skin and a fair coloured moustache. Mr Single had these two men under observation for a period and saw a third man pass a sawn-off shotgun to the man who was thin and anaemic looking. Mr Single stated that he was a bit over four metres from that man when this happened. Mr Single saw the three men stop the Armaguard officers and point their guns at those officers. He heard the robbers order the officers to the floor. The thin anaemic looking man was one of those who removed the money bags from the security officers.

Mr Single stated that after 5 April 1991 some police officers approached him with some photographs. He could not recall the number. His "rough estimate" was about 10. He said that he pointed out a particular person whom he believed was one of the people involved. Mr Single, after being examined on the voir dire, identified the group of photographs he was shown. He said, that the photographs were brought to the Woolworths store at Baulkham Hills. He picked out the photograph which he identified on the day on which he was shown the photographs and told Det Sgt Hall. There was another detective present. He said that he had no doubt that the man in the photograph he had selected was one of the robbers, the anaemic one. That was the appellant. There was another photograph which he thought was of the robber with the beer barrel stomach but he had reservations about it.

Mr Single insisted that he was not mistaken, adding that when he had seen the photographs again that day at the trial they had brought back memories of what he had seen on the day of the robbery.

Det Sgt Hall said that he was not the officer in charge of the investigation from the outset but he became the officer in charge of the enquiry in relation to the appellant sometime shortly after 5 April 1991. He attended at the shopping centre on 8 April 1991 and carried out enquiries with Detective James and Detective Nimmo. They sought to establish which people saw something and any person who saw something was shown photographs. Det Hall said that on 19
April 1991 they (the police) arranged for everyone they could possibly get to come to the Woolworths store where they again showed photographs. Det Hall said that he did his utmost to ensure that everyone who thought he or she could identify any one was shown photographs. All this was done prior to 23
April 1991, the day of the appellant's arrest. Det Hall said that he showed photographs to Mr Single but Mr Single was not able to pick out one particular photograph from the set of photographs which he was shown. If Mr Single had done so a statement would have been taken from him. Only Miss Casey was able to pick out any particular photograph.

Det James remembered speaking to a large number of people who had been present when the robbery occurred and showing them some photographs. Det James knew that Mr Single was one of the persons to whom the photographs were shown but could not recall a conversation with Mr Single. Det James said that Mr Single never picked out a photograph to him. Det James said that he was with Det Hall and that they called in the witnesses one at a time.

The essential question is whether Mr Single truly identified the appellant and selected his photograph on 19 April 1991. Mr Single insisted that he did. It may be that Mr Single did not make his position sufficiently clear to the police. There was room for a mistake or confusion particularly when Mr Single felt unable to be certain about the identification of the man with the beer- barrel stomach. Det Hall may not have appreciated what Mr Single was saying.
If Det Hall had thought there was a second witness who could identify the appellant, a statement would have been taken. On the other hand Mr Single was unlikely to have given the evidence which he did if he had not identified that appellant and the photograph of him.

It was for the jury to decide what weight should be attached to Mr Single's evidence. It was not evidence which could be lightly dismissed as he had the appellant under observation for some time at close quarters.

There was other less cogent evidence on the identification issue. Miss L M
Casey, who was a supervisor with Woolworths, was in the smoke shop. She saw a man with a gun near the Coca Cola machine facing the check outs. There was a security guard lying on the floor. She also lay on the floor with her face turned to the side. She saw the man with the gun for about twenty seconds. She thought that he was aged between 30 and 35, about 5 feet 8 inches tall with short collar length black hair apparently blow waved back with a black moustache and olive skin. The gun which he was holding was about 2 feet long and appeared to be wooden. She heard this man say to Mrs Bradbury "I will shoot you".

On Friday 19 April 1991, about 10.30 am, she was spoken to by Dets. Hall and
James. They showed her some black and white photographs. She looked through them all and stopped at one particular photograph. She recognised the person shown. She said "He looked very, very similar to the man I saw holding the gun ... on the day of the robbery." The hair on the man she saw on 5 April was a bit shorter than that shown in the photograph. She signed the back of the photograph, which was one of the appellant. When she saw the appellant in
Court on 21 November 1991 she noticed that the colour of his hair was a bit lighter.

In cross examination she said that she was sure that the person she saw at the coke machine was the same person she saw rush between the smoke shop and register 6. She also said: "Q: When you use the term "this man is very similar" because you say that, is there some room for error? 
A: I said the man looked very, very similar to the man in the photograph.
Well, perhaps because it was only 20 seconds, that was something that I could not be absolutely positively sure but from looking at the photographs and seeing him in court - 
HIS HONOUR: Q: What about seeing him in court? Sometimes there is a difference between seeing a photograph of someone and seeing them in the flesh. Did seeing him in court in the flesh assist you in any way? 
A: Yes, it did.

Q: It did? 
A: He looked the same as the man I saw the day of the robbery.

WHITEEAD: Q: Though you are prepared to concede that he was the only one there? 
A: That's right." 
This appears: "HIS HONOUR: ... can you be sure in your own mind that when you looked at that man in court you were identifying or looking at the person that you saw in the shop? 
A: Yes, I can be sure.

Q: Or the person that you saw in the photograph? 
A: To both.

WHITEHEAD: Q: You will not make any concession that you could be in error? 
A: Only what I said before, like 20 seconds is quick but I am sure it is the same person I saw in court and the day of the robbery, I am sure, and in the photograph." 
Mr J T J Buckley was a security officer with Armaguard. He and Mr Davey entered Woolworths and went to the office. They left carrying the takings from the previous day and some cash for the coins. They walked through the store with Mr Buckley in front of Mr Davey. In going through an unused checkout Mr
Davey passed in front of Mr Buckley. Mr Davey exchanged "chit-chat" with the store security officer. Mr Buckley noticed a man standing near that officer.
The man threw down a cardboard box. Mr Buckley saw that the man was carrying a shortened shotgun. The man commanded "Down, down, down, down, get down I'm not mucking around, I will shoot." Mr Buckley said that both he and Mr Davey obeyed. He lay face down. The bag containing the money was dragged out of his hand and he felt someone undoing his holster. The man was about 40 years old, about 5 feet 6 inches tall, slight build, and had light olive skin, dark coloured hair with a pony tail at the back. He was wearing dark coloured wrap around sunglasses. Mr Buckley said that he had this man under observation for five to ten seconds.

On 9 April 1991 he was shown a number of photographs, approximately fourteen.
He selected one where the subject looked "very, very similar" to the man he had seen with the shotgun at the Stockland Mall on 5 April 1991 and who had robbed him. Mr Buckley said that he was not absolutely sure that the person in the photograph was the man who robbed him but that person was very similar in facial appearance to the robber. Mr Buckley said that he believed he saw the man who had robbed him between 1 January and April 1993 in Merrylands Road,
Merrylands. Mr Buckley saw the appellant at the committal hearing on 24 April
Mr Buckley said that when he made his statement to the police he was endeavouring to convey that there was some doubt in his mind but that the man in the photograph looked very like the person who robbed him.

The Crown also relied on admissions allegedly made by the appellant after his arrest on 23 April 1991. It is necessary to refer to what happened on that day. After his arrest about 10.35 am the appellant was conveyed to Blacktown
Police Station. A little later that day a number of detectives went to his home at Riverstone and executed a search warrant. Det Sgt Marks gave evidence that he began searching a bedroom with Det Sgt Nimmo and saw Det Nimmo take a blue canvas bag from underneath a bed and remove from it a twelve gauge
Bentley shotgun in a sawn off condition.

About 11.10 am Det Sgt Hall began interviewing the appellant. In response to being informed that he had been identified as one of the offenders in an armed robbery shortly after 12.30 pm on 5 April 1991 upon two Armaguard employees at the Woolworth's store, Baulkham Hills and that his photograph had been selected from a number of photos shown to a security guard and being asked if he wished to comment he allegedly replied "I'm not a dog. I don't give anyone up." 
The interview was suspended between 11.28 am and 11.45 am. During this period
Det Hall was handed the sawn off shotgun which the police alleged had been found in the appellant's room. He was shown the shotgun and informed that it had been found by police in his bedroom. On being asked whether he wished to say anything about the weapon he was alleged to have replied, "All right, that's the gun I used." He was then asked, "Are you saying that you were involved in the commission of the robbery at Woolworths on 5 April at Baulkham
Hills. He allegedly answered "Yeah, all right." The appellant was told that the weapon had been located in a blue carry bag under the bed and he allegedly agreed that the weapon was in the bag. According to the police the appellant refused to say who else was involved in the robbery and declined to participate in a line up.

The record of interview was typed but the appellant declined to sign it. In the first half of the interview as typed the appellant made no admissions and asked for details of the police case. In the second half, after production of the bag and the gun he is alleged to have made comprehensive admissions. He is recorded as saying, when asked for details of what he did during the robbery, "It's very hard for me, mate, I've never been the type of bloke to spill me guts to anyone." When asked how much money he received for his part in the robbery, he allegedly responded "I got about a fourth". It is alleged that he declined to say anything further.

The interview is a curious one and one which raises doubts. It is not easy to accept that after being wary and exploring the police case to ascertain its strength, the applicant would make a few convenient and comprehensive admissions, decline to supply details and then refuse to answer any further questions.

In his evidence the appellant said that on 5 April 1991 he left home shortly before 11 am. He left with the woman with whom he boarded, Leanne Doyle, and her daughter Rebecca. They travelled in Ms Doyle's car eventually arriving at "Class 4 Cars" at Parramatta about 11.00 or 11.30 am. An employee and Ms Doyle had a discussion about her car and a price was agreed for its purchase. Mr
Murray said that there was some delay in obtaining a signatory for the company's cheque. About noon he and Ms Doyle were driven to the Guildford premises of the company so that payment could be arranged. They waited at
Guildford for over an hour. They were taken back to the company's Parramatta premises. They had to wait until around three o'clock before Ms Doyle was given a cheque. She tried to cash the cheque but the bank did not want to give her cash. Ultimately Ms Doyle and Mr Murray returned to the company which made arrangements for her to cash the cheque at a nearby bank. After receiving the cash Ms Doyle and the appellant returned to Riverstone by train. They arrived home about 5 pm.

The appellant denied making any admissions to the police and gave an account of police misconduct upon his arrest and while in police custody. He wrote a number of letters to various relevant authorities complaining about his treatment. He said that he did not see the sawn off shotgun until the committal proceedings. He agreed that the blue bag was his but he denied that when he left home on the day of his arrest it contained a shotgun. He asserted that the police had fabricated the evidence as to what was said in the interview and that the shotgun was planted by the police. He was not present while his place of residence was searched.

The appellant said that at the "interview" he requested that the police arrange a line up but they refused to do so. The bail papers revealed that when the appellant was taken before the magistrate on 23 and 24 April 1991 he requested that a line-up he held.

The appellant gave evidence of gross and corrupt misconduct on the part of Det
Nimmo who led the police team executing the search warrant at his place of residence.

Ms Doyle said that on 5 April 1991 she drove her metallic green coloured LDT to Class 4 Cars at Parramatta, arriving there about 10.45 am or perhaps between 11 am and 11.30 am. She spoke to one of the owners about selling her car. A mechanic inspected it and she spoke to a number of people at the car yard about the car. She and the appellant waited at the car yard for about 1 ½ hours. During the period they went to McDonald's. She said that they left the
Parramatta car yard about 1.45 pm and went to the company's Guildford premises to obtain payment for the car, someone from the company driving them there.
The journey took about 15 minutes and they were at Guildford for about 40 minutes to 1 hour. She was given a cheque and after a short period (about 10 minutes), they were driven back to Parramatta. She went to the ANZ Bank at
Parramatta but it was unable to cash the cheque at that point. That bank suggested that she go through the car yard's bank. She spoke to one of the owners (Jose De Freitas) and he wrote the words "Please pay cash" on the back of the cheque and signed it. She went to the car yard's bank and cashed it.
The bank was closing. She, the appellant and her daughter caught the train to
Riverstone arriving home about 5.30 pm. She said that from the time they arrived at the car yard until the time they arrived home the appellant had not been away from her for an hour. She left the appellant and her daughter at the car yard while she went down to the ANZ Bank. The appellant came down and joined her there.

Ms Doyle was cross examined at length. The jury may not have found her evidence reliable.

Mr Jose De Freitas stated that he was the sales manager of Class 4 Cars. He recalled seeing and speaking with Ms Doyle on 5 April 1991. He was not sure about the time but thought "it was some time before lunch or around lunch, somewhere around that." Later, he thought it could have been as early as 10 am. He said that at first she had a little girl with her and that about an hour later when she came back there was another fellow with her whom he could not see on the day he gave evidence. She came to the car yard to sell her car.
Mr Dee was present and looked at the car. He values cars. Mr De Freitas was not sure about many of the intervening details. He was not sure but thought that there may have been a time when Ms Doyle had to go to the company's
Guildford office.

He recalled Ms Doyle being handed the cheque. Only her little girl was with her. She went off to the bank. Mr De Freitas said that he first saw the appellant when he came back with her from the bank. He was not sure but he thought that the cheque was then made out to cash.

Mr De Freitas recalled Ms Doyle coming to his office about three weeks after 5
April 1998. At her request he checked the date of the transaction from the company's computer records.

Mr P Queenan, who worked at Class 4 Cars, recalled a transaction involving a
Ford LTD taking place on 5 April 1991. He saw a man and a woman and some little children talking to Mr De Freitas about 9.30 am or 10 am. The people went away for a short period and came back. He drove the man to George Street,
Parramatta where he alighted. Mr Queenan waited for a brief period but the man did not return to the car so Mr Queenan drove back to the car yard. The man later returned to the car yard. Mr Queenan estimated that the man was away for minutes to an hour to 1 ½ hours.

Mr John Dee (also known as John De Freitas), the valuer, failed to answer a subpoena issued at the appellant's request and duly served. Counsel reached an agreement as to what the jury should be told. The judge said: "It is agreed members of the jury, and you may act upon this as evidence, that
Det Sgt Hall spoke with Mr John Dee on 9 April 1992 regarding the sale of a
Ford from a female Leanne Doyle to Mr Dee's yard on 5 April 1991. Mr Dee agreed that he valued the vehicle, that there was a young lady Debbie or
Michelle and a young baby and this fellow present; that a price was agreed upon. All necessary checks were done on the car. He authorised the purchase.
He does not remember the method of payment and whether people went to
Guildford or someone from head office brought payment over. He heard something from the chap who was with them later, days, even weeks later.

He was asked to view nine photographs and he selected one, signed and dated the reverse and that is now part of Ex R. He could not recall the time he first saw the man nor remember whether morning or afternoon. He vaguely remembers the man there of (? at) the time during the purchase. Does not remember the attempt to negotiate the cheque, then walking to Parramatta
Shopping Centre. That is what the document says.

Members of the jury, I am going to make a comment upon the facts of the case.
You should clearly understand that you are at liberty to reject this comment if it does not correspond with your own independently formed opinion but the fact is that reference to Ex R will show that Mr John Dee identified a photograph of the accused as having been the person in company with Leanne
Doyle on 5 April 1991. As you have heard he cannot say what time, he cannot give any real particulars.

You may think that the accused's alibi depends, apart from his own evidence, very heavily upon Leanne Doyle because she is the only other person who fixes the time albeit only approximately but more importantly she says that apart from a very short period of time she was in the accused's company the whole of the relevant time, so that when you come to consider the alibi it seems likely that it is a question of the credibility of Leanne Doyle as to whether or not you accept that evidence or feel that it might be true and that the evidence of the witness Mr Dee who has not turned up is very peripheral to the issue.
About the only really important thing you might think that he has to say is that the person whom he did see at the car yard with Miss Doyle on 5 April was the accused.

You might think that the real question here is not whether the accused was there at all but whether he was there at the time it would have been required to commit the robbery itself and to get to the place; that is to and from the scene where the robbery occurred. There will be a lot more addressed about this. You have heard all the evidence. I do remind you it might be of some assistance to you that the first sighting of the three men who could have been the robbers was said to have been at approximately 11.45 from the two employees at the newsagency. The robbery itself was said by a number of witnesses to have occurred approximately 12.30. The witness who saw the car leaving said that was just before 12.30. If you accept that that involves a period of about three quarters of an hour between 11.45 and 12.30 plus whatever time it would take for the persons to get to and from, it would have taken the accused to have got to and from the scene of the robbery and back to
Parramatta.

That is only one facet of the case. There are a number of facets of it. I only give you that direction in the light of the failure of the witness to appear but you might think that the witness was not terribly significant apart from that one matter, that he does say he did see the accused at the yard at some time on that day." 
The jury were not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the sawn off shotgun was found in the possession of the appellant on 23 April 1991 but they were satisfied of the armed robbery on 5 April 1991 and that involved the appellant having a gun. It is probable that the jury was not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt as to the police version of what happened at the interview of the appellant. If they had been, they would have convicted the appellant of possessing a firearm. The evidence of the armed robbery at Woolworths was cogent and there was substantial identification evidence. The jury may well have taken the view that the evidence of Mr Single was cogent and that of
Detective Hall was less so. The alibi evidence lacked cogency.

Appeal Ground 1 - The trial judge failed to isolate and identify for the jury matters of significance which undermined the reliability of the identification evidence; such failure constitutes a misdirection and resulted in a miscarriage of justice.

The judge told the jury that the question of identification was the real issue on the first two charges, that they needed to exercise great care before accepting the evidence of identification and that evidence of visual identification must be very carefully scrutinised, because of the ever present possibility of mistake. He told the jury that in the past people had been wrongly convicted upon identification evidence. He explained that a number of honest and convincing witnesses can be mistaken and that it is the quality rather than the quantity of the evidence which mattered. Both honesty and accuracy were essential. The jury had to take the utmost care to ensure that the evidence of identifying witnesses is totally reliable.

The judge explained that the best and most reliable means of identifying somebody is for that person to be identified in a properly constituted and conducted line up in which the accused is in company with a number of other persons of reasonably similar appearance and that this gives the accused an opportunity to observe any irregularities. He pointed to the superiority of this method of seeing people in the flesh over a two-dimensional representation of their appearance from a photograph.

The judge explained that it may be necessary for the police, when trying to identify the offender to show photographs of possible suspects with a view to trying to identify the offender and that when such photographs have been shown to a potential witness the force of any later identification which might be made out of a line up is reduced. The judge referred to the conflict between
Dets Hall and James and Mr Single as to whether he pointed out a particular photograph as being that of the appellant.

The judge referred to a series of matters to which the jury should have regard. First, all identifying witnesses had never seen the offender previously. Secondly, none of the identifying witnesses knew before the armed robbery that he or she was going to have to identify somebody. For each of them this was a sudden, random event. Third, did the identifying witnesses have any special reason to remember the appearance of the offender or offenders? The judge commented that the jury may think that it is not every day that you get involved in or witness an armed hold up.

The judge directed the jury to consider whether the witness was under stress or had a good calm look, whether the person was naturally observant and whether the person had any training in what to look for? The judge explained that the Crown relied upon Mr Davey as having the training and the presence of mind to make a very careful observation whereas the defence went to the extent of almost ridiculing Mr Davey and suggested that "once a policeman, always a policeman" and that he was in effect "limelighting". The judge stated that whether his evidence deserved to be laughed out of court or whether it should be taken seriously was very much a matter for them.

The judge reminded the jury of other matters, including the light, how close the witness was to the offender, whether there was any obstruction to the witness' view, over what period of time the observation was made and what the witness observed. The judge referred to the Crown's contention that the appellant was a somewhat individual looking person and the defence riposte that one of the photographs in the bundle was of a person who bore quite a strong resemblance to the appellant but was not the appellant.

The judge also directed the jury to consider whether there was any material difference between any description given to the police or in the witness box by the witness and the actual appearance of the appellant as it was at the time of the robbery so far as that could be ascertained. The judge reminded the jury that when offences are committed in broad daylight offenders may take pains to conceal their true appearances, for example, by wigs, hair dyes, change or removal of spectacles, altered facial hair and change in hair style, amongst others matters, especially in a carefully planned and pre-meditated robbery.

The judge also told the jury to consider how good a test the witness was given in making the selection of the photograph. Were the men in the other photographs of a somewhat similar description? The Crown relied upon there being a photograph of a person who was said to be very similar.

The judge emphasised that they must take into account not only the similarities of the description of the offender in the evidence of the various witnesses but also the differences. The judge told the jury that it was obvious that the shorter the time between the commission of the crime and the showing of the photographs the better.

The judge took the jury through the evidence of Ms Bradbury, Mr Single, Ms
Casey, Mr Buckley and Mr Davey exposing both its strengths and its weaknesses.

The judge's directions as to the identification evidence were extensive and detailed and couched in homely language which would have been readily understood by the jury. At the end of those directions the jury would have understood the potential dangers of identification evidence and the need to scrutinise it with special care. They would also have understood the major areas of challenge to it and what needed to be considered. In the course of dealing with the general principles and the matters to be assessed the judge referred appropriately to the salient facts of the present case.

In R v. Heuston [81 A Crim R 387] at 406, I expressed the view that the principles relating to identification directions as gathered in Domican v. The Queen [(1992) 173 CLR 554] at 561-562 and 564 were: "(1) Whatever the defence and however the case is conducted, where evidence as to identification represents any significant part of the proof of guilt of an offence the judge must warn the jury as to the dangers of convicting on such evidence where its reliability is disputed.

The warning must be cogent, effective and appropriate to the circumstances of the case.

A warning in general terms is insufficient. The jury should be alerted to any weaknesses (or what may reasonably be regarded as weaknesses) in the identification evidence.

Reference to counsel's arguments is insufficient. The judge himself should give the relevant directions isolating and identifying for the jury any matter of significance which may reasonably be regarded as undermining the reliability of the identification evidence.

The judge must direct the jury that they are bound to take those matters into consideration in determining whether they will rely on the identification evidence." 
The judge is not required to refer to every piece of evidence or to deal with every discrepancy or difference in detail. He is only required to deal with matters which could reasonably be regarded as amounting to a significant weakness.

The appellant complained that the judge did not deal specifically with some 13 matters relating to Mr Davey's evidence. The first 5 complaints may be taken together. They are: he was taken by surprise; his attention was moving or divided between the gun and the face; he did not have sufficient time to collect his wits and make a careful observation of the weapon and the person; his observation could have been as little as "a few" or "five" seconds; whatever time his attention was on the gun detracted from the time his attention was on the face; 
These grounds bear upon the opportunity which Mr Davey had to observe the appellant and the effective time which Mr Davey had to see the appellant. As to (i) the judge said that none of the witnesses had any prior warning and that this was a sudden, random event. As to (ii) and (v) the judge, as earlier mentioned, pointed out to the jury that they had to consider the period of time during which the observation was made. The judge reminded the jury that
Mr Davey said that the actual robbery took about 20 seconds and that he looked at the one robber he saw for at least 10 seconds. Mr Davey saw the robber at very close quarters and from the front and was able to take in details both of the robber and the gun. The judge reminded the jury of Mr Davey's evidence that he had a very careful look at the robber. Mr Davey did not accept that he was unable to take in the details of the gun and the man. Mr Davey said that he was much taller than the robber and standing over the top of him. He was looking at both. As to (iii) this summarises the evidence incorrectly. Mr
Davey was saying the reverse. As to (iv) Mr Davey did refer to 5 to 8 or 10 seconds or possibly a few more seconds. The appellant's submission involves a misinterpretation of the evidence. There was evidence which would justify the conclusion that overall the period of observation was about 10 seconds. It was clear to everyone that it was a short period and one about which it was difficult to be precise. Counsel appearing for the appellant at the trial sought no correction.

Complaints (vi), (vii) and (viii) read: his failure to state on the first occasion to the police on the day of the robbery that the man had square sunglasses with a wiry gold frame nor indeed any glasses.
 he became aware at the committal hearing that his Armaguard partner, [Mr
Buckley] had identified the man as having sunglasses, and also failed in his first report to the police to report that the man had either sunglasses or a moustache.
 the in-court identifications at the committal or at trial could not be used to bolster his identification evidence 
As to (vi) and (vii) these are not matters of significance. They were covered extensively in cross examination, with Mr Davey stating that on reviewing his statement shortly after he made it, he noted the omissions on his copy of his statement. His omissions were that the robber had a dark moustache, was very tanned and wrinkled and had square dark sunglasses with wire frames. In his summing up the judge set out the description Mr Davey had given in his evidence and stated that Mr Davey, in giving his original description to the police, did not refer to the tanned and leathery skin on the neck and face nor to the large dark moustache. The judge did not refer to Mr Davey having omitted to mention the large square dark sunglasses in his statement to the police. The omissions were covered at some length in cross examination. The omissions mentioned by the judge would have brought the whole question of the omissions to the jury's attention. Not mentioning the sunglasses with the wire frames was not a failure to mention a significant matter. The judge was not asked by counsel for the appellant to add this point to his summing up.

As to (vii) Mr Davey said that he only became aware at the committal proceedings that Mr Buckley had provided a description which included sunglasses and a moustache. This is a subsidiary matter and was covered in cross examination. The issue was whether Mr Davey noticed these at the time of the robbery. The judge did draw the attention of the jury to the importance of what the witness observed at the time, what he told the police and any discrepancies. The judge was not asked by counsel for the appellant to add this point to the summing up.

As to (viii) Mr Davey was asked if he had ever seen the appellant after the incident at about 12.30 pm on 5 April 1991 and replied "I have only seen him at the committal hearings". Mr Davey was asked, without objection, if he had seen the appellant today (13 October 1993 at the trial) and indicated him.
This was innocuous. The judge made it clear during the trial and during his summing up that an identification cannot be made for the first time in court.
There was no need for the jury to be further instructed.

Complaints (ix), (x) and (xi) read: "(ix) that a witness who appears to be "unshakeable" can be wrong; that the statement of "very positive" has no inherent indicia of reliability; that if they rejected the evidence implicating the accused on the count concerning the possession of the weapon, that would substantially weaken their confidence in the identification of the Appellant.
 the Appellant was not previously known to the witness;" 
As to (ix) this is not a matter which relates specifically to questions of identification. Being positive can hardly be described as a weakness. Further, the judge told the jury: "The chances of a miscarriage of justice are at their highest in cases when the conviction of an accused depends solely, or substantially upon this kind of evidence [identification evidence by an eyewitness from photographs] ... It is possible that a number of honest and convincing witnesses can be mistaken." 
The jury would have had no doubt about the positive and certain identification of the appellant by Mr Davey but had been warned of the possibility of honest and convincing witnesses being mistaken.

As to (x) the jury was not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant had the shotgun in his possession. Mr Davey did not positively identify the weapon. He said "yes, that looks like the gun." Shotguns fitting the description of the shotgun allegedly found are not uncommon. The jury had no difficulty in distinguishing between the armed robbery incident on 5 April and the alleged finding of the shotgun in the appellant's room on 23
April 1991. The direction suggested was neither necessary nor sought. Further, it would not have been correct to give it.

As to (xi) the judge made it clear in his summing up that none of the identifying witnesses had ever seen the offender before the robbery.

Complaints (xii) reads: "(xii) the other Armaguard witness, Buckley, who had given the police a description that included a dark moustache and square sunglasses had compared the description he gave to the police with Davey on the afternoon of the robbery (T 67.3) while Davey denied knowing Buckley's description until the committal. (T 104.9)." 
This matter goes primarily to the credit of Messrs Davey and Buckley. An argument of some force could be advanced that Mr Davey had added to his description after talking to Mr Buckley. There is no direct evidence of what
Messrs Buckley and Davey said to each other. Whether the moustache and the glasses were mentioned does not appear. The judge did not refer to this particular discrepancy but the jury were alerted to matters not appearing in the initial statement of Mr Davey to the police and subsequently given in evidence. The judge was not asked to draw this point to the jury's attention.
It was a subsidiary matter.

Complaint (xiii) emerged in argument and was to this effect: "The judge erred in not comparing the evidence of Mr Davey with that of the other witnesses and not telling the jury that Mr Davey could be wrong in the details he gave and that others could be correct. Mr Davey's evidence should have been compared with that of Dobbs, Beard, Helen Ardill, Vincent Ardill,
Alford, Braithwaite, Westwood, Bradbury and Single." 
After going over the descriptions provided by some of the witnesses the judge said: "You can see that there is a very considerable variation between some of these descriptions." 
Later, after going through all of the witnesses' descriptions the judge said "in short, you have varying descriptions by a number of people." He subsequently reminded the jury "to pay attention not only to the similarities but to the dissimilarities." Earlier in his summing up he had made the same point. The judge was not asked to give further directions as to the differences.

It is important not to lose sight of the way in which the defence was conducted at the trial. These remarks of counsel for the appellant about Mr
Davey appear in the summing up: "once a policeman, always a policeman", "limelighting," "gilding the lily", "over-acting" and "laying it on too thick." It seems that a strong personal attack was made upon Mr Davey and that this was the approach adopted to deal with his damaging evidence. It was a broadly based attack which, unsurprisingly, failed. It was beyond dispute that he was held up and was very close to the robber.

It must not be overlooked that the judge gave the jury, at its request, a copy of the transcript of the evidence at the trial with an Index setting out the names of the witnesses and the pages where their evidence appeared. The jury referred to the transcript during addresses and the summing up.

The appellant's complaints about the judge's treatment of Mr Davey's evidence and his identification directions relating to it must be rejected.

The appellant complained about the judge's treatment of Ms Casey's evidence.
The appellant complained that the judge had wrongly described her in-court identification as "very important evidence." This does not accurately summarise the position. The judge said that Casey "gave very important evidence in this case at pages 89-90 of the transcript." These pages include a discussion of Ms Casey's in-court identification (the judge ascertaining that she was sure that when she made her in-court identification she was identifying the person she saw in Woolworths shop). However, her actual in- court identification is found at page 83 of the transcript. It was not Ms
Casey's in-court identification that the trial judge was referring to as "very important evidence"; rather, it was her evidence concerning her identification of the accused (including her in-court identification and her response to questioning about whether in her in-court identification she was identifying the person seen in the photograph, rather than the person she had seen in
Woolworths shop).

During the evidence and the summing up the judge told the jury that an identification cannot be made for the first time in court.

The appellant submitted that the judge should have isolated and identified these weaknesses in Casey's identification evidence: the photo display was shown to her 14 days after the event; the in-court committal identification added nothing to the strength of the earlier photo identification because the witness had already seen the photo and was perhaps merely confirming her photo identification: the in-court identification at trial similarly added nothing to the strength of the earlier photo identification.

The judge told the jury that it was very important to consider how long after the event the photo identification took place and elaborated on this point. He emphasised that the shorter the time the greater the likelihood that the identifying witness will have retained a clear image of the person in his or her mind. The judge reminded the jury that she identified the photograph on 19
April 1991. The jury knew that the incident occurred on 5 April 1991. There is no substance in point (i).

As to (ii) it has earlier been mentioned what the judge meant by his directions. I have earlier set out what Ms Casey said, namely, that when she looked at the man in court she was looking at the man she had seen in the
Woolworths shop and the photograph. This made plain her position as to in court identifications. No comment about the matter from the judge was necessary.

My earlier comments cover complaint (iii).

The appellant complains that the judge failed to isolate and identify the following weaknesses in Mr Buckley's evidence: out of the photo display of 14 persons, only two photos depicted a person who only had a moustache, T. 65.3; this meant the Appellant had a 50% chance of being selected; in other words, that the photo display was highly suggestive and not a fair one; (ii) the witness had seen another person in in Merrylands who he believed to be the same person as the robber, (T.62c) however that person was never identified as being the Appellant; he was `extremely frightened' during the robbery (T 67.8); an identification in a photograph can never be considered as being as reliable as one made in person, such as in a line up." 
As to (i) it is correct that only two photographs depicted a person with only a moustache. There were others who had both a moustache and a beard. The appellant's claim that he had a 50% chance of being selected is fallacious, resting as it does on the incorrect assumption that the witness had to make a selection. As to the submission that the photo display was highly suggestive and not a fair one, it is hard to maintain that submission when there was included a photograph of a person who was said to be very similar to the appellant. In any event the judge directed the jury to consider whether the photographs shown to the witness (apart from that of the appellant) were those of people of a somewhat similar description and "How good a test was put to the witness in making that selection of the photograph?" That sufficed. It was not necessary for the judge to refer specifically to these matters. It would be wrong to concentrate on one facial feature. Moustaches can be shaved off.
The issue is, viewed as a whole, how similar were the other photographs. The jury had been instructed that they had to consider the adequacy of the test put to the witness.

As to (ii) Mr Buckley's evidence was that he had seen another person in 1993 in Merrylands whom he believed to be the same person as the robber. That person was not positively identified as being the appellant. Nor did Mr
Buckley positively identify the appellant as the offender. The judge directed the jury that Mr Buckley had not positively identified the appellant.

As to (iii) the judge told the jury that whether a witness to the armed robbery was under stress was one matter to be considered. The judge outlined the facts of the robbery as they affected Mr Buckley. From this narration it was obvious that Mr Buckley would have been very frightened. The judge stated
Mr Buckley said that he saw the robber for five to ten seconds but could not be absolutely positive that the man in the selected photograph was the robber.
The robber had similar features.

As to (iv) the judge pointed out the superiority of a line up over identification from photographs and when it may be necessary to use photographs.

The appellant complained that the summing up did not identify these weaknesses in the evidence of Mr Single: "(i) although he had described the robber as `blondey haired', the photo selected was of a very dark haired person. T 34.9; no other witnesses described the robber as having had reading glasses; a photo identification is never as reliable as an identification in person.
 no other witness described the robber as `blondey haired'." 
As to (i), the photograph was black and white. Describing a person and selecting a photograph are different activities, the latter involving a consideration and comparison of two images as a whole while the former involves breaking an image up into its component parts and translating them into words. Hair colour can readily be changed. As to (ii) and (iv) the judge directed the jury to have regard to the dissimilarities in description. These are not major details. As to (iii) the judge stated that a line up was better than photo-identification. None of these could be regarded as matters of significance.

The directions given by the judge as to identification were adequate in the context of this trial and the way it was fought. There was no misdirection.
The Crown case on identification was a strong one. Both Messrs Davey and
Single had an excellent close range view of the appellant and observed him carefully. They were supported by the evidence of Ms Casey and Mr Buckley. The jury was not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the evidence of Dets Hall and James as to the police interview because they acquitted on the gun possession charge. The jury was entitled to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the positive identification of the appellant by Mr Single and to have a strong preference for his evidence over that of the police officers.

I reject Appeal Ground 1.

Appeal Ground 2 - His Honour erred in his direction that the jury was to consider the reliability of the appellant's alibi witnesses by applying the same eyewitness identification standards that are required in identifying an accused in a criminal proceeding.

During the summing up the judge, in dealing with evaluation of the identification evidence led by the Crown, referred to a number of matters which the jury should consider. After mentioning the importance of the time difference between the witness seeing the offender and being shown a bundle of photographs the judge continued: "It is important to bear in mind, what the identifying witness said at the time, of making the identification. If he said, `Oh, well, maybe, perhaps, yes, that could be him', that might be one thing, but if somebody said, `That's him, there's no doubt', that could be another. However those things are not conclusive. For instance, consider the evidence from the people at
Class 4 Cars. How confident was the witness of the identification. It is important, but it is not necessarily conclusive." 
This passage does not establish that the jury were directed to apply the cautionary approach to be taken to the Crown's identification witnesses to the appellant's alibi witnesses. The judge was giving an illustration or example.
It is, of course, important to keep in mind what a witness, whether a Crown witness or an alibi witness, said at the time he was making an identification.

The complaint is without substance because there was no issue that the appellant was at "Class 4 Cars" on the day of the robbery. The question was whether he was there between about 11.30 am and 12.45 pm. In his summing up the judge said to the jury: "You might think that what this case is about, is not whether the accused was ever at the car yard on that day, but whether he was there when it really mattered." 
I have earlier quoted a similar comment made by the judge when dealing with Mr
Dee immediately prior to the close of the appellant's case.

This ground of appeal fails.

Appeal Ground 3 - The convictions are unsafe and unsatisfactory.

The basis of this submission was that the jury in acquitting the appellant of the possession of the shotgun must have disbelieved the alleged oral admissions attributed to him by the police and that the only body of evidence that remained was the identification evidence of Messrs Davey, Single and
Buckley and Ms Casey. It was submitted that there was no other evidence connecting the appellant to the crime. In the search of his premises no money, no clothing matching the description of that worn by the robber, no dye and no eye glasses were found. It was further submitted that upon the whole of the evidence it was not open to the jury, properly directed, to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant was guilty.

It is not a question of the jury disbelieving the police as to the oral admissions but not being satisfied of them beyond reasonable doubt. The identification evidence of Messrs Davey and Single was strong. They were supported by Mr Buckley and Ms Casey.

I have examined and assessed the whole of the evidence. The Crown case was a strong one. Applying the test in M v. The Queen [(1994) 181 CLR 487] at 492-494 as explained in Jones v. The Queen (1997) 72 ALJR 78 at 85 this was a case in which upon the whole of the evidence it was open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant was guilty. It is not a case in which I feel any doubt. There is no possibility that an innocent person has been convicted. I would have been very surprised if the jury had not convicted the appellant. The verdict was not unsafe or unsatisfactory.

General 
The appellant sought leave to raise grounds 1 and 2. I have concluded that these grounds must be rejected on their merits. Having regard to the way in which the trial was conducted including the broad disparaging attack on Mr
Davey, the absence of relevant requests for further directions, the extensive directions of the judge covering the major matters and the delay in prosecuting the appeal I would refuse leave to rely on these grounds.

In the context of this case, which involved extensive eyewitness evidence and a large number of civilian witnesses the delay in prosecuting the appeal was very serious. Indeed, it was such as to preclude, from a practical point of view, a useful second trial. It is essential that appeals be prosecuted promptly so that, if appropriate, any new trial can be held promptly and before the memory of witnesses becomes significantly affected by the lapse of time.

I propose that the appeal against conviction be dismissed.

REGINA v. James Francis MURRAY 
JUDGMENT 
NEWMAN J: I agree with Smart J. 
REGINA -v- James Francis MURRAY 
JUDGMENT 
IRELAND J: I agree with Smart J. * * * 
