

Butler versus Commissioner of Police Matter No 11809/97 [1997] NSWSC 354 (1
September 1997) 
Last Updated: 27 February 1998 ` 
Wayne Edward Butler versus Commissioner of Police` ` 11809/97` `1 September 1997` `Graham AJ` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division` /97 - WAYNE EDWARD BUTLER versus COMMISSIONER OF POLICE 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The Service and Execution of Process Act (1992) (Commonwealth) makes provision for warrants to be produced to magistrates whereupon magistrates are required to make certain orders. Section 83(8) of the Act provides: "Subject to subsections (10) and (14) and section 84, if the warrant or a copy of the warrant is produced, the Magistrate must order: that the person be remanded on bail on condition that the person appear at such time and place in the place of issue of the warrant as the Magistrate specifies; or that the person be taken, in such custody or otherwise as the Magistrate specifies, to a specified place in the place of issue of the warrant".

A warrant for the apprehension of the plaintiff, Wayne Edward Butler, was apparently issued at Mackay in the State of Queensland on 2 June 1997 calling for the plaintiff to be apprehended and brought before a Justice to meet a charge of having murdered one Celia Natasha Douty at Brampton Island in the
State of Queensland on 1 September 1983.

The warrant was apparently served on 10 June 1997 upon the plaintiff, whereupon an order for extradition of the plaintiff was made by Magistrate
Milson on 12 June 1997.

Section 86 of the Service and Execution of Process Act (1992) makes provision for this court to review orders for extradition in certain circumstances.
Section 86(7) provides that the review is to be by way of rehearing and under sub-section (8) the court may confirm, vary or revoke the order.

By summons filed 18 June 1997 the plaintiff seeks to have this court revoke the order for extradition of the plaintiff made on 12 June 1997, although in its present form the relief is not formulated in those precise terms.

The plaintiff's case will be that the warrant issued by the Justice of the
Peace at Mackay in Queensland was not in the prescribed form and accordingly, the order for the plaintiff's extradition is invalid. Secondly, the plaintiff will urge that the court's power of review permits the court to have regard to whether or not it would be unjust or oppressive for the extradition order to stand.

The defendant, the Commissioner of Police, has filed a motion seeking to have orders made pursuant to Part 31 of the Supreme Court rules for the separate determination of certain questions before the court embarks upon any hearing on the merits as to whether or not it would be unjust or oppressive to extradite the plaintiff. The questions formulated for separate determination relate to the validity of the warrant and to the proper interpretation of section 86 of the Act.

In addition to the proposed relief under Part 31, expedition of the hearing of the plaintiff's summons is sought.

Mr Robinson, who appears for the defendant/applicant, urges that the court should provide for the separate determination of the questions on the basis that they could be disposed of in a period of time that would be of the order of one hour, whereas the substantive hearing would be likely to occupy one day plus.

Mr Magnus, who appears for the plaintiff/respondent to the motion, submits that it would be unjust for his client to be required to deal with the separate questions separately and independently of the substantive case which his client would wish to make in the event that the court were to find that it was permissible for a plaintiff to seek the review on the basis that it was unjust or oppressive to order extradition.

In my opinion, the interests of justice will not be served by providing for the separate determination of the questions raised. However, it seems to me that this is a matter of some importance which has, on the evidence, aroused some widespread publicity in the State of Queensland. It seems to me that the interests of justice require that the hearing of the plaintiff's summons be expedited.

Accordingly, the orders that I would propose are, order that the hearing of the plaintiff's summons filed 8 June 1997 be expedited; otherwise, notice of motion dismissed. The plaintiff/respondent's costs of the motion to be plaintiff's costs in the proceedings.
 oOo * * * 
