

McMahon and Anor versus South Eastern Sydney Area Health Service and Anor [2004] NSWSC 442 (26 May 2004) 
Last Updated: 28 May 2004 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: McMahon & Anor versus South Eastern Sydney Area Health Service &
Anor <case>  
CURRENT JURISDICTION: Common Law  
FILE NUMBER(S): 20059/2003  
HEARING DATE{S): 3 May 2004  
JUDGMENT DATE: 26/05/2004  
PARTIES: 
Vicki McMahon  (First Plaintiff)  
David Justin MxMahon  (Second Plaintiff)  
Soiuth Eastern Sydney Area Health Service  (First Defendant)  
Samuel Leslie Freedman  (Second Defendant)  
JUDGMENT OF: Master Harrison  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
Ms L Boyd  (First Defendant)  
Mr S Woods  (Second Defendant)  
SOLICITORS: 
Mr D Hirsch, 
Maurice Blackburn Cashman  
Ms F Allpress, 
GIO  (First Defendant)  
Mr P Johnstone, 
Blake Dawson Waldron  (Second Defendant)  
CATCHWORDS: 
Extension of time to commence proceedings, ss 60C & E [Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/la133/) - alleged medical negligence  
ACTS CITED:  [Limitation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/) - [ss
C](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s60c.html) & E  
DECISION: 
Leave is granted to the first plaintiff to extend the limitation period pursuant to [ss
C](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s60c.html) and E of the Act from 1 October 2001 up to and including 7 March 2003 
Leave is granted to the second plaintiff to extend the limitation period pursuant to [ss60C](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s60c.html) and E of the Act from 10 March 2002 up to and including 7 March 2003 
The plaintiffs are to pay the defendants' costs as agreed or assessed.  
JUDGMENT:  
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
COMMON LAW DIVISION 
PROFESSIONAL NEGLIGENCE LIST  
MASTER HARRISON  
WEDNESDAY, 26 MAY 2004  /2003 - VICKI McMAHON & DAVID JUSTIN McMAHON versus SOUTH EASTERN SYDNEY AREA HEALTH SERVICE & DR SAMUEL LESLIE FREEDMAN  
JUDGMENT (Extension of time to commence  proceedings, [ss 60C](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s60c.html) & E [Limitation Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/) - alleged medical negligence)  MASTER: By notice of motion filed 31 July 2003, the plaintiffs seek an order extending the time within which to commence proceedings pursuant to [ss
C](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s60c.html) or in the alternative 60G of the [Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/) 1969 (the Act) in respect of the management of the first plaintiff's pregnancy and subsequent birth of their son, Thomas Xenophon McMahon. Thomas was diagnosed with Down syndrome and a neurological disorder and is severely disabled. The first plaintiff is Vicki McMahon and is the mother of Thomas.
The second plaintiff, David Justin McMahon is married to the first plaintiff and is the father of Thomas. The first defendant is the South Eastern Sydney
Area Health Service. The second defendant is Dr Samuel Leslie Freedman, a general practitioner.  The plaintiffs allege medical negligence in that the second defendant failed to arrange the proper test for Down syndrome, thus failing to determine whether or not the plaintiff's foetus was affected by Down syndrome and denying her the opportunity to terminate the pregnancy. The first plaintiff seeks damages for continuing with the pregnancy, the labour and delivery and for nervous shock. The second plaintiff seeks damages for nervous shock. Both plaintiffs seek damages for the significant cost of raising and caring for their son Thomas. The claim against the first defendant arises due to the failure of its employee Dr Edwin Philip Enfield Kirk, to properly direct the second defendant as to the correct maternal serum test to be done and the appropriate time the test ought to have been performed. The plaintiffs relied on their affidavits sworn 22 October 2003 and the affidavit of their solicitor
Karen Jennifer Chan sworn 20 October 2003. The defendants did not rely upon any affidavit evidence.  
Background History  For the purpose of this application both plaintiffs gave evidence and were cross-examined on that evidence. I accept their evidence except to say that I have some reservations in relation to Vicki McMahon's explanation of the history she gave to Dr Gertler, which I shall refer to in more detail later in this judgment. For the purpose of this application I find the following facts.   In late August 1998 the first plaintiff began experiencing severe nausea and suspected that she was pregnant. On 26 or 27 August 1998, the first plaintiff consulted Dr Gerges who performed a urine test and confirmed that the first plaintiff was pregnant with her second child. Prior to being informed that she was pregnant, the first plaintiff had suffered from flu-like symptoms and Dr
Gerges had prescribed medication including Bricanyl, Sudafed and Codral. On being informed that she was pregnant, the first plaintiff queried whether the medication she had been prescribed would lead to birth defects. Dr Gerges assured the first plaintiff that the medication would have no detrimental effect.  On or about 27 August 1998 Mrs McMahon attended Dr Freedman for advice regarding her pregnancy. She expressed concerns about giving birth to a child with disabilities. On 28 August 1998 an ultrasound was done at the request of
Dr Freedman. The ultrasound confirmed a pregnancy of 12.5 to 13 weeks gestation. As the first plaintiff was still concerned about the adverse effect of the medication she had taken, Dr Freedman referred the first plaintiff to
Dr Edwin Kirk, a clinical geneticist at the Royal Hospital for Women for advice regarding her concerns about giving birth to a child with disabilities.  On 1 September 1998, the plaintiffs consulted Dr Edwin Kirk at the Royal
Hospital for Women. Dr Kirk handed the plaintiffs a booklet entitled 'Prenatal
Diagnosis' (see Annexure 'A' affidavit first plaintiff) and discussed with them that they could screen for Down syndrome by having a maternal serum- screening test. On 7 September 1998 Dr Kirk and Dr Mowat reported by letter to
Dr Freedman about the consultation. At the last paragraph of the letter they stated that David and Vicki were considering whether or not they would chose to have maternal screening for Downs syndrome. Apparently Dr Freedman received this letter on 10 October 1998, after the consultation of 8 September 1998 had taken place.  On September 8 1998 the first plaintiff consulted Dr Freedman. She specifically requested that he arrange for a maternal serum-screening test.
Vicki McMahon showed Dr Freedman a text at page 14 of a booklet entitled "Prenatal Diagnosis" which had been given to her by Dr Kirk. On the same day Dr Freedman arranged for a blood test to be performed at StatLaboratories
Pathology. The blood test that he requested was for AFP (alphafetoprotein).
The blood test results were reported on 9 September 1998.  On 19 September the first plaintiff consulted with Dr Freedman about the results of the blood test. Dr Freedman advised the first plaintiff to the effect that the blood test was normal. The first plaintiff was reassured by Dr
Freedman's advice that the blood test was normal and believed that her foetus was not at an increased risk of being affected by Down syndrome. In reliance upon that advice Mrs McMahon continued with the pregnancy.  The AFP test ordered by Dr Freedman was not a maternal serum test for Down syndrome. The maternal serum test for Down syndrome is the 'triple test' comprising AFP, oestriols and human chorionic gonadotropin. Maternal serum testing for Down syndrome is to be done at between 15 and 17 weeks gestation.
The maternal serum test ordered by Dr Freedman was done at around 14 weeks gestation.  In December 1998 the first plaintiff became concerned about the size of the baby. The first plaintiff then went to the Royal Hospital for Women for ultrasounds. Dr Olive informed the first plaintiff that she had 'polyhydramnios', a condition where there is a large amount of fluid around the placenta. Dr Olive then performed a 3D scan. Dr Olive assured the first plaintiff that there was nothing to worry about.  On 10 March 1999 the first plaintiff gave birth to Thomas Xenophon McMahon at the Royal Hospital for Women. He has Down syndrome and is significantly disabled.  In August 1999 the first plaintiff's pregnant sister had a screening test for Down syndrome. As it was not the same test that was performed on the first plaintiff, on 16 August 1999 the first plaintiff went to Dr Freedman's surgery. In reviewing the records, the first plaintiff discovered a letter from Dr Kirk to Dr Freedman dated 7 September 1998. On 13 September 1999, the first plaintiff asked Dr Kirk why she had not been sent the letter. Dr Kirk explained that that had been his intention but there was a failure in secretarial system and in any event the sending of the letter would not have made any difference to the outcome. The first plaintiff accepted this advice.  Between November 1999 and June 2002 Thomas was frequently admitted to hospital for pneumonia and seizures. During this period the plaintiffs' marriage deteriorated. The first plaintiff's rejection of Thomas both shocked and disgusted the second plaintiff. The plaintiffs caring for Thomas took significant time and emotional effort. Separation was discussed.  On 20 May 1999, the first plaintiff made an appointment to speak with a solicitor at Legal Aid. The advice from Legal Aid was that "There is no clear legal solution and any legal action is likely to be novel and fiercely contested". The letter also referred to the decision of CES versus Superclinics
Pty Ltd [(1995) 38 NSWLR 47] and that if something similar happened the litigation could drag on for several years, which would undoubtedly have emotional and financial costs. The letter gave the contact details for Intellectual Disability Right Service, two law firms and the Law Society Community Assistance Programme. The plaintiffs accepted that a medical negligence case would be very difficult and costly. Not surprisingly, in light of this advice a legal claim was not pursued for the next 3 years.  By the middle of 2002, Thomas's various illnesses were brought under control and he began to be weaned off most of his medications. At this point, his seizures stopped which led to a cessation in hospitalisations and consultations. Although the second plaintiff had resisted the idea of taking legal action, it was at this stage that the first plaintiff again raised the idea of obtaining legal advice and the second plaintiff was receptive to the idea.  On 26 July 2002 the plaintiff met with Mr Concanon of Carrol & O'Dea and he advised the plaintiffs that he needed to obtain a report on the issue that troubled him, namely why Tommy's problems were not diagnosed in the third trimester despite Polyhdramnios and ultrasounds not being entirely normal.  On 20 September 2002 the plaintiffs sought advice from Mr Hirsch of Maurice
Blackburn Cashman solicitors who explained to the plaintiffs that in his opinion the problem was not in the third trimester but rather in the first trimester when Dr Freedman had done the wrong blood test.   On 7 March 2003 the statement of claim was filed.  On 31 July 2003 the notice of motion seeking to extend time was filed.  On 13 August 2003 an Amended Statement of Claim was filed.  
The Law  The plaintiff relies on ss 60C and 60E of the Act. The approach to be adopted in dealing with applications for extension of limitation periods is that which has been expounded at length in Brisbane South Regional Health
Authority versus Taylor <case>; [(1996) 186 CLR 541]; BHP Steel (AIS) Pty Limited versus Giudice (& Ors) (Unreported, NSWCA, 7 March 1997); Council of the City of Sydney versus Zegarac [(1998) 43 NSWLR 195]; Holt versus Wynter <case>; [(2000) 49 NSWLR 128]; McLean versus Sydney Water Corporation <case>;
Milperra Marketing Pty Ltd & Ors versus Bayliss <case> and Itek Graphix Pty Ltd versus Elliott <case>; [(2002) 54 NSWLR 207.] The onus rests with the applicants. In addition to satisfying the relevant threshold requirements pursuant to sections 60H and
I, it must be shown that it is just and reasonable to make an order to extend the limitation period.  Sections 60C and 60E are contained in subdivision 2 of the Act. Subdivision is headed 'Secondary limitation period'. As stated in section 60A of the
Act, the purpose of the subdivision is to provide a procedure for the granting of a maximum 5-year extension of the 3-year limitation period for personal injury cases. It applies only to causes of action that accrue on or after 1
September 1990. Sections 60C and 60E apply to the plaintiffs' cause of action.  Section 60C of the Act provides:  "60C Ordinary action (including surviving action)  
This section applies to a cause of action, founded on negligence, nuisance or breach of duty, for damages for personal injury, but does not apply to a cause of action arising under the [Compensation to Relatives Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ctra1897288/).  
If an application is made to a court by a person claiming to have a cause of action to which this section applies, the court, after hearing such of the persons likely to be affected by the application as it sees fit, may, if it decides that it is just and reasonable to do so, order that the limitation period for the cause of action be extended for such period, not exceeding 5 years, as it determines."  Section 60E of the Act provides:  "60E Matters to be considered by the court  
In exercising the powers conferred on it by section 60C or 60D, a court is to have regard to all the circumstances of the case, and (without affecting the generality of the foregoing), the court is, to the extent that they are relevant to the circumstances of the case, to have regard to the following:  the length of and reasons for the delay;  the extent to which, having regard to the delay, there is or may be prejudice to the defendant by reason that evidence that would have been available if the proceedings had been commenced within the limitation period is no longer available;  the time at which the injury became known to the plaintiff;  the time at which the nature and extent of the injury became known to the plaintiff;  the time at which the plaintiff became aware of a connection between the injury and the defendant's act or omission;  any conduct of the defendant which induced the plaintiff to delay bringing the action;  the steps (if any) taken by the plaintiff to obtain medical, legal or other expert advice and the nature of any such advice the plaintiff may have received;  the extent of the plaintiff's injury or loss."  In relation to ss 60C and 60E of the Act, Mason P in Council of the City of Sydney versus Zegarac at 197 referred to some uncontroversial propositions.
They included:  
Section 60C confers a judicial discretion.  
The discretion is a discretion to grant, not a discretion to refuse, an extension of the primary limitation period. The court must be satisfied that it is "just and reasonable" to make the order for extension.  
In exercising the discretion, the court is required "to have regard to all the circumstances of the case" (s 60E(1)). It is also required to have regard to the 8 factors listed in <case> "to the extent that they are relevant to the circumstances of the case".  
Among those circumstances to which a court must have regard are the rationales for the existence of limitation periods which were identified in those passages from the Attorney General's second reading speech that are set out in the order judgments, and which McHugh J discusses in Brisbane South
Regional Health Authority versus Taylor at 552-553.  
Since <case> creates a judicial discretion appellate review is restricted by well-known principles.  Justice Powell in Council of the City of Sydney versus Zegarac at 240-241 stated that three things might be said about <case> and <case>. He agreed with proposition 3 expounded by Mason P. Powell JA's further two propositions were firstly, that an order extending the limitation period may only be made when it appears, in the light of all the circumstances of the case, including those set out in <case> of the Act, that it is just and reasonable so to do.
Secondly, although a prospective defendant may be subject to an evidentiary onus to raise any consideration telling against the exercise of the discretion to extend the limitation period, the ultimate onus of satisfying the court that, in all the circumstances of the case, it is just and reasonable that an order may be made, lies on the applicant.  The principles concerning prejudice have been considered in Holt v
Wynter, by the Court of Appeal (per Sheller JA with whom Meagher, Handley
JJA and Brownie AJA agreed) at paragraph 119 where their Honours stated that the effect of the High Court's decision in Brisbane South Regional Health
Authority versus Taylor is that an application for an extension of time under limitation legislation should be refused if the effect of granting the extension would result in significant prejudice to the potential defendant.
However, fairness is a matter of degree. The concept of a fair trial is a relative one. To be fair, it need not be ideal - see McLean versus Sydney Water
Corporation <case>  I turn now to consider <case>.  
The length and reasons for delay - <case>(a)  The limitation period for the second plaintiff's claim of nervous shock would have expired on 10 March 2002. The limitation period for the first plaintiff's claim for 'wrongful birth' would have expired on 1 October 2001.
Proceedings were commenced on 7 March 2003. The motion for an extension of time was filed on 31 July 2003. That is approximately 12 months out of time (from the birth of Thomas). I accept that with the passing of time, there will be presumptive prejudice.  Following the birth of Thomas Mrs McMahon asked various doctors involved in the management of her pregnancy to explain how it came about that Thomas had
Down syndrome. From the birth of Thomas until about 2002 Mrs McMahon could not bond with her son, as she had never wanted a disabled child. During this time she was resentful, was depressed, did not have any energy and wanted to stay in bed. She was embarrassed about Tommy's condition. Mr and Mrs McMahon's marriage went through a difficult period as Mr McMahon could not understand his wife's attitude towards Thomas. On 20 May 1999, the first plaintiff made an appointment to speak with a solicitor at Legal Aid. The advice from Legal
Aid was such that any legal action would be novel. This advice, which referred to emotional and financial costs, discouraged the plaintiffs from taking legal action. The plaintiffs took this to mean that a medical negligence case would be very difficult. The plaintiffs' marriage was in trouble and both parents focus was upon looking after Thomas and their other child.  Mr David McMahon initially resisted his wife's desire to pursue a legal claim because he did not believe that there was any case for negligence since both Dr McNally and Dr Fisher explained their positions over the polyhydramnios issue and the ultrasounds. The second reason was that he did not want to 'stir the pot' with the doctors because he felt strongly that we needed their help to care to Tommy and it would get then 'off side' if we were to get involved with legal matters against the hospital.  Around June 1999, the time Thomas developed breathing problems and became less responsive, the second plaintiff began drinking heavily and often returned from lunch "under the weather". He was in denial about what was happening. In October 1999 the second plaintiff consulted Warwick Peters, a psychologist and subsequently attended counselling sessions. Thomas was frequently hospitalised and required consistent care such as being put on a ventilator every 3 hours.  David McMahon gave evidence as to the winter of 2000 being "one deep long trough" with no end to it. In August 2000, the first plaintiff again fell pregnant. In April 2001 the first plaintiff gave birth to her second son
Patrick. Around the middle of 2002, Thomas' seizures were brought under control, he began to be weaned off most of his medications and the hospitalisations and consultations ceased. Mr McMahon gave evidence that at that point he could look towards the future. For the first time he was receptive to his wife again raising the idea of obtaining legal advice.  In July 2002 the plaintiffs consulted Carroll & O'Dea Solicitors in respect of possible negligence in the third trimester regarding ultrasounds and the likelihood of less damage to Thomas had he been born by Caesarean section. Although Carroll & O'Dea Solicitors sent records for an expert medical opinion, in July 2002 the plaintiffs sought advice from their current solicitors. On 20 September 2002 met with David Hirsch and Karen Chan of
Maurice Blackburn Cashman. At this meeting, the second plaintiff deposes that
Mr Hirsch told the plaintiffs that in his opinion the problem was not in the third trimester but in the first trimester when Dr Freedman had done the wrong blood test. On 5 November 2002 the plaintiffs' solicitor received reports from
Dr Fisher. Further reports from Drs Gertler and Mann were received in November It was Maurice Blackburn Cashman who informed the plaintiffs that it was their opinion that the problem was not in the third trimester but in the first trimester when the second defendant had done the wrong blood test. The plaintiffs instructed their solicitors to investigate the case. However in Dr
Gertler'[s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ctra1897288/s4.html)
November 2002 report at page 3 he states:  "Shortly after Thomas' birth Mrs McMahon made enquiries as to how the diagnosis of Down's Syndrome had been missed and found out that the general practitioner had ordered the wrong test. Since that time Mrs McMahon has remained with ongoing feelings of anger. Although she considered taking legal action when she first found out about the wrong test being performed, she decided not to pursue this. She felt too depressed and withdrawn, as well as being overwhelmed with the responsibilities she had towards Thomas and her other children. It is only in the last several months since Thomas' condition has stabilized and the seizures brought under control, that Mrs McMahon has again addressed the issue of taking legal action."  In the light of this information Mrs McMahon was cross-examined. She denied that she told Dr Gertler that she considered taking legal action when she first found out that the wrong test had been performed. When pressed Mrs
McMahon said "I told him, that was in August 1999, that led me to make further inquiries and that is why I saw Dr Freedman and I tried to see Dr Kirk but I also told him that my emphasis was on the third trimester because I was focused" (t25, 33-36). It was put to Mrs McMahon that when she told Dr Gertler that she was considering taking legal action it was in relation to the performance of the wrong test (t27, 11-14). Mrs McMahon replied, "No, the legal action was in regard to the third trimester. The alarm bells didn't go off, the alarm bells went off with me in the third trimester" (t27, 15-17).
When Mrs McMahon was afforded the opportunity to review the paragraph from Dr
Gertler'[s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ctra1897288/s4.html)
November 2002 report reproduced above, she stated, "Yes, I understand what you are getting at but I think you have got it wrong. You have to remember I saw
Dr Gerges [the witness meant Dr Gertler] when I was emotional I was extremely distressed and it was a psychiatric visit" (t27, 52-54). Mrs McMahon then went on to state that it was in August 1999, she was aware or believed that: firstly, Dr Freedman had ordered the wrong test; secondly, Dr Freedman had not ordered all the tests she had asked him to order; thirdly, there existed the
Intellectual Disability Rights Services which could provide further help if consulted; fourthly, she knew of at least two firms of solicitors recommended by Legal Aid in relation to medical negligence (t28-29, 39-3). When asked if she was aware that solicitors were available to go and see if she chose to do so, Mrs McMahon replied, "The answer to that question is yes, I was aware back in May 1999 but not in August 1999, I was aware back in May 1999 but not in
August 1999, I was aware after I received the [Legal Aid] letter and after I received the letter I pretty much forgot about it and if I could just add, I certainly had a lot on my plate" (t29, 29-33).  After photocopying her records at Dr Freedman's surgery, Mrs McMahon went to see Dr Kirk on 15 September 1999. At that time, Mrs McMahon asked Dr Kirk why she had not been sent a copy of the letter dated 7 September 1999. Dr Kirk replied that it would not have made any difference to the outcome if Mrs
McMahon had received the letter.  After further advice and more discussions in March 2003, the plaintiffs instructed their solicitors to initiate legal proceedings against Drs Freedman and Kirk. The statement of claim was later amended to replace Dr Kirk with the
South Eastern Sydney Area Health Service who was responsible for the actions of Dr Kirk.  As Sully J relevantly observed [at paragraph 14] in Willis versus Dr Ganesha
Thambipillay & Ors <case> (24 June 2003), until the plaintiffs in that case had first sought legal advice:  "...they had not given any serious consideration to their respective entitlements to recover in an action at law damages for nervous shock; they had not received any proper professional advice in that regard; and they did not have, otherwise, any real grasp of what possibilities might be available to them in that behalf."  Sully J then went on to say [at paragraphs 14-15]:  "...The realisation on 27 August 1997 that the baby's condition was so serious as to justify immediate transfer to Sydney, and the growing realisation thereafter about just how serious that condition was; about the catastrophic procedure necessary to save the baby's life; and then, day after day, year in and year out, about how gross and permanent were their baby's deficits, must have been, as both Mr. and Mrs. Willis described, an utterly shattering experience, coping with which was in effect an all-consuming pre-occupation.  
Having what seems to me to be a sensible, practical and humane regard to the entirety of that situation, I am satisfied that relevant delay has been adequately explained."  In Tori versus Greater Murray Health Service [(2002) Aust Torts Reports -651]; <case> a claim for nervous shock arising from the birth of the plaintiff's son, I stated [at paragraph 10] that:  "The main reason for delay is that the plaintiffs set about providing for the needs and demands of their son Jack and could not cope with the additional stress of taking legal action."  To adopt the words of Sully J, having what seems to me to be a sensible, practical and humane regard to the entirety of the situation which includes the plaintiffs' emotional state, the constant and unrelenting needs of Thomas which from 1999 to 2002 included regular hospitalisation and the difficult state of the plaintiffs' marriage I am satisfied that the plaintiffs' explanation for not seeking legal advice in respect of any possible claim for their own injuries until after Thomas' medical condition had improved in mid
July 2002 is reasonable.  
Extent to which delay caused evidence to be lost - <case>(b)  There is no evidence that the failure of the plaintiffs to commence the proceedings within the limitation period has meant that any evidence has been lost. The defendants continue to practice in Sydney and the medical records of
Drs Freedman and Kirk are in existence and have been obtained and reviewed by the plaintiffs' solicitors.  
The time at which the injury became known to plaintiff - <case>(c)  On 10 March 1999, the first plaintiff gave birth to her son Thomas. The second plaintiff was present at the birth. At paragraph 17 of his affidavit he states:  "I was shocked when I first saw him. His head was large, swollen and bruised.
His eyes looked strange. He did not look human. We were told that everything was ok and that he was just traumatised from the birth."  On 11 March 1999, the plaintiffs were informed that Thomas had Down syndrome. It was not until the plaintiffs consulted their current solicitors and the relevant medical reports and inquiries had been made that they came to understand the negligence of the first and second defendants. Before their current solicitors recommended they see Dr Gertler, neither of the plaintiffs had seen a psychiatrist. Dr Gertler'[s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ctra1897288/s4.html)
November 2002 report confirmed that both plaintiffs suffered from nervous shock.  
Time at which nature and extent of the injury became known to plaintiff; time at which plaintiff became aware of connection between injury and defendant's act or omission and extent of plaintiff's injury or loss - <case>(d), (e) and (h)  Despite the assurances of Dr Gerges, on 27 August 1998 the first plaintiff saw Dr Freedman who referred them to Dr Kirk who performed the alleged incorrect blood test.  According to Dr Gertler, the first plaintiff had suffered nervous shock and continued to suffer emotional damage at the time of assessment on 29 October
It was Dr Gertler's opinion that the first plaintiff had not come to terms with Thomas's condition. The first plaintiff's prognosis, even with counselling remains guarded. According to Dr Gertler, the second plaintiff had suffered nervous shock but his emotional condition had improved by the time of assessment on 29 October 2002.  As previously stated it was not until the plaintiffs consulted their current solicitors and the relevant medical reports and inquiries had been made that they came to understand that they has a case that the first and second defendants were allegedly negligent in relation to a test conducted in the first trimester of pregnancy.  
Conduct of defendant which induced plaintiff to delay bringing the action - <case>(f)  There is no conduct by the defendants in evidence that induced the plaintiff to delay bringing the action.  
Steps taken by plaintiff to obtain medical, legal or other expert advice - <case>(g)  On 20 May 1999 the first plaintiff consulted a Legal Aid solicitor who discouraged the instigation of any claim as it would be fiercely costed and costly. In August Mrs McMahon became aware that the wrong test may have been performed in the first trimester of her pregnancy. Given her 13 September 1999 discussion with Dr Kirk (see paragraph 12 of this judgment) and her ongoing depressive state, Mrs McMahon's decision not to persevere with a claim at this stage is understandable. On 26 July 2002 the plaintiffs met with Carroll &
O'Dea Solicitors who arranged for an expert medical report. In August 2002, the first plaintiff sent some background documents to Maurice Blackburn
Cashman. On 20 September 2002 the plaintiffs met with Karen Chan and David
Hirsch of Maurice Blackburn Cashman, their current solicitors.  In the year between the first consultation and the filing of the notice of motion, expert reports were sought from Drs Linda Mann, Eric Fisher, Ann
Turner and Robert Gertler. In addition, the discharge summaries (exhibited to the affidavit of Karen Jennifer Chan sworn 20 October 2003 [KJC3-19]) from St
George, Sydney Children's and John Hunter Hospitals illuminate the extent of time and care that Thomas required between November 1999 and August 2002.  The second defendant was aware of the existence of these proceedings from March 2003 when he was served with a statement of claim. On 17 April 2003 the statement of claim was served on Dr Kirk. On 7 March 2003 the statement of claim was filed in this Court. This motion was filed 31 July 2003.  
Just and reasonable  I turn now to consider whether it is just and reasonable to extend the limitation period. The applicant bears an evidentiary and persuasive onus, which, in the absence of concession, requires material to be adduced that demonstrates that the dilatory plaintiff has a real case to advance. The need for the court to decide that it is just and reasonable to extend the limitation period must focus attention on the question whether there is indeed evidence to establish the plaintiffs' cause of action. It would rarely be possible to say that it was just and reasonable to subject the defendant to litigation otherwise statute barred if it did not appear that there was evidence available to the plaintiff to establish his cause of action. (See
Szerdahelyi versus Bailey (Unreported, NSWSC, Badgery-Parker J, 1 May 1997);
Ortado versus Bailey (Unreported, NSWSC, Badgery-Parker J, 1 May 1997); Lewis v Bailey (Unreported, NSWSC, Badgery-Parker J, 1 May 1997); Zegarac and
Dow Corning Australia Pty Ltd versus Paton, Meares versus Paton (1998) Aust Tort
Reports 81-485, and Fitzgerald versus Bankstown City Council (Unreported,
NSWCA, 6 November 1995).  The first defendant did not suggest (as did the second defendant) that there was no real case to be advanced. The second defendant submitted that there was no real case to advance because by the time he received the letter from Dr Kirk on 10 October 1999 it was too late to do anything. Further, the second defendant submitted that the plaintiffs could not establish that if the correct test had been carried out, it would have been positive, that the plaintiff would have elected to have the amniocentesis test and this in turn would have proved to be positive. The plaintiffs do not have to prove every issue in this type of application. It is important to remember that it was because of a correspondence mix up that the first plaintiff's lost the opportunity of having the correct test performed. She cannot be barred from her claim because the inability to that obtain evidence stems from the alleged negligence of the defendants.  In any event, the report of Dr Linda Mann dated 20 November 2002 annexes an extract of an article that refers that uptake of serum screening by patients ranged from 67-92%. The amniocentesis rate in those pregnancies identified at increased risk was around 80% and about 90% of parents elected to have the pregnancy terminated following a confirmed diagnosis of Down syndrome. (Wald).
Further, Dr Fisher in his report dated 31 October 2002 stated that he was of the opinion that a general practitioner in Sydney in August 1998, exercising reasonable care could reasonably have been expected to know that maternal serum screening for Down syndrome required a "triple test" and not simply an alphafoetoprotein (AFP) test. It is my view that there is a real case to advance against both defendants.  The nature of the discretion conferred by <case> of the Queensland
Limitations Act was considered by the High Court in Taylor. Section 31(2) of that Act is almost identical to <case> of the New South Wales [Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/). The Court of Appeal has applied Taylor in relation to [s
G](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s60g.html) in
Giudice and Commonwealth of Australia versus McLean [(1997) 41 NSWLR .](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281997%29%2041%20NSWLR%20389 "View LawCiteRecord" )  The ultimate test in any such an application is whether a fair trial can be conducted not withstanding any delay (see Wynter). The plaintiffs' decision not to seek legal advice earlier with a view to taking legal proceedings was not taken for forensic advantage but rather because the second plaintiff resisted suing as he felt the assistance of the hospital would be of paramount importance in respect of future care for Thomas. Moreover, the plaintiffs' marriage was placed under considerable strain and their main focus was the significant task of caring for Thomas who had been through a traumatic period of recurring hospitalisation. The second defendant submitted that he would be prejudiced because the conversations which took place between him and
Mrs McMahon on 8 and 19 September 1998 were critical. The first plaintiff has given her version of events. It is not known whether the second defendant has a recollection of these conversations and has in his possession his notes of the consultations or whether he is aware of his usual practice in 1998 in relation to ordering tests for Down syndrome. However, in these circumstances
I am not satisfied that this means that the second defendant will not obtain a fair trial.  I am satisfied that in the circumstances it is just and reasonable to extend the limitation periods pursuant to [ss
C](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s60c.html) and E of the Act.  Costs are discretionary. In Wynter, Sheller JA at paras 147-148 stated that, in relation to costs, ordinarily a successful applicant, who has allowed him or herself to get out of time, should pay the costs of the application unless the respondent's opposition was wholly unreasonable. The defendant's opposition was not wholly unreasonable. The plaintiffs are to pay the defendants' costs.  The court orders that:  
Leave is granted to the first plaintiff to extend the limitation period pursuant to [ss
C](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s60c.html) and E of the Act from 1 October 2001 up to and including 7 March 2003.  
Leave is granted to the second plaintiff to extend the limitation period pursuant to [ss
C](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s60c.html) and E of the Act from 10 March 2002 up to and including 7 March 2003.  
The plaintiffs are to pay the defendants' costs as agreed or assessed.  
LAST UPDATED: 27/05/2004 * * * 
