

Archcom Pty Limited versus Consumer Claims Tribunal [1997] NSWSC 156 (24 April )

ARCHCOM PTY LIMITED versus CONSUMER CLAIMS TRIBUNAL /94 April 1997 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES ADMINISTRATIVE LAW DIVISION 
SIMPSON J 
JUDGMENT OF COSTS 
HER HONOUR: On 29 September 1995 I dismissed the plaintiff's summons seeking relief under <case> of the Consumer Claims Tribunal Act 1987 with respect to a decision of a consumer claims tribunal ordering the plaintiff to pay to the second defendant the sum of $2,850.90. It is now necessary to determine where the costs of that determination should fall.

The proceedings in the tribunal involved four parties: Mr Fabio Giacomin, who was the successful applicant, J McPhee & Son (Australia) Pty Limited trading as McPhee Transport (the first respondent in the tribunal) Archcom Pty
Limited (now the plaintiff, then the second respondent), Robert Frederick
Gough and Sylvia Phyllis Gough trading as Bob's Kempsey Computer Service (now the fourth defendant, then the third respondent). The order ultimately made by the tribunal and confirmed as a consequence of my order directly affected only
Giacomin and Archcom.

The role of this court in reviewing consumer claims tribunal decisions is limited to those cases where jurisdiction or natural justice questions are raised. Both were raised in the present case.

Of the parties in the tribunal, only Archom and McPhee were represented in this court. The other participant was the Minister for Consumer Affairs, identified in the pleadings as the fifth defendant, intervening pursuant to statutory right, whose role was confined to arguments concerning jurisdiction.

The summons having been dismissed, each of these defendants sought an order for costs.

The questions calling for determination are different in each case.

The Fourth Defendant (McPhee) 
McPhee placed evidence before me of certain correspondence, prior to hearing, with the legal representatives of Archcom. The fourth defendant had sought to be released from the proceedings, a course which Archcom declined to adopt. Accordingly, McPhee notified Archcom that, should the summons be dismissed, it would seek costs on an indemnity basis.

In my opinion, Archcom was correct in declining to release McPhee from the proceedings. McPhee had been a party to the proceedings in the tribunal, and was accordingly a proper party to the proceedings in this court. Although
Archcom was not seeking any orders against McPhee in this court, the consequence of some of the possible outcomes would have affected McPhee. Had
Archcom failed on its challenge to the jurisdiction of the tribunal, but succeeded in its claim that it had been denied natural justice, the consequential orders must have been that the entire matter be remitted to the tribunal for further hearing according to law. It was not within Archom's power to release McPhee in the sense that it could have had no further involvement in the proceedings. It was, of course, open to McPhee to submit to the orders of the court, including the possibility that that would be the outcome. In that way the costs of defending proceedings in which no orders had been made against McPhee could have been avoided. I do not think McPhee should have its costs because of the refusal of Archcom to release it from the proceedings in this court. But McPhee had an interest in maintaining the decision of the tribunal, it exercised its right to do so, and was successful.
It was McPhee, who, with respect to the natural justice question, defended the order of the tribunal. It is for this reason that I have come to the conclusion that the plaintiff should pay the costs of the fourth defendant.

The Fifth Defendant 
The Minister was joined pursuant to <case> of the Act. That section entitles such intervention at any stage of the proceedings, and provides that, upon exercise of the right to intervene, the Minister becomes a party to, and has all the rights of a party to, the proceedings, including rights of appeal.

On behalf of the Minister, it was argued that, the plaintiff having been unsuccessful, the usual rule that costs follow the event should apply.

In my opinion the circumstances applicable to the Minister's costs are different to those applicable to McPhee. The Minister elected to exercise the right to become a party. There is no reason why the costs which accrued following that election should be thrown upon the plaintiff. I make no order as to the costs of the fifth defendant.

The order I make is that the plaintiff pay the fourth defendant's costs of the summons. I decline to order that such costs be assessed on an indemnity basis.
I make no order for the costs of the Minister.
 * * * 
