

Regina versus Monzur Ibrahim [1996] NSWSC 404 (4 September 1996) 
REGINA versus MONZUR IBRAHIM /95 
WEDNESDAY 4 SEPTEMBER 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
SULLY J, BELL AJ 
JUDGMENT 
SULLY J: On 16 October 1995 Mr Monzur Ibrahim stood for sentence in the Parramatta District Court, and before his Honour Judge Downs of Queens Counsel, in connection with a number of matters. The first matter that concerned his Honour was an appeal to the District Court from a conviction and sentence of imprisonment imposed in a Local Court for larceny and some associated driving matters. His Honour dismissed the appeal against conviction but varied the sentence of imprisonment so that it became one of imprisonment for six months to commence on 19 April 1995 and to expire on 18 October 1995.

No point arises for present purposes with regard to that matter, except insofar as the obligation to serve that sentence as fixed in the District
Court has an impact upon the overall length of time for which the present applicant will be detained in custody.

His Honour dealt as well with three other matters. It is convenient to begin by looking briefly at the objective facts of each of them.

The first of them concerned an offence of stealing from the person. Put simply, the applicant approached a lady who was standing at a bus stop with a young child, grabbed her handbag, and began to run away with it. She held on to the bag. However, the applicant pulled it from her grip and decamped with it. He was at the time, it would seem, in company with two other young people and they decamped with him.

The second matter involved an assault occasioning actual bodily harm. The facts giving rise to that matter are, put briefly, that on 16 April 1995 the offender and the victim were playing card machines at a tavern in Greenacre.
An argument of some kind erupted between them. The applicant pushed the victim off a chair and then punched him three times about the head. There was some dispute as to the number of punches, but the primary Judge appears to have proceeded upon the basis that there was evidence sufficient to carry a finding that there were three punches, and I see no reason to differ from that finding.

The victim of that assault suffered two compound fractures of the mandible. He required an operation for the wiring of his jaw; and was continuing to receive treatment, as it would seem, until at least early June 1995.

The third matter involved a charge of breaking and entering premises with intent to steal. The facts with regard to that matter are, briefly, that on 18
April 1995 the applicant and a co-offender went to some premises at Wiley
Park; and, put simply, in the early hours of the morning, smashed a bathroom window, climbed into the premises, and stole and otherwise ransacked the premises.

The learned primary Judge took account not only of those three principal offences, but of two further matters that were put before his Honour on a schedule. The first of those matters concerned the discovery on 19 April 1995 of a shortened .303 rifle in the then possession of the applicant. The rifle was apparently located in a garage at the premises where the applicant was then living. The applicant apparently admitted possession, but denied that he had ever used the weapon for any untoward purpose.

The second scheduled matter was dated as of the same day, 19 April 1995, and had to do with a charge of receiving two mobile phones.

His Honour dealt with all of those matters in this way. As I have already indicated, he dismissed the appeal against conviction in relation to the Local
Court appeal matter and imposed a sentence of imprisonment of six months, which was some two months or so less than had been originally imposed in the lower Court.

As to each or the other three principal offences with which his Honour was dealing, his Honour fixed a term of imprisonment of two years. The sentences were concurrent. They were all expressed to commence on 18 October 1995: that is to say, they were accumulated on the fixed term imposed in relation to the
Local Court appeal matter; and they were apportioned between a minimum term of eighteen months and an additional term of six months.

Mr Green of Queens Counsel, in what I presume to say have been most succinct, helpful and frank submissions, concedes that the overall sentence is not vulnerable to present attack; but submits that the learned primary Judge fell into error in the approach that his Honour took with regard to the apportionment of the overall sentence of two years, fixed in respect of each of the three principal matters with which his Honour was dealing.

In order to deal fairly with that contained but important submission, it is I think appropriate to commence with a short chronology.

On 4 December 1994 the applicant was arrested in connection with the Local
Court matters of which I have already spoken. He was admitted to bail. On 28
February 1995 he committed the first or the three principal offences, as I have been describing them. He was bail refused. In circumstances which are not clear, he made a further application for bail and, on 8 March 1995, he was granted bail in relation to that matter.

On 30 March 1995 he appeared in the Local Court for sentence in connection with the December 1994 matters. He was, as I have indicated, convicted and sentenced to a period of imprisonment. He at once lodged an appeal to the
District Court and was granted appeal bail. On 16 April 1995 - that is to say, at a time when he was on bail for the first of the principal offences and on
District Court appeal bail - he committed the second of the three principal offences of which I have earlier spoken. This time, once again, he was given the benefit of bail.

Two days later, on 18 April 1995, he committed the third of what I have called the three principal offences. He was arrested on 19 April 1995, bail was refused, and the two matters which were subsequently dealt with on a schedule came to light at that time. He continued in custody after that arrest on 19
April 1995, until his Honour Judge Downs dealt with him on 16 October 1995.

I set out that chronology in order to establish, as I think needs to be done with a clear eye and a level head at the very outset of the discussion of the particular point now taken, that this is not a case of what might be described as a single, one-off, out-of-character offence. It is a case that involves a studied succession of serious criminal offences committed successively while on successive grants of bail.

It is trite law - but a case of the present kind makes it worthwhile to make the point perhaps one more time - that bail is a privilege. Breach of bail is always regarded by the Courts as a serious matter because of the light it casts upon the reliability of the person who has been granted, and who has abused, the privilege of bail. When that happens in a succession of cases over a very short time span; and when the breaches take the form they did in the present case, of significant breaches of the law; then it really does reduce very significantly any proper room for manoeuvre in this Court, so as to interfere with sentences of the kind that were imposed at first instance in the present case.

The concession that the overall sentences are not vulnerable is, in my respectful view, correctly made. Indeed, the sentences seem to me, in terms of reflecting overall criminality, as I have described it, to be lenient.

I do not necessarily criticise them on that account, because there were significant subjective matters properly to be brought into balance; and, in my view, the learned primary Judge did bring them into account. It remains, nonetheless, the fact that in objective terms the Court is called upon to deal with a very serious case.

It is contended, correctly and fairly, that the applicant is a young man. So he is. But the Court has said sufficiently, and sufficiently publicly for it to have reached appropriate quarters, that although youth is something which, as matter of common humanity, the Court will always take into account, it must not become a perception of those in youthful categories that they can simply rampage through society in the way in which the present applicant did, sheltering from their just deserts behind their youth, erected, so to speak, as a shield of convenience for that purpose.

It needs perhaps to be said once again, that would be a serious misconception among young people. A proper sympathy is not to be understood as necessarily translating into a weak and inappropriate overall response.

It is said that the applicant has some prospects for rehabilitation. For myself, I accept that such appears to be so, insofar as one can judge such a matter upon the basis of materials of the kind with which this Court has to work on the present occasion. But it does not seem to me that it has been demonstrated that the six month additional term, which is the effective provision made by the primary Judge, is inadequate to achieve that kind of rehabilitation.

For myself, I am not inclined to interfere with the apportionment upon which
Judge Downs resolved, because in the end it seems to me that the overall sentences are so moderate, that to change them at all in favour of the applicant, as is now sought, involves, if the change is to have any real meaning and substance at all, the substitution of a minimum term of the order of twelve months; and it seems to me that no reasonable person could accept that that is a fair measure of the criminal culpability of the kind of behaviour which I have been describing.

I think that there are things that need to be done, and that can be done, for the assistance of the applicant while he is in custody. I shall come to them presently.

On the basic question for this Court, whether there has been demonstrated such error as would justify our intervening to reapportion the minimum and additional terms, I can but say that for my own part, and for reasons that I have tried to make plain, I have not been persuaded that such a case has been established.

I would grant the application for leave to appeal. I would dismiss the substantive appeal. I think that the following recommendations should be made and, for myself, I would order that the Registrar of the Court transmit them urgently to the attention of the Commissioner of Corrective Services.

That, insofar as it has not already been done, the classification of the applicant should proceed as a matter of urgency,to the end of reducing as far as is practicable any risk of his being brought into contact with what might be described as hard-ore criminal offenders.

That consideration might properly be given to making available to the applicant, should he wish to take advantage of the opportunity, his admission to the Young Offenders Programme, to the end of his being given,within the particular resources available to that programme,the continuing and practical support that he requires in the matter of his drug and related problems;and the assistance,in a more general sense,that he will require in order to move as easily as can be managed back into useful and lawful civil life at the conclusion of his minimum term.

I propose orders accordingly.

BELL AJ: I agree.

SULLY J: The orders then will be as I have announced them. * * * 
