

In The Matter of The Companies Listed In The Schedule To The Summons and
The Corporations Law Nambucca Investments Pty Limited (Receiver and Manager
Appointed) (Plaintiff) John Star (Defendant) No. 4237/95 Corporations Law [1995] NSWSC 171 (18 December 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
EQUITY DIVISION
SANTOW J
HRNG
SYDNEY, 13, 14 November 1995 #DATE 13:11:1995, SHORT
MINUTES OF ORDER 14:11:1995 #ADD 18:12:1995 
Counsel for the Plaintiff      J Martin (Sol.) 
Solicitors for the Plaintiff
Henry Davis York 
Counsel for the Defendant      P A Somerset (Sol.) 
Solicitors for the Defendant     P
A Somerset and Co
ORDER
Orders made
JUDGE1
SANTOW J In this matter I am dealing with a Notice of Motion by the Plaintiff of to-day's date that leave be granted for Mr Gordon Finlay to seek or consent to be appointed or act as administrator of four companies, Airbar
Pty Limited,
Mistbar Pty Limited, Lawnkin Pty Limited and Gurial Pty Limited ("the four companies").
Certain facts can be taken as agreed, which I simply record. 
With respect to each of the abovementioned four companies, the Plaintiff
Nambucca Investments
Pty Limited is an unsecured creditor and the parent company which owns all the shares in those four companies. 
The National
Australia Bank is a secured creditor of each of the four companies assumedly pursuant to a floating charge. 
Each of the four companies have other creditors than their parent company including some preferential creditors and there are accordingly significant unsecured creditors in relation to those four companies. 
Each of the four companies and indeed the parent company Nambucca
Investments Pty Limited is significantly insolvent.
At present, Mr Gordon Finlay is appointed by the Court as a receiver and manager of Nambucca Investments Pty Limited, acting for a specific group of creditors of that company who are debentureholders in it.
There is the possibility of proceedings being brought by or on behalf of the four companies pursuant to s588V and W of the Corporations Law. Section
W of the Corporations Law permits a company's liquidator to recover from the corporation as a debt due to the company, an amount equal to the amount of any loss or damage resulting from a contravention of s588V, dealing with insolvent trading (in this case by the holding company). I emphasise that this is at the present a possibility and not one where detailed or indeed any evidence has been submitted as to the likelihood or otherwise of any such claim succeeding. Nonetheless it is a possibility which should not be disregarded at this point.
Finally, I should note, though it is of peripheral relevance, that Mr John
Star is already appointed a voluntary adminsitrator of both the parent,
Nambucca Investments Pty Limited and the four subsidiary companies.
I say it is of peripheral relevance as proceedings before me to-day do not relate to the continuance or otherwise of that appointment though I note that that matter is also the subject of contest between the parties.
Against that background, I have to consider whether leave should be granted pursuant to s448C(1) of the Corporations Law to permit Mr Gordon
Finlay to act as administrator of the four subsidiary companies. That leave is required arises from s448C(1)(b) of the Corporations Law. This is because Mr
Gordon
Finlay, in his capacity as receiver and manager of the Nambucca
Investments Pty Limited, a related company of the four companies, is a creditor of Nambucca Investments Pty Limited in an amount exceeding $5,000, arising by reason of his costs, fees and expenses.
One might question whether, if that were the only basis of conflict, why leave should not readily be given to the appointment of Mr Gordon Finlay.
After all, s448C(1)(b) expressly excludes from its prohibition a person who is a creditor "in a capacity as administrator or liquidator of, or as administrator of a Deed of Company Arrangement executed by the company or a related body corporate ...".
However, in the present case, it is contended by the Defendant who opposes that leave be granted, that there is an inherent conflict not shared by such an administrator or liquidator, or at any rate not typically so shared. This is where, as here, Mr Gordon
Finlay represents a particular group only of the total creditors of the parent company. That conflict is said to be exacerbated when the prospect arises, as here, of claims not only by the parent company against the four subsidiary companies for indebtedness owed to the parent, but conversely where there may be claims by the four subsidiary companies against the parent arising under s588V and
W of the Corporations Law.
In a number of analogous cases involving the removal of a liquidator on the ground of actual or perceived conflict of interest, principles have been laid down for the Court to consider such matters-, see for example Advance
Housing
P/L (in liq) versus Newcastle Classic Developments P/L as Trustee of the
Albans Unit Trust [(1994) 14 ACSR 230.] Those principles provide some guidance here. They could be summarised as follows: 
The cases show that there must be a real and not merely theoretical possibility of conflict and that the guiding principle in the appointment by the court of a liquidator is that he must be independent and must be seen to be independent. 
Those who assert that a liquidator should be removed are under a duty to establish at least a prima facie case that this is for the general advantage of the persons interested in the winding up and the onus of proof will not be easy to discharge if the liquidator has become well acquainted with the business and affairs of the company. (That onus is reversed here, where the applicant for leave is the party seeking appointment.) 
A liquidator may act as a liquidator of a company even if there is a prior involvement with the company in liquidation provided that involvement is not likely to impede or inhibit the liquidator from acting impartially in the interests of all creditors or give rise to a reasonable apprehension that the liquidator might be so inhibited or impeded.
There is no suggestion here that Mr Gordon Finlay has a material personal interest which gives rise to conflict beyond that inherent in his being paid fees by or on behalf the holding company for acting in the capacity as its receiver and manager.
It is pressed upon me by the Defendant, that there will be a saving of cost through Mr Gordon Finlay's familiarity with the affairs of the holding company and thus through it, of the four subsidiaries.
However, taking all these matters into account and giving weight to the particular conflict of which I am satisfied there is at least apprehension in the present case, I do not consider that the appropriate course is to permit the appointment of Mr Gordon
Finlay. I have no doubt about his integrity should a matter subsequently arise where a conflict directly affected him. But reliance on that, then to terminate his administration could then disrupt the orderly administration of the four subsidiary companies. It could involve substantial additional cost as someone new would have to become acquainted with the affairs of those companies.
 .
Accordingly, and particularly because of the very different position of a receiver acting for a limited group of creditors in comparison to a liquidator who must act for all creditors and having regard also to the prospect of litigation between holding company and subsidiary pursuant to s588V and W of the Corporations Law I decline to give the leave sought for the appointment of
Mr Gordon Finlay.
 .
I order costs to be paid by the Plaintiff. 
Order made 14 November 1995 
In this matter, by consent, I make the Short Minutes of
Order, a copy of which I have signed for identification. In so doing I note that the appointment is a joint one between Gordon Finlay whose appointment alone I did not sanction and furthermore that the question of conflict is dealt with by the undertaking contained in the First Schedule. 
SHORT MINUTES OF ORDER 
P.A. SOMERSET and CO.,
Solicitors,
Level 19, MLC Centre, Martin Place,
SYDNEY
Phone: 221 1300 
Note undertakings of Gordon Finlay to John Edward Star and the undertakings of John Edward Star to
Gordon Finlay specified in the First Schedule hereto. 
BY CONSENT ORDER THAT: 
Leave be granted nunc pro tunc for Gordon Finlay to consent to act and to act as Administrator together with John Edward Star of the companies listed in the Second Schedule hereto as and from 14th November, 1995. 
Summons to be dismissed. 
No Order as to costs of the Summons. Order for costs made on th
November, 1995 vacated. 
FIRST SCHEDULE 
Gordon Finlay undertakes to John Edward Star and John Edward Star likewise undertakes to Gordon Finlay not to deal with any matter in which the relevant person would have a conflict of interest in his respective capacity as
Administrator of any of the companies specified in the Second Schedule hereto and in the case of Gordon Finlay in his capacity as Receiver of the assets of the Plaintiff. 
SECOND SCHEDULE 
Airbar Pty. LImited ACN 056 789 149
Mistbar Pty. Limited ACN 056 001
Lawnkin Pty. Limited ACN 052 316 319
Gurial Pty. Limited ACN 000 756 703
Integrated Developments Pty. Limited ACN 053 875
Gaopaten Pty. Limited ACN 003 559 626
Isabella Enterprises Pty. Limited ACN 066 990 047
FILED: 14.11.95 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/171.html  
