

Sri Guru Singh Sabah (The Sikh Association, Sydney) Incorporated and Ors v
Jagdish Singh Cheema and Ors Matter No 1406/95 [1998] NSWSC 142 (7 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 22 May 1998 `SRI GURU SINGH SABAH, SYDNEY (THE SIKH ASSOCIATION, SYDNEY) INCORPORATED & ORS versus JAGDISH SINGH CHEEMA & 21 ORS` ` 1406/95` `7 May 1998` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: I am currently trying two notices of motion concerning the control of the Sikh Temple at Revesby. One motion was filed by the plaintiffs on 2 April 1998 seeking various orders including orders that a list of members as settled by Mr Terry Jessop and dated 10 March 1998 were entitled to become members of the Association controlling the temple and the other which was amended today filed by the interim committee of the temple to the effect that certain other people as well should be admitted as members. 
This litigation commenced in 1995 though that was not the commencement of the disputes between two rival groups in the Association. There are differences in the outlook of their religious beliefs between the two parties as well as other differences and these differences have caused considerable and heated disputes between them since it would seem 1989. The two camps can conveniently be called the plaintiffs and the defendants.

The main question in the proceedings commenced in 1995 was who was the properly elected committee of the Association. Mr Justice Hodgson decided this question in the sense that, to paraphrase him, he decided that neither side controlled the body and he indicated in that judgment that a regime should be set up for full, fresh and fair elections. That judgment was handed down on 7
February 1996 and as often happens his Honour left it to the parties to formulate short minutes to carry out what he said.

On 22 February 1996, those short minutes were brought in and they set out in an extended form a set of orders to carry out his Honour's judgment.
Essentially the orders were that in the short term there would be an election of an interim committee. The interim committee would be restricted to performing the functions set out in order 6 which is as follows: "6. Order that the committee elected at this general meeting of the
Association have the following functions only; to run the day to day affairs of the Association pending the calling of the annual general meeting as set out below; to prepare statements pursuant to <case> of the Associations Incorporation
Act for subsequent approval of the annual general meeting; to process applications for membership to the Association from the following cases of applicants and no other: all persons alleged by the plaintiffs to have been members of the
Association in accordance with the last list of members prepared by Ram Ravi
Singh Khalsa and filed in these proceedings; any other person who has since July 1988 donated at least $250.00 to the
Association and claims entitlement to life membership." 
The plaintiffs say that it was obvious to them that the defendants would win the first round of elections and control the interim committee and this is indeed what happened. The second stage of the order which is set out in par 7 is as follows: "7. Order that, for the purpose of processing applications for membership, the committee shall: within fourteen (14) days of the general meeting, send to the persons in par 6(c)(i) for whom an address is held a letter inviting them to apply for membership of the Association (provided they are nominated in writing by an existing member as shown in the register of members available for inspection at the office of the Association), including with the said letter a nomination form and a copy of these orders, and advising them that the committee will hold a meeting on a specified date (no more than three (3) weeks after the date of the notice) to deal with applications it receives before then for membership; and advising them also that, if they claim a right to life membership, they should give details of the payment which they have made on the basis of which they claim that right; within five (5) weeks of the general meeting, hold a committee meeting to deal with any applications for membership pursuant to par 6(c).
 permit the independent party and the solicitors of the plaintiff and the defendants, or solicitors nominated by them, to attend as observers at the committee meeting called to process membership applications; in the event of any question arising whether any applicant falls within the classes specified above forthwith to refer that question to the independent party for decision (who shall decide the matter summarily on the basis of the records of the Association and evidence submitted by the applicant with the application) and accept that decision as final and binding; within seven (7) days of completion of the meeting advise the applicants of the outcome of their application." 
It was then considered that this process would allow the electors to be ascertained and that under order 8 there would be a new election by giving notice to all those who had been elected to the Association through the process set out in order 7 plus, of course, the original members.

Mr Justice Hodgson seems to have considered that this process would take a relatively short period of time. Unfortunately it took much longer. The initial process was considered by Mr Robertson, an accountant, and his work took much longer and was far more expensive than the parties anticipated.

There were continued disputes between the parties and these boiled over to an application which came before the Court on 25 September 1997. The matter before the Court was settled by a settlement agreement which was signed by representatives of both the plaintiffs and the defendants and the settlement agreement had annexed to it the directions to which I will refer shortly.

Essentially the settlement agreement recited that the interim committee was said by the plaintiffs not to have complied with his Honour's order and the interim committee denied culpable non-compliance and the parties had agreed that Mr Terry Jessop, an employee of the State Electoral Office, would be retained to carry out the orders. I should interpolate here that it appears that although the State Electoral Office has no jurisdiction to become involved in private elections it is not unknown as part of a public service that the Department and its employees provide for employees to become involved in this sort of activity in their spare time.

The parties agreed in the settlement agreement that Mr Jessop would prepare the list of persons whom he had determined were entitled to membership and being provided that list, the interim committee would within three days convene a meeting, approve for membership all the parties on that list and approve the issuing of a notice of annual general meeting. Both sets of parties agreed to use their best endeavours to limit the areas of this agreement requiring Mr Jessop's determination.

The directions which were attached contained 27 paragraphs. Paragraphs 5, 6 and 7 say: "5. You shall consider and determine applications for membership received by you in accordance with the criteria referred to in the orders by his Honour
Justice Hodgson on 22 February 1996 (copy attached) and upon the criterion that, provided you are satisfied that a valid application form has been received from a person who is on the Ram Ravi Singh Khalsa List (copy attached) or has demonstrated a life membership payment then that person is entitled to membership of the Association.
A life membership payment shall be demonstrated by annexing a copy of the receipt by which such payment was made to the Application.
You shall give the Plaintiffs and Defendants one opportunity to make written representations to you no later than 5.00pm on 9 October 1997 as to whether a particular application is from a person who appears in the Ram Ravi
Singh Khalsa List or who has paid life membership." 
The directions in pars 24 and 25 provided that Mr Jessop would be paid $100 an hour plus disbursements and noted that he had given a preliminary estimate of $3,000 and would give written notice of any change to that estimate.

The process was put into train before Mr Jessop. He received lists from both sides supported by evidence. He received objections from each side to the others lists and he determined on 10 March 1998 who were the persons that were entitled to be elected to membership.

Both sides were dissatisfied to some extent with Mr Jessop's determination.
The plaintiffs' dissatisfaction was that in 21 cases Mr Jessop did not agree to put in one of the people on his list who should have been put on the list.
However, the plaintiffs' attitude is that they just have to accept what Mr
Jessop did.

The defendants say that Mr Jessop's list cannot be maintained and that the process should really start again with some other mutual person.

The case was referred to me for an urgent hearing and it seemed to me when I first received the papers that what was required was the isolation of a separate preliminary question. However the judge who referred it to me did not actually formulate the question and indeed had some doubt as to whether that was the way forward.

After hearing opening submissions I thought that the question should be formulated and with the agreement of counsel for both parties the following question was formulated: "On the true construction of the orders of Hodgson J and the settlement agreement of 25 September 1997 and in the events that have happened is the interim committee bound to accept the list presented to it by Mr Jessop on 10
March 1998 unless there can be demonstrated: fraud; mala fides; caprice; fundamental departure from the terms of his appointment?" 
Mr Lawler for the plaintiffs then addressed on that question and Mr Beale for the defendants was part way through this address when it became obvious that both sides agreed that the answer to that question should be "yes". I accordingly then answered it in that way.

Mr Beale then conceded, very properly, that there was no material that went to fraud or mala fides so that the questions were whether Mr Jessop's list was vitiated by caprice or fundamental departure from the terms of his appointment.

Mr Beale then stated that there were two aspects in which the list was disqualified under each of those heads. First, so far as wrongly admitting members of the plaintiffs' camp, Mr Jessop had erred in failing to pay attention to the task given to him under Hodgson J's order by failing to consult the records of the Association and in particular in admitting as members the wife of (a) a member who had taken out a "family life membership subscription"; (b) not checking sufficiently to see that receipts which were proffered to him were in fact the receipts relating to the person in question; and (c) instead of looking for one receipt for $250 to qualify a person as a life member, allowing an accumulation of receipts for small amounts to be abrogated to make $250.

The second way in which Mr Jessop is alleged to have acted capriciously or in fundamental departure from his obligations was with respect to the defendants' draft list of life members. It will be remembered that under the directions par 6, life membership payments "shall be demonstrated by annexing a copy of the receipt". The defendants did not annex receipts for many of the applicants, but, in lieu, gave a receipt number. They say that it was the obligation of Mr Jessop to consult the records of the Association to see that they were life members and then put those persons on the list. Instead they say he looked at documents other than records of the Association, namely the copy receipt submitted on most of the plaintiffs' applications, and declined to look at any of the records held by the Association.

The case could have gone on for quite some time and I am very grateful to both counsel for the professional way in which they have put their respective client's case in a concise and sensible way without detracting one whit from the strength of those cases. This has enabled me to avoid reading a large box full of material, the method being used that one counsel would announce a fact and, if the other counsel did not gainsay it, it would be deemed to be a fact.
If the other counsel did gainsay it then the relevant portion of the affidavit or document was read.

Both parties also considered that the basal test is set out in the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Legal and General Life of Australia Limited versus A
Hudson Pty Limited [(1985) 1 NSWLR 314.] That decision was affirmed by the Privy Council in [(1986) 61 ALJR 280] but it is the Court of Appeal's decision that is the guiding light in this area of the law. Putting aside cases of fraud and collusion, McHugh JA at 335 to 336 analysed the type of mistake made by a valuer or other person that had been appointed by the parties to determine facts which would vitiate the expert or valuer's decision. He said it was clear that if the parties had agreed (as they have here) that the determination would be final and binding on the parties, a mere mistake would not be a sufficiently negligent mistake for an action for damages against a valuer and did not affect the determination, but it was only a fundamental mistake like a mistake of the valuer valuing the wrong interest or the wrong property that would actually vitiate his determination.

Mr Justice Mahoney at p 320 said that one has always got to look at the contract to determine what it is that the expert or valuer has got to do and one cannot look to see whether the valuer or expert directed his or her mind to the principles of the task in hand. If the expert has, then the onus stands despite errors.

When the Privy Council affirmed the decision, the Board said at 281, "it would be a disservice to the law and to litigants to encourage forensic attacks on valuations by experts when those attacks are based on textual criticisms more appropriate to the measured analysis of fiscal legislation." 
Mr Lawler conceded that Mr Jessop had in fact made some mistakes. He says that some of these mistakes were made in not admitting members of the plaintiffs' camp. There were six other applications which although completely bona fide did not have receipts attached to them and should have been rejected had Mr
Jessop been completely consistent. However, he says that the mistakes that had been made are not such that show that there was caprice or a fundamental disregard of the task.

Turning to Mr Beale's submissions with respect to the plaintiffs' list, it does not seem to me that any of the three areas of error if I can call them that are within the category of a fundamental mistake which goes to the heart of what Mr Jessop was to do. It must be remembered that one must look at the settlement agreement in the directions in the light of the surrounding circumstances.

The parties had been concerned at the expense of retaining Mr Robertson who had been charging the commercial hourly rate, and instead took advantage of the good offices of Mr Jessop who was an expert on elections. They had set a preliminary budget of $3,000 which at $100 an hour would mean 30 hours work.
Mr Beale correctly says that this could have been exceeded on notice. However, that estimate shows the sort of hours of work that Mr Jessop was supposed to put into the task. It was not expected, I would have thought, on the documents that he was to try the question of each person's eligibility in the same way as a Supreme Court might have. He was, to use the word used in the short minutes of order, to decide the matter "summarily". This is a word which usually means "properly, but quickly".

Mr Justice Hodgson's order was to the effect that the people who could be admitted to membership included people who had donated at least $250 to the
Association and claimed entitlement to life membership. The exhibit, PX03, shows and indeed it was conceded by Mr Bain who gave evidence for the defendants, that life membership could be procured by the donation of $250 or family life membership for a donation of $500. Family life membership included membership for both husband and wife. This $500 matter was not directly referred to in Hodgson J's order, but there was some oblique mention of it in his Honour's judgment. However, I would not have thought that it was an error going to the root of the matter or a matter of caprice for the expert to take a payment of $500 by a husband as covering himself and his wife and both of them claiming life membership.

There are other complaints that there has been confusion of names and receipts have been collated and attached to applications referring to more than one person. In this community there are people with very similar names and particularly are they similar if, as sometimes occurs, a surname is omitted because the penultimate name for males is usually Singh and there is only a limited supply of first names.

Only one case has actually been proved where a person says that receipts which really refer to him have been credited by Mr Jessop to somebody else. It would seem that what happened was that Mr Kent, a solicitor for the plaintiffs, collated the receipts. In the one case that was proved, and perhaps in others as well, Mr Kent has made an honest error in including some receipts that belonged to another person. There is no evidence that Mr Jessop was aware of the problem of confusion of names or that he was aware that he ought to check this matter or that he acted otherwise than by accepting the material after looking at the objections which had been put in by the defendants. Again this matter does not seem to me to amount to a fundamental error or a matter of caprice.

I would have thought myself, just reading the orders and the directions that there could be some room for debating as to whether one receipt for $250 had to be annexed to the application which is in accordance with par 6 of the directions or, alternatively, that the sum could be made up by more than one amount which seems implicit in order 6(c)(ii) of the original short minutes.
Mr Jessop obviously took the second and again this is not to my mind a fundamental error.

In all the material then, though Mr Jessop may have made mistakes, I think what Mr Lawler says is correct. Mr Jessop has done his best as an independent person. None of the alleged mistakes are sufficiently fundamental in themselves or as a totality to disqualify his position.

The same matters were argued under the heading of caprice. I would think that caprice for this purpose means a person acting on his or her own prejudice careless of the evidence and deciding matters by tossing a coin or the like.
Although Mr Beale suggested that Mr Jessop acted without consulting the records, there is quite a degree of flavour in the material which I have read that Mr Jessop did try to do his best and the totality of his conduct was that of a careful man proceeding.

As to the defendants' argument that the reference number on the receipt should have been accepted by Mr Jessop and that he should have looked at the records,
I have a lot more hesitation in rejecting.

I would have thought that perhaps this is a technical matter that Mr Jessop could have at least asked for the records to be produced. On the other hand records could have been produced to him and clause 6 of the directions clearly says that life means membership payments shall be demonstrated by annexing a copy of the receipt. The parties clearly indicated how this particular matter was to be proved. Mr Jessop acted on the basis that those words meant what they said and he did not commit any fundamental error or act capriciously by obeying those words.

Mr Beale says that was just not open to Mr Jessop. First of all, Mr Beale says, that it was not competent for the parties to make an agreement contrary to the orders of Hodgson J. I do not think they did. I believe that the settlement agreement and the directions carry out the orders. However, at an interlocutory stage, Santow J ordered that the defendants file an ordinary statement of claim and the plaintiffs file a defence to the allegations which the defendants were making. In their statement of claim, pars 2 and 3, the defendants seem to accept that the settlement agreement and the directions carried out the order as did the plaintiffs in their defence.

Furthermore, Mr Beale says that par 5 of the directions show that the primary thrust was that the determination was to be in accordance with the criteria referred to in Hodgson J's orders and that a determination other than by those criteria is a fundamental breach. However, clause 5 gives a reference to another criterion. The parties had actually varied the task that the independent person was to do and they had agreed on evidence that would be produced to carry out the general task. I cannot see that there has been a disregard of the task that had to be done by doing the job that Mr Jessop in fact did.

Accordingly the attack on Mr Jessop's determination fails. With it, the defendants' amended notice of motion of today must be dismissed with costs and the order that should be made on the plaintiffs' notice of motion of 2 April is in accordance with par 2 adding the extra name Kala Singh Pawar. There should be liberty to apply and the seven respondents to the plaintiffs' notice of motion are to pay the costs of that notice of motion. Whether those gentlemen are entitled to be indemnified out of the assets of the Association for those costs is in the first instance a decision to be made by the general meeting. The exhibits are to be retained for 28 days and then disposed of in the normal way.
 [Counsel addressed as to membership fees. My inclination is to say that until further order the membership fees for 1998 for life members is nil, for new members $5 and for persons who were members as at October 1996 $10 and I will note the court records accordingly] * * * 
