

P. J. Vickers versus Conveyancers Licensing Committee No. 030064/94
Administrative Law [1995] NSWSC 60 (6 October 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW DIVISION
SPERLING J
HRNG
SYDNEY, 18 May 1995 #DATE 27:7:1995 #ADD :10:1995 
Counsel for the Plaintiff:     P. Roberts 
Solicitors for the Plaintiff:   Legalco (S. Semihektas) 
Counsel for the Defendant:     T Molomby 
Solicitors for the Defendant:   Crown Solicitor
ORDER
Orders made
JUDGE1
The appeal
SPERLING J On 25 August 1994 the Conveyancers Licensing Committee constituted under the Conveyancers Licensing Act 1992 decided to refuse an application by the plaintiff, Philip John Vickers, for a certificate of eligibility, for which he had applied. The plaintiff has appealed to the Supreme Court pursuant to the provisions of <case> of the act.
Before me, Mr Roberts of counsel appeared for the plaintiff. Mr Molomby of counsel appeared for the Committee.
It was common ground at the bar table that the appeal from the committee was by way of a re-hearing de novo. There was evidence, to which I shall come, that the plaintiff was examined on two occasions by an examination panel appointed by the Committee. Mr Roberts submitted that insofar as there was evidence before me of the opinion of the examining panel, I should receive that evidence as evidence of the opinion.
Mr Molomby submitted that
I was bound by the rules of evidence except to the extent that the rules were relaxed consensually. The affidavit evidence filed by the Committee in these proceedings included evidence as to the opinion of the examination panel in relation to the two occasions to which I have referred. From this, I have taken it to be common ground that I should receive that evidence as evidence of the panel's opinion, and that I should give the opinion such weight as I think appropriate having regard to the totality of the evidence in the proceedings before me. The legislation
The Conveyancers' Licensing Act 1992 provides for the licensing of conveyancers.
 .
The Law Society Council has the function of issuing licenses under the
Act; Pt 2, Div 3. It is a condition for the grant of a licence that the applicant must have a current certificate of eligibility to hold a licence; s (1).
The Committee is constituted by s 146 of the act. Its functions, pursuant to <case>, include so far as is presently material: "(a) the function of determining the educational qualifications, practical training and conveyancing experience that are suitable to qualify a person for a licence; the function of accrediting courses of studies leading to such educational qualifications; the function of dealing with applications for certificates of eligibility."
The Committee consists of 7 persons, being 2 solicitors, licensed conveyancers, 2 persons appointed to represent the interests of consumers and person with qualifications and experience in business or commerce; <case>
Detailed provisions relating to the issue of certificates of eligibility appear in Pt 2, Div , of the Act. Section 12(1) provides that the Committee may grant or refuse an application for a certificate of eligibility. By s
(2), the Committee is forbidden to issue a certificate of eligibility unless it is satisifed that the applicant: "(a) is of or above the age of 18 years; and has such educational qualifications, practical training and conveyancing experience as may be approved by the Committee; and is not a disqualified person." 
Relevantly, a disqualified person includes a person who has been convicted in
New South Wales or elsewhere of an offence involving dishonesty; <case>. Other disqualifications specified in the subsection include mental incapacity and disqualification from practice as a legal practitioner or as an auctioneer.
 .
There is no prescribed procedure for the approval by the Committee of educational qualifications, practical training and conveyancing experience which an applicant must have to the satisfaction of the Committee before it can grant a certificate of eligibility. It is implicit that the Committee will approve such standards pursuant to the functions mentioned in paragraphs (a) and (b) of <case>.
An education subcommittee is to be established to investigate such matters relating to those topics as are referred to it by the
Committee; and it is then to report to the Committee; <case>.
Section 13 provides that a certificate of eligibility may specify conditions to which a licence should be subject. These may include: "(a) a condition prohibiting the proposed licensee from carrying out conveyancing work otherwise than as an employee of a licensee whose licence does not contain such a condition; a condition requiring the proposed licensee to undertake or complete a specified course of studies within a specified period of time; a condition prohibiting the proposed licensee from carrying out conveyancing work in relation to specified kinds of transaction; a condition requiring the proposed licensee to undertake or complete a specified course of further legal education during each year for which he or she remains a licensee."
Section 18(4) provides that a licence granted by the Council must be granted subject to the conditions set out in the current certificate of eligibility.
 .
The scheme of the Act so far as is presently relevant, is that the
Committee has the function of establishing and implementing minimum standards of expertise for licensed conveyancers. That function is to be performed by setting standards and determining applications for a certificate of eligibility in accordance with them. The Committee may restrict the practice of a prospective licensed conveyancer by imposing conditions on the certificate of eligibility, which the Council is bound to incorporate in any license granted pursuant thereto. There is a prohibition against disqualified persons being awarded a certificate. They include persons convicted of an offence involving dishonesty. The Committee has the responsibility of policing the gate. Apart from that administrative function, the Committee's functions, as specified in the Act, are related to establishing and implementing standards of expertise for admission to practise as a licensed conveyancer.
As I have indicated, the Committee may impose a condition (which will attach to the licence ultimately granted by the Council) that the proposed licensee undertake or complete a course of studies within a period of time, or a condition that the proposed licensee undertake or complete a specified course of further legal education during each year for which he or she remains a licensee. Such conditions may be imposed on individual certificates selectively or on certificates generally. This power would enable the
Committee to require a particular applicant who has satisfied minimum standards for safe practice as a conveyancer, but only just, to undertake further study or legal education tailored to the requirements of the particular applicant and designed to raise his or her expertise to a more satisfactory level. The power also enables the Committee to require that a specified course of further education be undertaken by all new licensees immediately after becoming licensed or to require a specified regime of further education for all licensees throughout their careers.
There is no express provision that the Committee may refuse to grant a
licence on the ground that the applicant is not a fit and proper person. The second reading speech in the Legislative Assembly delivered by the Hon. P.E.J.
Collins QC BA LLB MP on 30 June 1992 suggests that the Committee was intended to have such a discretion (Hansard for that date, page 4815): "So far as the licensing arrangements are concerned, a person who has the necessary qualifications, training and experience will apply to the Conveyancers Licensing Committee for a certificate of eligibility.
The committee will also determine whether the person is fit and proper to be issued with a licence. Once a certificate of eligibility has been issued, the holder may apply to the Law Society for the issue of a licence." (Emphasis added.) .
The same passage was included in the second reading speech in the
Legislative Council, delivered by the Hon. J.P. Hannaford LLB
MLC on 16
September 1992 (Hansard for that date, page 5779). I doubt that the reference to a "fit or proper person" criterion was intended to be taken literally. It may have been a loose reference to the disqualification provisions. For the
Committee to make such a judgment appears to be beyond the ambit of its role in the scheme of the legislation, which relates to establishing standards of expertise and determining the expertise of individual applicants. Applicants who obtain a certificate of eligibility must apply to the Council for a licence. A wider discretion may arise there, although none is expressly provided for in the legislation in relation to the Council either. I am inclined to the view, reading the legislation as a whole, that the Committee has no general discretion to reject an application for a certificate of eligibility on the ground that the applicant is not a fit and proper person.
But, for more abundant caution, I will proceed on the basis that it does.
Schedule 3 to the Act, which is given effect by <case>, provides for more liberal treatment for persons who had been conducting a conveyancing business for at least two years prior to 1 March 1992 and who applied within 6 months from the commencement of Pt 2 of the Act.
Relevantly, Clause 7 of the schedule provides (italics added): "7(1) For the purposes of Division 2 of Part 2 (which relates to certificates of eligibility), any person: ....
....
who, when applying for a certificate of eligibility to hold a licence, satisfies the Committee that the person is sufficiently knowledgeable in relation to the law and practice of conveyancing to warrant being granted a licence by virtue of this clause, is, subject to section 5 (which specifies the grounds of disqualification previously mentioned), qualified to hold a licence even if the person does not have the educational qualifications, practical training or conveyancing experience approved by the Committee for the purposes of Part 2.

The Committee may, for the purposes of this clause, examine any applicant as to his or her knowledge in relation to the law and practice of conveyancing and cause an inspection to be made of the accounts in relation to his or her conveyancing business."
The effect of clause 7 was to introduce a more flexible and potentially lower standard of expertise than that which it was anticipated would be required by the Committee for applications generally. The policy reasons for such transitional provisions appear from the second reading speeches to which
I shall come.
 .
Schedule 3 does not expressly provide that a certificate issued in such a case may be made subject to conditions. But, reading the legislation as a whole, <case> applies to certificates issued pursuant to the schedule. This construction is consistent with the review of the transitional provisions of the legislation in the first reading speeches in both houses (Hansard, supra, at pages 4816 and , respectively): "Finally, until the scheme becomes fully operational, there will need to be transitional provisions to recognise the experience of persons currently engaged in conveyancing. Subject to meeting the fit and proper person criteria, a person who was engaged in the conduct of conveyancing for a two-year period prior to st March, 1992, will be eligible to be issued with a transitional licence. However, he must satisfy the Conveyancers
Licensing Committee of his competence and pass any exam set by the committee. The holder of an interim licence will be required to meet all of the practice requirements mentioned above and be subject to such conditions as the committee may prescribe.
Interim licence holders will be subject to the indemnity and fidelity insurance requirements. Once the first persons enrolled in the course of study graduate and become eligible for full licences, the transitional licence scheme will end." 
There is a good deal said here that is not to be found in the legislation, but the policy is clear enough. It may also be noted that a "fit and proper person" criterion was again mentioned.
 
The evidence on the appeal
The evidence for the plaintiff in the proceedings before me consisted of affidavits by the plaintiff sworn 17 November 1994 and 15 March 1995, and oral evidence by him. The evidence for the Committee consisted of an affidavit by
Mr M.J.Bird, secretary of the Committee, sworn 21 December 1994, oral evidence by him, affidavits by Mr S Ticli, solicitor, sworn 22 December 1994 and 16 May , an affidavit by Mr J.R. Warren, solicitor, sworn 22 December 1994, and a minute of the Committee dated 25 August 1994.
A good deal of the evidence related to the plaintiff's conduct concerning certain transactions in which the plaintiff had been engaged. Some of this material was before the Committee. Some was tendered for the first time before me. I propose to defer consideration of this body of evidence for the time being. I will return to it later.
 
The plaintiff's own evidence
The plaintiff's affidavit of 17 November 1994 was drafted by him personally. It has much in it which is not germaine, even after the omission of passages which were not read. I will limit this review of his evidence to matters of substance.
 .
The plaintiff has carried on business as a conveyancer at Coffs Harbour
Since 1989, through his company The Real Property Conveyancing
Company. He therefore qualified for consideration under the transitional provisions in
Schedule 3 of the Act.
The plaintiff has a law degree, but (as appeared from his oral evidence) had not completed a course at the College of Law, with the consequence that he has not been admitted to practise as a solicitor.
On 14 and 15 April 1994 an inspection of the plaintiff's books of account was carried out.
On 30 March 1994 the Committee forwarded to the plaintiff an assignment to be completed by him and information concerning a knowledge test to be administered. There was to be an oral examination in a question and answer session with an examination panel, who might discuss with the applicant aspects of the assignment. Other matters of law and practice relating to conveyancing of residential property would then be examined in a question and answer session. At conclusion of the oral examination, the applicant would be required to provide a written response to a practical question. The
Conveyancers Licensing Committee would consider the reports from the examination panel relating to each aspect of the examination process. If the
Committee was not satisfied concerning the applicant's knowledge, an externally administered written examination could be undertaken at a later date, and consideration of the application for a certificate of eligibility could be deferred until completion of that examination. On 17 April 1994 the plaintiff forwarded his completed assignment. He also sat for the examinations. On 19 April 1994, the secretary of the Committee advised the plaintiff by telephone that the examination panel had not been persuaded that he was sufficiently knowledgeable in the law and practice of conveyancing to be granted a certificate of eligibility.
On 6 May 1994 the Committee provided the plaintiff with a further assignment and details relating to what was described as an extended knowledge test. The plaintiff sat for that test on 18 May 1994. On 18 or 19 May 1994, the secretary of the Committee telephoned the plaintiff and told him that the examination panel had been satisfied as to the plaintiff's state of knowledge of the law and practice of conveyancing subject to a condition relating to continuing legal education.
Then, on 1 June 1994, the secretary of the Committee wrote to the plaintiff advising that complaints had been received in regard to his application from three solicitors, Messrs S. Pratt, H. Lee and G. Smede. The plaintiff's comments were invited in relation to the complaints, and the plaintiff's comments were ultimately provided, following some intervening correspondence with the Committee. Consideration of that material is deferred.
On 25 August 1994 the secretary of the Committee wrote to the plaintiff advising him that the Committee had decided to refuse his application. The reasons given for refusal were stated as follows: "Failure to comply with the provisions of Clause 7 (1)(C) of
Schedule 3 to the Conveyancers Licensing Act 1992 in relation to knowledge of the practice of conveyancing." 
The plaintiff's affidavit of 15 May 1995 was in reply to the affidavits of
Messrs Ticli and Warren which related to the complaints made by them. I have deferred that aspect of the matter for later consideration.
The plaintiff was cross-examined on his affidavit evidence. The cross-examination was directed almost exclusively to the complaints material which I have deferred.
 
Mr Bird's evidence
In his affidavit sworn on 21 December 1994, Mr M. J. Bird, the secretary of the Committee, provided certain statistics relating to the grant of certificates of eligibility. Of the 38 certificates issued, the Committee had imposed a condition on each certificate pursuant to <case> of the Act in the following terms: "The holder of this Certificate is required to complete a course of further legal education in relation to conveyancing during each year for which the holder is a licensee."
He confirmed that the plaintiff had been examined by an examination panel on 18 April
The report of the panel was not tendered in evidence but the opinion of the panel was summarised, presumably from their report.
Mr Bird said: "The Panel found that the results of the examination were inconclusive and considered it appropriate for extension of the examination to be offered to the plaintiff, in each mode." (That would be an assignment, an oral examination and a written examination.)
No report was tendered in evidence in relation to the extended examination either, but again the opinion of the panel was summarised, presumably from their report. Mr Bird went on to say in his affidavit: "The extended examination was conducted on 18 May 1994. The
Panel was satisfied that the plaintiff's knowledge of the law and practice of conveyancing is sufficient to warrant being granted a licence by virtue of Clause 7, provided the plaintiff undertake continuing legal education in relation to conveyancing equivalent to 10 points (that is 5 points additional to the normal 5 points required by the Committee) in each of the first two years of a licence." 
This was a heavier condition than the condition which had been imposed in relation to the 38 certificates of eligibility which had been issued by the
Committee. Mr Bird said that in consequence, the following additional condition would have been included on a certificate issued to the plaintiff, if the certificate had been granted: "The holder of this certificate is required to complete an additional 5 units of continuing conveyancing education in each of the two years first following the issue of a licence." 
The minute
The Committee tendered a minute of its determination rejecting the plaintiff's application for a certificate of eligibility on 25 August 1994. It reads as follows: "Application from Philip John Vickers 
The cover sheet, application form, examination panel reports EP /1994 and EP20/1994, the statutory declarations from local solicitors, and the accounts inspection report were noted. It was agreed that the statutory declarations were not of a significant nature. It was also agreed that the applicant had not adequately demonstrated that he is sufficiently knowledgeable in relation to the law and practice of conveyancing as required by Clause 7(1)(c) Of Schedule 3 and the application be refused."
I make the following observations in relation to the minute. As I have said, the examination panel reports were not tendered in evidence. The statutory declarations from local solicitors, referred to in the minute, were annexed to the plaintiff's affidavit in the proceedings before me. The view of the Committee that the complaints material which had been submitted at that stage was not of a significant nature is to be noted. I will refer to that observation when I come to review the complaints material. The accounts inspection report, mentioned in the minute, was not tendered in evidence by the Committee. It is reasonable to infer that it contained nothing adverse to the plaintiff.
 
Discussion
Although the reports of the examination panel have not been tendered, the substance of the reports embodying the opinions of the panel is known from Mr
Bird's affidavit.
Following the extended examination, the panel was satisfied that the plaintiff's knowledge of the law and practice of conveyancing was sufficient to warrant the plaintiff being granted a licence, provided the plaintiff undertook continuing legal education in relation to conveyancing equivalent to 10 points in each of the first two years of a licence. This was more onerous than the usual condition.
In Mr Bird's paraphrase of the panel's report, the condition is expressed as a proviso to the panel's opinion that the plaintiff's knowledge was sufficient to warrant being granted a licence. However, the continuing legal education equivalent to 10 points was to be undertaken in each of the first two years of a licence. That made it clear that in the opinion of the panel the plaintiff had sufficient knowledge to warrant his being granted a licence forthwith. The "proviso" did not qualify that opinion. The "proviso" recommended the imposition of a heavier condition in relation to continuing legal education than was usually imposed. That reflected a view on the part of the panel that, although the plaintiff had sufficient knowledge to be granted a licence, he was not comfortably over the mark and required more than the usual regime of continuing legal education to ensure that he would achieve a desirable level of expertise beyond what the panel regarded as sufficient for safe practice. The inherent distinction between what was sufficient and what was desirable is important.
 
Provisional decision
The evidence does not reveal the constitution of the examination panel.
It is reasonable to assume, however, that it was composed of experts selected by a committee which itself had the relevant expertise to make an informed and appropriate selection of personnel for the panel. The panel's opinion provides a strong prima facie case for granting a certificate. Subject to examination of the complaints material (some of which was before the Committee and some of which has been filed for the first time in the proceedings before me), there is nothing in the evidence to rebut that case.
I pay due regard to the determination of the Committee as an expert tribunal. However, in a sphere where the court itself has relevant expertise, the weight to be given to a tribunal's determination is much less.
Furthermore, in the absence of evidence as to whether the panel's reports in this case contained more than is revealed by Mr Bird's affidavit, there is no reason for me to suppose that the Committee had more of substance before it than I have in relation to the plaintiff's assignments and examination results. If it did and the material was adverse to the plaintiff I would have expected the Committee to prove that in the evidence before me. In the absence of such proof, it is reasonable for me to infer either that the Committee had no more before it in relation to those matters than I have or that any such material was not adverse to the plaintiff.
The same may be said in relation to the proceedings which are before me by way of a re-hearing de novo. The substance of the examination panel's reports is in evidence.
The opinion of the panel provides a strong prima case for the issue of a certificate of eligibility. There is no evidence to the contrary subject to the complaints material to which I shall come. In these circumstances, I see no reason why I should not accept the opinion of the
Committee's examination panel that the plaintiff's knowledge of the law and practice of conveyancing is sufficient for practice as a licensed conveyancer, and that the condition specified by the panel in relation to continuing legal education should be imposed. I would therefore determine that a certificate of eligibility should be granted, subject to that condition.
This determination is subject to consideration of the complaints material, which I will now undertake.
 
Complaints
Complaints have been made in relation to certain transactions in which the plaintiff had been engaged. The complaints material is contained in statutory declarations annexed to the plaintiff's affidavit of 17 November , together with the affidavits of Mr S. Ticli, sworn 16 May and 22
December 1994 and the affidavit of Mr J.R. Warren, sworn 22 December 1994.
(How material adverse to the plaintiff came to be presented by him does not matter.) Evidence for the plaintiff in response to these complaints is contained in the plaintiff's affidavits of 17 November 1994 and 15 March 1995, and in the plaintiff's oral evidence.
The complaints material is directed to the plaintiff's honesty and professional competence.
It is relevant to note the standard of proof required to establish dishonesty or professional incompetence on the plaintiffs part. While the civil standard applies, it has been recognized by the courts that the graver the allegation the greater should be the strictness of proof required, with regard also to the gravity of the consequences flowing from a particular finding: see Briginshaw versus Briginshaw <case>; [(1938) 60 CLR 336], Re Pochi and Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs <case>; [(1979) 26 ALR 247.] In a matter involving allegations of dishonesty and professional incompetence, where the plaintiff's capacity to continue in his occupation is at stake, a strict standard of proof is be required in order to make out such allegations.
I will deal with each transaction.
 
Sale of business by Slevin to Krutina
The transaction concerned the sale of a business by Ms Dianne Slevin to
Ms Muriel Krutina in April 1992. Evidence against the plaintiff is annexed to the plaintiff's affidavit of 17 November 1994, and consists of a statutory declaration by Mr S. Pratt of 22 March 1994, a statutory declaration by Mr H.
Lee of 24 March 1994, and a letter from Mr Pratt to the Law Society dated 22
March 1994.
Mr Pratt, solicitor, represented the vendor in the transaction, the plaintiff represented the purchaser. The agreement for sale was made conditional upon the purchaser being granted a lease by the registered proprietor of the business premises, a Mr Phillips. Mr Lee, solicitor, represented Mr Phillips. The agreement for sale gave the purchaser a right of occupation prior to settlement and pending the issue of a lease. The transaction as outlined thus far is not contradicted by the plaintiff's evidence. The plaintiff conceded in oral evidence to having acted for Ms
Krutina in the purchase of the business referred to by Mr Pratt.
Mr Pratt recounts two incidents in relation to the transaction. First, Mr
Pratt alleges that on 9 May 1992, before settlement of the conveyance and grant of a lease, Mr Pratt was called to the premises in question where he observed "Krutina" dismantling shop fittings and loading them onto a trailer.
The police and Mr Phillips, the landlord, were also present. He quotes a statement said to have been made by "Krutina" to those present at the premises, that "Mr Vickers is aware of my moves, he advised me that I have paid for all fittings and equipment with the deposit ($20,000) and that I am within my rights to close the shop and remove these items". The implication would seem to be that the plaintiff had wrongly advised his client that the client was entitled to remove equipment before having acquired legal title to the property.
Secondly, Mr Pratt refers to a caveat lodged by his client over real property owned by the plaintiff's client. This was property which the plaintiff's client was seeking to sell in order to partly finance her purchase of Ms Slevin's business. Mr Pratt does not say what caveatable interest his client could be said to have had. Mr Pratt asserts that he received a letter from the plaintiff requesting removal of the caveat over the property belonging to the plaintiff's client. A second letter from the plaintiff to Mr
Pratt expressed the intention to bring an action in the Supreme Court against
Mr Pratt's client for removal of the caveat. According to Mr Pratt, an agreement was eventually reached between his client and the plaintiff <case> whereby the plaintiff's client deposited $20,000 in a trust fund in favour of
Mr Pratt's client in consideration of the caveat being revoked. In a letter to the Law Society dated 22 March 1994, annexed to his statutory declaration, Mr
Pratt contended that the plaintiff's second letter was an indication of the plaintiff's negligence or incompetence, asserting that it showed that the plaintiff was unaware of the simple procedure for lapsing caveats under s 74J of the [Real Property Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/) and wrongly saw an action in the Supreme Court as the appropriate recourse for his client.
Thirdly, in his letter to the Law
Society, Mr Pratt asserts that the plaintiff acted contrary to the law in acting for Ms Krutina in the purchase of a small business.
Mr Pratt does not elaborate as to the reasons why he believed the plaintiff acted contrary to the law.
In his statutory declaration,
Mr Lee also refers to the incident involving the police on the 9 May 1992, in which "Krutina" allegedly removed equipment from the business premises. Mr Lee admits to having no personal knowledge of the incident since he was not personally present on that occasion.
Ms knowledge of the incident is derived, on his own account from telephone conversations between himself and his client, Mr Phillips.
Mr Lee repeats the statement allegedly made by "Krutina" to those present at the premises as recounted by Mr Phillips to Mr Lee that
Krutina's solicitor had told Krutina that Krutina was entitled to remove the equipment.
Secondly, Mr Lee alleges that the plaintiff falsely represented to others that he is a lawyer. (This complaint has some association with the Krutina transaction and is therefore dealt with here.) Mr Lee refers to comments which he heard in relation to the plaintiff on two separate occasions. The first comment was said to have been made by Mr Phillips to Mr Lee in their telephone conversation after the police incident at the business premises to which I have referred. Mr Phillips reported that Krutina had described the plaintiff as Krutina's "solicitor".
The second comment was said to have been made by a
Mr Warren, real estate agent to Mr Lee. Mr Warren supposedly described the plaintiff as a "barrister". Neither comment was directly to the effect that the plaintiff had told Mr Phillips or Mr Warren that he, the plaintiff, was a solicitor or a barrister.
Mr Lee's third complaint asserts in general terms that Mr Lee had no personal knowledge or experience of the plaintiff which would lead Mr Lee to believe that the plaintiff had knowledge of the law in relation to the sale of small businesses or commercial leases.
In relation to Mr Pratt's evidence against him, the plaintiff responded in the following way. First, in relation to the police incident, the plaintiff denied having had personal knowledge of the removal of property from the premises. He had only second-hand knowledge of that incident based upon what
Ms Krutina had told him of what had occurred, and that it was her boyfriend who had attempted to remove the equipment. The plaintiff denied having given any advice to Ms Krutina or to her boyfriend that they were entitled to remove the equipment.
In relation to Mr Pratt's complaint concerning removal of the caveat, the plaintiff claimed to have knowledge of the procedure for lapsing caveats under s74J of the [Real Property Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/) as at 25 May 1992. He admitted having written to
Mr Pratt, expressing the intention on behalf of his client to commence proceedings in the Supreme Court. However, he claimed that this was a mere threat. He denied having made an agreement on his client's behalf that his client deposit $20,000 in a trust fund in favour of the vendor in return for the caveat being withdrawn.
In response to Mr Lee's evidence, the plaintiff denied having represented that he was a solicitor or a barrister.
Secondly, the plaintiff asserted that he had had dealings with Mr Lee prior to the Krutina matter, none of which happened to involve business conveyances or commercial leases. This was by way of repost to Mr Lee's claim that the plaintiff, to Mr Lee's knowledge, had no knowledge of the law relating to this type of transaction.
I find that this evidence is not sufficient to prove material dishonesty and/or incompetence on the part of the plaintiff.
The allegations against the plaintiff concerning the police incident at the business premises are based on hearsay reports, that is, what Krutina stated the plaintiff had said. Mr Lee was not present at the incident, and therefore his evidence is based on a 'double hearsay' of what Mr Phillips told him about what Krutina had told Mr Phillips. Such evidence can be given little, if any weight in supporting a claim of incompetence or dishonesty.
This is especially so when it appears that there is ambiguity in the evidence against the plaintiff as to who was the person referred to as "Krutina" in this incident (i.e. whether the client or her boyfriend). The plaintiff asserted, admittedly also from hearsay knowledge, that the person present on that occasion was not in fact the plaintiff's client, Ms Krutina, but Ms
Krutina's boyfriend. There is some support for this from
Mr Lee's evidence, in which Krutina is referred to as "he". But even if one were satisfied that the words were uttered by the plaintiff's client or by her boyfriend, it does not follow that the plaintiff had in fact authorised what was done. He denies that he did. In view of that denial I could not be satisfied to the contrary on the untested statement of a person looking to excuse an illegal act when confronted by the police.
I accept as true the plaintiff's explanation for the threat of court proceedings in relation to the caveat. That disposes of the complaint as to inadequacy of knowledge. Technically, the threat of court proceedings with no genuine intention of taking such proceedings was dishonest, but hardly a serious instance of dishonesty.
The evidence purporting to show that the plaintiff had made misrepresentations as to his professional status is also unpersuasive. Mr
Lee's evidence of a comment about Krutina's "solicitor" is heresay. Moreover, the statement in itself does no more than suggest that Krutina believed the plaintiff to be a solicitor. There is nothing in this evidence to establish that it was due to the plaintiff's representation that Krutina held such a belief. The same applies to the evidence concerning Mr Warren's belief that the plaintiff was a barrister.
If Mr Warren held the belief, he may have come to hold that belief other than through a representation by the plaintiff.
As regards Mr Pratt's allegation that the plaintiff acted contrary to law in acting for the purchaser in this transaction, the assertion appears to be based on the Conveyancers' Licensing Act which excludes the transfer of goodwill of a business from the ambit of work which licensed conveyancers are permitted to do. But the Act was assented to after the Krutina transaction. It cannot be therefore that the plaintiff was acting contrary to the statute at that time.
Mr Lee's assertion as to the plaintiff's lack of knowledge in relation to commercial conveyances is so elliptical that it does not warrant examination.
 
Matter of Plunkett
Mr Smede's account of this transaction is given to a statutory declaration dated 23 March, annexed to the plaintiff's affidavit of 17
November
The evidence consists of a general charge that through his dealings with the plaintiff, Mr Smede has observed the standard of the plaintiff's professional competence which, he says, falls far below the standard exected by the public. Mr Smede refers to three matters in which Mr
Smede and the plaintiff were involved.
The first is the matter of Plunkett. This involved a transfer of property which was to incorporate certain covenants arising from a contract of sale. Mr
Smede acted for the vendor, the plaintiff represented the purchaser. The plaintiff prepared the initial transfer. Following an exchange of correspondence between the plaintiff and Mr Smede's firm, the transfer in final form was prepared by Mr Smede. The plaintiff's evidence accords with Mr
Smede's evidence thus far.
According to Mr Smede, he prepared a final transfer because it was clear from a transfer prepared by the plaintiff that the plaintiff was not able to competently draft the transfer according to the terms of the contract of sale.
It is not explained in the evidence in what way the transfer did not comply with the terms of the contract. Nor were the contract and tranfers in question tendered in evidence.
In response, the plaintiff asserted in his evidence before me that it was the transfer prepared by Mr
Smede which was not in accordance with the contract, insofar as Mr Smede's transfer included additional covenants not provided for in the contract. According to the plaintiff, he conceded to Mr
Smede's transfer after the plaintiff's client told the plaintiff not to worry about the additional provisions.
On this evidence the fault was as likely Mr Smede's as the plaintiff's, or the difference of opinion between them may have arisen from constructions respectively placed on the contract which were both reasonably open or at least arguable. The evidence does not support a charge of incompetence on the plaintiff's part.
 
Matter of Bruton
The second matter referred to by Mr Smede's evidence is a contract for sale in which Mr Smede initially represented the vendor. Mr Smede later received an authority from the plaintiff's company for transfer of the matter from Mr Smede to the plaintiff's company. In a conversation between Mr Smede and the vendor, the vendor allegedly told Mr Smede that he, the vendor, had been advized that the plaintiff's company was a licensed conveyancer. The evidence does not specify who advised the vendor of this. The vendor also allegedly told Mr Smede that the plaintiff's costs were to be approximately half the costs of Mr Smede's firm.
In oral evidence the plaintiff denied having told the vendor that the plaintiff's company was a licensed conveyancer.
The evidence against the plaintiff in this matter amounts to no more than hearsay evidence that Mr Smede's former client had been informed by some unspecified person that the plaintiff's company was a licensed conveyancer.
That does not impugn the plaintiff.
The point about costs has no apparent relevance, and none was explained.
 
Matter of Cowled
In the third matter referred to in Mr Smede's evidence, Mr Smede acted for the purchaser in a transfer of property. Mr Smede stated that this was a current matter at the time of making his statutory declaration,
The transfer of property involved the release and re-creation of an easement. According to
Mr Smede's evidence, the plaintiff acted for a contiguous landowner in preparing documentation to extinguish then re-create the easement in question.
Mr Smede claims that the documentation was incorrect and needed to be entirely redrafted. There is no more specific evidence as to why the documentation was incorrect.
In oral evidence, the plaintiff denied having acted in this matter at all. The plaintiff conceded that he did not have a complete memory of the names of the parties in transactions in which he had acted. He also conceded that he had not searched his files. However, he asserted that he very rarely drafted documentation relating to easements, and that he would therefore remember this matter if he had been involved in it.
Counsel for the defendant submitted that I should prefer Mr Smede's account, given that when Mr Smede made his statutory declaration the matter was current and fresh in Mr Smede's mind. However, even if I were to accept Mr
Smede's evidence that the plaintiff had in fact drafted the documentation in this matter, the evidence against the plaintiff is not sufficient to make a finding of incompetence. Mr Smede might be wrong in his assessment of the documentation prepared by the plaintiff. In the absence of the documentation being produced I could not be satisfied that Mr Smede rather than the plaintiff was right about what was required.
 
Sale by Elsegood to Bayliss
The evidence against the plaintiff consists of the affidavits of
Mr S.
Ticli, solicitor, sworn 22 December 1994 and 16 May 1995, and the affidavit of
Mr J. Warren, real estate agent sworn 22 December
The evidence outlines the transaction as follows. The transaction involved the sale of a property by vendors named Elsegood to purchasers named Bayliss, in September 1994. Mr
Ticli acted for the purchasers, the plaintiff acted for the vendors. Mr
Warren's company was the selling agent for the vendors. Under the agency agreement between the vendors and Mr Warren's company, the vendors agreed that the selling agent should hold all deposit monies. Similarly, the contract for sale of the property nominated the vendor's agent as the depositholder and specified that the vendor's agent in this transaction was Mr Warren's company.
The complaint against the plaintiff in relation to this transaction focuses on the plaintiff's management of the deposit monies. According to the evidence, on 22 September 1994 the purchaser delivered to Mr Ticli's office a deposit cheque drawn in favour of the selling agent.
The deposit cheque was then handed over to the plaintiff's company upon exchange of the contract, with the expectation by Mr Ticli that the cheque would then be forwarded to the selling agent. According to Mr Warren he had a conversation with the plaintiff on September 1994 in which Mr Warren enquired as to the whereabouts of the deposit cheque; that the plaintiff denied any knowledge that a selling agent was involved in the transaction and stated that the deposit cheque had been banked into a trust account controlled by the plaintiff and in favour of the vendor; and that the plaintiff admitted to Mr
Warren that Mr Warren should be the stakeholder of the deposit monies and agreed to send the deposit cheque to Mr Warren by that afternoon; and that Mr
Warren did not receive the deposit cheque on that day.
On the following day, 29 September 1994, a conversation took place between the plaintiff and Mr
Ticli regarding the deposit cheque. According to
Mr Ticli, the plaintiff allegedly told him that, the cheque having been banked, the bank had to clear the cheque before the plaintiff could pay the deposit monies to the selling agent. Further, according to Mr
Ticli, the plaintiff stated that, on the day the deposit cheque was delivered to the plaintiff, the plaintiff had been very busy and had banked three cheques at that time (the implication being that the plaintiff was advancing some kind of mistake as the explanation).
Mr Warren received a letter with a cheque for the deposit monies enclosed from the plaintiff on 4 October 1994.
To a large extent, the plaintiff agreed with the facts as alleged by the complainants in relation to this transaction. The gist of his explanation as given in evidence in these proceedings was that it had slipped his mind that the contract provided for the agent to hold the deposit, that he did not notice that the cheque was made out to the agent when it was received by him and that he banked the cheque with two other deposit cheques believing he was doing no, more than he was authorised to do. Furthermore, he said, he was preparing for his wedding, which took place on 30 September, and he had other things on his mind. When Mr Warren telephoned he realised he had made a mistake, but found he could not transmit the money to the agent until the cheque, having been banked to his trust account, had been cleared.
I accept the plaintiff's explanation. The events do not establish dishonesty or professional incompetence on his part.
 
Sale by Ugarte-Carral
The factual situation in the next transaction referred to in the complaints material is similar to that in the last one. The evidence against the plaintiff consists of Mr Warren's affidavit of 22 December
Evidence for the plaintiff consists of the plaintiff's affidavit of 15 May 1995.
According to Mr Warren's evidence, Mr Warren's company acted as selling agent for vendors named Ugarte-Carral in the sale of the vendors' property in
September 1993. The plaintiff's company represented the vendors in the conveyance. The agency agreement between the vendors and the selling agent nominated the selling agent as stakeholder of the deposit monies. A letter dated 23 September 1993 from the selling agent to the plaintiff also specified that the deposit was to be paid to the vendors' agent and named Mr Warren's company as the vendors' agent. There is no reference in the evidence to any express stipulation in the contract of sale nominating a stakeholder. The contract was not tendered. The evidence indicates that the selling agent received a cheque from the purchaser of the property as part of the deposit monies, and that this cheque was accordingly banked by the selling agent.
The complaint against the plaintiff is directed to the plaintiff's handling of the balance of the deposit monies. Following exchange of contract on 19 October 1993, Mr Warren claims that he had a telephone conversation with the plaintiff in which Mr Warren enquired as to the whereabouts of the cheque for the balance of the deposit monies.
Mr Warren reports the plaintiff as saying that the deposit cheque was made out to the plaintiff and would be deposited to the plaintiff's trust account as stakeholder according to the vendors' instructions. Following this, Mr Warren allegedly had a conversation with
Mrs UgarteCarral in which Mrs Ugarte-Carral told Mr Warren that she was unaware of any arrangements nominating the plaintiff as stakeholder.
Mr Warren sent a facsimile dated 22 October 1993 to the plaintiff's company requesting that the deposit cheque be made available for collection by him in accordance with the agency agreement. In response, the plaintiff sent a letter dated 22
October 1993 to
Mr Warren stating that the deposit cheque was made payable to the plaintiff's company. It would appear from the evidence that the deposit monies then remained in the plaintiff's trust account and were not transferred to the selling agent.
The plaintiff's factual account of the transaction accords for the most part with Mr Warren's evidence. The plaintiff confirmed that he acted for the vendors Ugarte-Carral in the transaction, and that he received part of the deposit monies on behalf of the vendors. The plaintiff asserted that the cheque was made payable to the plaintiff's company. Moreover, the plaintiff asserted that there was no stakeholder nominated in the contract for sale. The plaintiff denied having had a conversation with Mr Warren in which they discussed the deposit monies, and denied knowing that there was a selling agent involved in this transaction prior to receiving Mr Warren's facsimile.
The plaintiff also denied having stated to Mr Warren that he had deposited the deposit monies according to the vendors' instructions.
The plaintiff conceded to having received the facsimile from Mr Warren. He stated that he interpreted the facsimile as expressing concern on the selling agent's part concerning payment of the agent's commission. The plaintiff said that at the time of banking the cheque he believed that his company was the stakeholder of the deposit monies.
I am not satisfied on this evidence that the plaintiff banked and retained the balance of the deposit monies, with knowledge that he was not entitled to do so.
In the absence of a provision in the contract of sale constituting the vendors' agent as the stakeholder and where the vendors' conveyancer receives a cheque for the deposit payable to his company, I would not be satisfied that the vendors' agent is the person entitled to hold the deposit as stakeholder.
I am not satisfied therefore that the plaintiff's conduct in retaining the deposit in such circumstances was wrongful.
There is then the collateral complaint that the plaintiff, according to
Mr Warren, sought to justify his position by asserting that he held the deposit on the vendors' instructions. The plaintiff denies that any such conversation occurred. I do not see why I should resolve that issue against the plaintiff. But even if the conversation occurred as Mr Warren assserts, the statement attributed to the plaintiff is not shown to be false. The asserted statement by Mrs Ugarte-Carral that she was unaware of any arrangements nominating the plaintiff as stakeholder, leaves open the possibility that her co-vendor made such arrangements.
 
Conclusion in relation to the complaints material
Insofar as it may be material to consider whether the plaintiff has been guilty of dishonesty in relation to the foregoing transactions, I find that he has not (save for the trifling matter of an empty threat of court proceedings made in one instance). Nor does the evidence in relation to those transactions establish incompetence or lack of knowledge on the part of the plaintiff.
I am fortified in this view by the fact that insofar as the foregoing complaints material was before the Committee, they recorded in their minute that the Committee did not regard the statutory declarations as being of a significant nature.
 
Conclusion and orders
There being nothing in the complaints material to lead me to change my provisional decision,
I determine that a certificate of eligibility should be granted, subject to the condition concerning further education to which I have referred.
The defendant should pay the plaintiff's costs of the proceedings.
The matter will be listed for mention.
The plaintiff should bring in short minutes of order.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/60.html  
