

Jankowski and Another versus Mastoris No. 2071 of 1994 Contracts - Legal
Practitioners - Liens [1995] NSWSC 114 (31 October 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
EQUITY DIVISION
HODGSON J
HRNG
SYDNEY, 18th and 19th September 1995 #DATE 19:9:1995 #ADD 31:10:1995 
X-Cl./Def's Counsel:       Mr. Whitelaw 
Instructed by:          Deluchi and Co., Leichhardt 
X-Def./Ptff's Counsel:      Mr. Davoren 
Instructed by:          Garvis Solicitors, Sydney
ORDER
Orders made.
JUDGE1
HODGSON J On 13th August 1992, the plaintiffs, Messrs. Jankowski and Garvis, lodged caveat E679176 in relation to the property of the defendant, Mrs.
Mastoris, at South Coogee. In about April 1994, Mrs. Mastoris initiated the lapsing procedure, and these proceedings were commenced by summons on 20th
April 1994 seeking extension of the caveat. That extension was granted until further order.
The real issues to be decided by me are raised by an amended cross-claim, filed 17th August 1995, seeking relief under the Contracts Review Act in respect of the unregistered mortgage on the basis of which the caveat was lodged, and consequential relief. Specifically, the primary order that Mrs.
Mastoris seeks is an order that the caveat be removed upon the provision of alternative security, namely a banker's guarantee in the amount of $18,854.00.
I will commence by giving a brief history of the matter.
The plaintiffs acted as solicitors for Mrs. Mastoris in proceedings
No.4998 of 1991, in which she sought relief in relation to a mortgage given to her by the State Bank. By 15th May 1992, Mrs. Mastoris had paid $15,000.00 to the plaintiffs on account of costs and disbursements in the proceedings. I note here that subsequently she paid a further $1,000.00 on 2nd June 1992, and $700.00 on 7th July 1992. On 22nd May 1992, the matter came before me in the
Expedition List of the Equity Division, and on that day I indicated that the matter would be granted expedition.
On 27th May 1992, Mr. Garvis, the partner of the plaintiffs with the conduct of the matter, wrote to Mrs. Mastoris a letter in which the following three paragraphs appeared: "Given that the matter is listed on the 5th June, 1992 we are unable to carry out any further work on your behalf until such time as we receive the sum of $15,000.00. Accordingly, the necessary preparation for the 5th June, 1992 will not be done by either the writer or by the barrister unless we receive the aforementioned amount of moneys.

In the event that you do not comply with this request then after seven (7) days of the date hereof we will file with the Supreme Court a Notice of ceasing to Act.

We regret that we need to impose such ultimatum upon you but it is clear to the writer that you are experiencing financial difficulties and that there is real doubt as to whether you are able to pay the moneys presently owed and the further costs up to finalisation of this matter."
On 22nd June 1992 (or possibly 23rd June 1992), Mr. Garvis wrote a further letter to Mrs. Mastoris in the following terms: "We note with concern that our fees in the sum of $10,597.90 remain outstanding in respect of the period up to 27th
February, 1992.

Since the above date we have done further work which we estimate to be at least $10,000.00.

Accordingly, the total outstanding is about $21,000.00.

It is anticipated that a hearing date will be obtained for your matter in late August/September of this year.

We require full payment of all monies presently outstanding to this office plus an additional $2,500.00 to cover preparation costs of your barrister.

In the alternative we are prepared to continue to act for you notwithstanding that the above monies remain outstanding upon the following basis:- 
A.
You provide us with security over your house by way of a second registered mortgage, 
B. You provide us with a mortgage over the lease in respect of your business by the company presently holding the lease, 
C. Personal guarantees from the directors of the above referred to Lessee company are given, 
D. All of our costs and disbursements in respect of the above security form part of the principal debt on which the interest will be payable at the rate of 14% per annum for the first two months after the issue of our accounts, and if not paid within that period then at the rate of 18% until full and final payment.

E. In the interim period you to pay on a weekly basis the sum of $650.00 on each and every Friday, such monies to be placed in our trust account on account of barristers fees and/or our costs.

F. We require your irrevocable instructions to settle your claim upon the basis of $350,000.00 to be paid to the State
Bank and that the State Bank be entitled to take possession of the plant and equipment presently situate in the shop premises.

In the event that you are prepared to accept this proposal, we require a copy of the Lease in respect of your shop, the name and registered office of the Lessee company and details of its solicitors.

We will require you, the company and it's (sic) directors to be independently advised by another solicitor.

As to our requirement No. 5 above, we impose this condition on the basis that we are concerned that a reasonable settlement offer submitted by the bank may be rejected by you, in which event further costs will be incurred in circumstances where payment of same would be doubtful given your financial position.
We have recommended on two occasions that offers submitted to the state (sic) Bank be substantially higher than was actually submitted. On both occasions you instructed us to submit a figure lower than we recommended.

We require your response to the above proposal by 3 p.m.
 tomorrow the 24th instant."
It appears that at a conference which took place on or about 23rd June , Mrs. Mastoris advised
Mr. Garvis that she had spoken to other solicitors, and Mr. Garvis said that he regarded himself as discharged from the conduct of the case. However, he also says that, because certain matters required urgent attention, he agreed with Mrs. Mastoris that he would attend to these matters, subject to the payment of $1,300.00. Advice to that effect was set out in a letter dated 24th June 1992 sent by Mr. Garvis to Mrs.
Mastoris. That letter was in the following terms: "We refer to our conference on 23rd instant in which you advised that you are unable to pay our outstanding costs or indeed any additional monies in respect of work done since the date of our most recent Memorandum.

Subject to your paying $1,300.00 by Friday of this week we will arrange for Mr. Gullotta, Barrister, to appear on your behalf on the next Mention date. At the conclusion of that
Mention we will file a Notice of Ceasing to Act.

In the event that we do not receive the sum of $1,300.00 as above indicated we will within seven (7) days after the date of this letter file with the Court a Notice of Ceasing to Act and will withdraw our brief from
Mr. Gullotta, Barrister. It will then be necessary for you to arrange your own representation before the Supreme Court on the next Mention date being the 3rd July, 1992.

We note that you are presently making enquiries as to a solicitor who is prepared to act on your behalf. We are presently considering upon what terms we are prepared to release our file and will advise you of same in the coming days."
On 25th June 1992, Messrs. Bowen and Geraghty wrote to the plaintiffs advising that they had received instructions to act for Mrs. Mastoris and asking for advice as to collection of her file. On 29th June 1992,
Mr. Garvis wrote to Mrs. Mastoris advising that he would file a Notice of Ceasing to Act on 3rd July 1992. on that day (or perhaps the next day), Mr. Garvis received a letter dated 29th June 1992 from Mr. Dennis, solicitor, practising under the name of Dennis and Co., advising that he had instructions to take over the matter, and including the client's authority to transfer the file.
On 30th June 1992, Mr. Garvis wrote to Mr. Dennis advising that his firm would "require security as to any moneys due and owing to this firm which are presently estimated at $18,854.50 or as otherwise may be determined upon taxation of our bill of costs". A further letter of the same date was sent by
Mr. Garvis to Mr. Dennis to similar effect, apparently after receiving the letter from
Mr. Dennis of 29th June 1992.
Mr. Garvis filed a Notice of Ceasing to Act in that matter on 1st July
On 7th July, Mr.
Dennis wrote to Mr. Garvis asking for an itemised bill.
Mr. Dennis said in evidence, and I accept, that at around this time he told
Mrs. Mastoris that this could result in an itemised bill claiming more than the amount then claimed by Mr. Garvis.
By 11th
August 1992, the case had been given a hearing date, apparently some time in August. A letter dated 11th August 1992 from Mr. Dennis to Mr.
Garvis reported that when the matter had been mentioned before me on that day,
I made certain comments which were quoted in that letter in the following terms: "It would appear that the Plaintiff has paid approximately $18,000.00 in legal costs to her former solicitor and that the
Plaintiff is unable to pay further costs or pay money into the
Court for the papers to be released.

If the Plaintiff's previous solicitor causes the hearing to he adjourned I am minded to make orders that if the previous solicitor is unjustified that he should pay on an indemnity basis the costs thrown away if the matter is adjourned next
Monday. If this matter is not resolved I request the
Plaintiff's former solicitor to attend at 9.30 am tomorrow."
The matter came before me again for mention the following day, 12th
August 1992; and at that time, the mortgage on the basis of which the caveat was lodged, was signed. I interpolate here that the relationship of the signing of the mortgage to appearances in Court before me was raised explicitly with the parties at an early stage of these proceedings, and the parties took the view that this did not raise any difficulties with my hearing this matter; and I consider that view was correct.
The mortgage which was signed was on a [Real Property Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/) form, handwritten, with three hand written pages.
Essentially, the mortgage purports to secure over Mrs. Mastoris' South
Coogee property all moneys which might be agreed or found to be owing by Mrs.
Mastoris to the plaintiffs.
As I understand it, Mrs.
Mastoris admits signing at least one copy of the
RPA form, and one copy of the three handwritten pages, but she denies that it is her signature which appears on other pages of these documents. In my opinion, she is clearly mistaken about this, and I will not consider that matter further.
The file which had been held by Mr. Garvis was then taken over by Mr.
Dennis, and Mrs. Mastoris' proceedings against the State Bank were later resolved.
Mr. Garvis subsequently submitted an itemised bill of costs totalling over $47,000.00, and giving credit for just under $17,000.00 paid on account by Mrs. Mastoris. There have been some proceedings already in relation to the taxation of that bill of costs, and no doubt legal costs have been incurred in relation to those proceedings.
Now Mrs. Mastoris wants to re-finance her property and is hindered in this by the caveat. Mr. Garvis refuses to remove the caveat unless he is given alternative security for an amount up to $60,000.00.
Mrs. Mastoris seeks relief essentially on the basis that she signed the mortgage on the basis of extreme pressure and lack of time, and in circumstances where she believed the amount secured was no more than $18,854.00. She also claims that she was unaware of incorporation by reference of Memorandum Q860000, and that she believed on advice from Mr. Dennis that signing the document would not affect re-financing her property.
It is rare that the Court would act under the Contracts Review Act on a contract made at arms-length on advice of solicitors on both sides, in the absence of some kind of misleading conduct. However, there are two factors in this case which suggest to me that the contract may be unjust, because harsh, so as to require intervention.
In the first place, if it be the case that Mr. Garvis discharged himself from acting for Mrs. Mastoris, the authorities indicate that he would not have had the right to retain the file, but would have been obliged to hand it over to the new solicitors on the basis that those solicitors would preserve Mr.
Garvis' lien. If that was the case here, then the consideration given for the mortgage by Mr. Garvis would essentially be his own bona fide, but erroneous, belief that he was entitled to retain the file; and it may seem harsh that such an onerous mortgage as claimed by Mr. Garvis be based on such slender consideration.
In the second place, the best advice Mr. Garvis could give his client to guide her conduct in the matter was that his fees were estimated at $18,854.00; and it may seem harsh that, in those circumstances, she should be bound by a mortgage which Mr. Garvis now claims should be considered as giving security for up to $60,000.00.
In relation to those two matters, Mr. Davoren for Mr. Garvis made the following submissions. In relation to the first of those matters, he submitted that, although there appeared to be an ultimatum contained in the latter of th May 1992, it is plain from Mr. Garvis' bill of costs that he did continue to do work on the matter for Mrs. Mastoris, notwithstanding her non-compliance with the ultimatum. In those circumstances, on the basis of Mr. Garvis' evidence of the conference held on or about 23rd June 1992, it was Mrs.
Mastoris' action in instructing new solicitors which, in substance, brought about the discharge of Mr. Garvis; so that the authorities relating to the situation where it is the solicitor who discharges himself have no application. In further support of that submission, Mr. Davoren pointed out that Mr. Garvis was sufficiently conscientious and concerned about the interests of Mrs. Mastoris to go ahead and do urgent work that had to be done on her case, notwithstanding her engagement of new solicitors, but of course with her concurrence, to ensure that she was not prejudiced because the new solicitors could not get this urgent work done. Mr. Davoren submitted that those circumstances supported the inference that Mr. Garvis would not have abandoned Mrs. Mastoris, even if the terms of the ultimatum were not met.
On the second matter, Mr. Davoren relied on the evidence that Mrs.
Mastoris had been advised that the requiring of an itemised bill could result in a bill for an amount in excess of the amount then being claimed by Mr.
Garvis, so that it was by no means unfair that the mortgage should extend to a larger amount.
I will deal with the two matters in turn.
On the first matter,
I will take this opportunity to set out what appears to me to be the relevant law, because it does seem to me to be quite important in relation to problems of this kind, and it does seem that it may not be generally known, or at least well known.
The following note appears at par.66.7.1 of Ritchie, Supreme Court
Procedure: "A solicitor who discharges himself for all practical purposes loses his lien as he can be compelled to hand over the documents 'subject to the lien': Heslop v. Metcalfe (1837) 3 My and
Cr 183; <case>; [40 ER 894.] If a solicitor discharges himself without good cause and reasonable notice he will usually deprive himself of the right to recover remuneration for past services as his retainer is an entire contract. See (66.0.0) and Cordery on Solicitors (1968) th ed at 98-102.

Good cause includes failure by the client to provide moneys to cover disbursements: Wadsworth v. Marshall Cr and J 665; <case>; [149 ER 279] or incapacitating injury to the solicitor: Forney v. Bushe (1954) LJ 604. It is also good cause where the solicitor discovers that an action properly commenced cannot be properly continued:
Lawrence v. Potts (1834) 6 Cr and P 428; <case>; [172 ER 1306] or if he is asked to do something dishonourable or is hindered or prevented by the client Underwood Son and Piper v. Lewis [(1894) 2 QB 306] at 314."
The first sentence of that entry would appear to apply to cases where the solicitor has discharged himself for good cause and with reasonable notice, but indicates that even in those circumstances, for all practical purposes, he loses his lien.
That view is confirmed by this passage from Cowdery,
Solicitors, 6th Ed. at p.427: "Where a solicitor discharges himself, the client or his new solicitor is entitled to a summary order not merely for inspection or production, but for delivery of papers, etc., in the cause, on an undertaking to hold them without prejudice to the former solicitor's lien, and subject to re-delivery after the hearing, and, if necessary, subject to an undertaking to prosecute the suits in an active manner, the order being confined to documents in the possession of the solicitor.

The court has no jurisdiction to relieve the solicitor from such an undertaking where it is not made to the court."
The leading authority on this matter appears to be the 1837 case of
Heslop v. Metcalfe (1837) 3 My and Cr 183. A solicitor was acting for the plaintiff in that matter, and during the course of the matter made a number of demands for the payment of costs, and sought to enforce those demands by legal proceedings. Ultimately, the solicitor wrote to the plaintiff advising that the solicitor would proceed no further in the matter unless a request for payment which had been previously advised were complied with before 1.00pm on the following day. On receiving that communication, the plaintiff instructed other solicitors. The plaintiff's new solicitor sought from the previous solicitor the file in the case; and it was held by Lord Cottenham, L.C. that the file should be delivered to the new solicitor without prejudice to the original solicitor's lien, and upon an undertaking from the new solicitor to return the file after the hearing.
The considerations involved in the decision in that matter are set out in a paragraph on pp.188-9 of the report of that case: "Undoubtedly, that doctrine may expose a solicitor to very great inconvenience and hardship if, after embarking in a cause, he finds that he cannot get the necessary funds wherewith to carry it on. But, on the other hand, extreme hardship might arise to the client, if - to take the case which is not uncommon in the smaller practice in the country, - a solicitor, who finds a poor man having a good claim, and having but a small sum of money at his command, may go on until that fund is exhausted, and then, refusing to proceed further, may hang up the cause by withholding the papers in his hands. That would be a great grievance and means of oppression to a poor client, who, with the clearest right in the world, might still be without the means of employing another solicitor. The rule of the Court must be adapted to every case that may occur, and be calculated to protect suitors against such conduct. Now, a solicitor, if he knows that he must trust to the result of the cause for his remuneration, will, of course, be disposed to proceed with it in such a way as, while it promotes the interest of his client, is most likely to render his lien available.
I have no doubt, therefore, that the existence of the lien, while it is a great protection to the solicitor against his client, is also a great benefit to the client; but the benefit would be entirely lost, if the solicitor might stop short in the middle of the suit, and insist upon retaining the papers, because then no other solicitor could take up and carry on the cause."
A further decision to similar effect was given in the case of Robins v.
Goldingham [(1872) 13 Eq. 440.] In that case also, the plaintiffs' solicitor required payment of certain sums of money, and ultimately wrote a letter which concluded "under the present unsatisfactory circumstances, I beg to say that I really must decline to increase my liabilities on your account unless some satisfactory arrangement be made as to costs". The plaintiffs then instructed new solicitors, and the previous solicitor declined to hand the papers over unless he had his costs paid or secured. In that case also, an order was made for the papers to be delivered to the new solicitors on their undertaking to hold them, without prejudice, to the lien of the new solicitor, and to return them undefaced within twelve days of the conclusion of the proceedings.
Malins, VC in that case referred, among other cases, to Heslop v.
Metcalfe, and at p 442 said this: "Now it is well settled that where a solicitor is discharged by the client he has a lien for his costs upon the papers in his hands, and can retain them till he is satisfied; but it is different where the discharge is by the solicitor. There is no blame to be imputed to Mr. Suckling for declining to go on with the suit; but it is clear that a solicitor is not entitled to stop litigation, because he cannot obtain funds to carry it on" .
The same approach was followed in the much more recent case of Gamlen
Chemical Co. (U.K.) v. Rochem Ltd. [(1980) 1 WLR 614.] In that case, the solicitors acting for the defendants called upon the defendants to pay professional charges at a certain stage during the proceedings. The defendants disputed the charges, paid some money, but refused to pay any more. The solicitors on 23rd
February 1979 wrote stating that unless their costs were paid by 2nd March, they would issue a summons on 5th March, later extended to th March, applying to the Court to be removed from the record. By a letter of 25th June they again notified the defendants that unless they were paid they would apply to the court to be removed from the record, and on the same day, issued a summons applying for such an order. on 9th July, the defendants instructed other solicitors to act for them. The defendants sought the delivery of documents to the new solicitors, and that order was made. An appeal was brought to the Court of Appeal, and the appeal was dismissed.
It was held that where a solicitor discharges himself in the course of an action, his possessory lien over the documents became subject to the practice of the
Court, and the Court would order the documents to be handed over to the new solicitors subject to the lien unless exceptional circumstances existed when the Court might be justified in imposing terms. This matter of exceptional circumstances is discussed by Templeman, LJ at p.624-5 of the report: "I wish to guard myself against possible exceptions to this general rule. The court in fact is asked to make a mandatory order obliging the original solicitor to hand over the papers to the new solicitor. An automatic order is inconsistent with the inherent, albeit judicial, discretion of the court to grant or withhold a remedy which is equitable in character. It may be, therefore, that in exceptional cases the court might impose terms where justice so required. For example, if the papers are valueless after the litigation is ended and if the client accepts that he is indebted to the original solicitor for an agreed sum and has no counterclaim, or accepts that the solicitor has admittedly paid out reasonable and proper disbursements, which must be repaid, the court might make an order which would only compel the original solicitor to hand over the papers to the new solicitor providing that in the first place the client pays to the original solicitor a sum, fixed by the court, representing the whole or part of the moneys admittedly due from the client to the original solicitor. Much would depend on the nature of the case, the stage which the litigation has reached, the conduct of the solicitor and the client respectively, and the balance of hardship which might result from the order the court is asked to make." 
See also Major Projects v. Sibmark (McLelland, J., 19/2/92).
It is necessary to consider the application of those principles to the facts of this case. The issue of exactly what was said by the participants in the conference between Mr. Garvis and Mrs. Mastoris on about 23rd June 1992 was not raised in affidavits in these proceedings, and I find myself unable to decide precisely what was said, although I accept that Mr. Garvis has given his best recollection of it. I also accept that Mr. Garvis had a bona fide belief that he was entitled to a lien over the papers.
However, the cases to which I have referred do confirm that the Court should not take an overly technical approach to the question of whether it is the client who has discharged the solicitor or the solicitor who has discharged himself, but rather look at that question as a matter of real substance.
Taking that approach in this case, in my view it is clear that the substance of the matter was that Mr. Garvis discharged himself.
In my opinion, when one considers the history of the matter, it is inescapable that Mrs.
Mastoris sought new solicitors because Mr.
Garvis was requiring payment of sums of money or the granting of security which she was unable, or unwilling, to pay or grant, and for no other reason. To say that, in those circumstances, it was Mrs. Mastoris who discharged Mr. Garvis would, in my view, be unrealistic.
A consideration which goes to support this approach of substance rather than technicality is the following. If it were the case that a solicitor, threatening to cease acting if a certain amount was not paid, did not discharge himself in cases where, without waiting for the ultimatum to expire, the client went to another solicitor, that would, in my opinion, be a matter for the original solicitor to warn the client about if the original solicitor intended to take such a technical point.
So, in my opinion, the principles I have discussed do apply in this case.
I do not believe that there would have been special circumstances of the kind discussed by Lord Justice Templeman in this case that would have justified any unusual order; but even if I were wrong about this, in my opinion it is inconceivable that the Court would have required more than a security limited to the $18,854.00 then being claimed.
I note that solicitors were involved on both sides in this transaction, but so far as appears, it does not seem that the solicitors on either side had a full understanding of these principles; and as I have said, it is for the reason that these principles do not appear to be generally understood that I have spent a little time in setting them out in this judgment.
Turning to the second question, there is some force in Mr. Davoren's submission that Mrs. Mastoris was advised that the ultimate claim could be for more than $18,854.00. However, in my opinion, solicitors do have a general obligation to clients to keep them well informed as to the quantum of costs being incurred; and in my opinion, that duty is particularly important in a situation such as arose in this case, where the solicitor was ceasing to act for a client, and insisting on arrangements in relation to his fees before handing over a file which was vital for the conduct of the client's case, which was shortly to be heard by the Court. It does happen, not uncommonly, that when a client challenges a bill, and the solicitor is required to deliver an itemised bill, the itemised bill turns out to be significantly more than the amount claimed by the solicitor; and nothing that I do in this case will prevent Mr. Garvis pursuing the full amount of his itemised bill, if he chooses to do so. However, as I have said, I think a solicitor does have an obligation to keep the client well informed as to amounts of costs being incurred, and I think that obligation is important in circumstances such as the present. In my opinion, that is a further reason why it would be harsh on
Mrs. Mastoris if the mortgage that she granted were to secure more than the amount of costs then being asserted by Mr. Garvis.
Having regard to that matter, and having regard to the small extent of consideration provided for by the mortgage, in my opinion, the mortgage as it exists is unjust because harsh; and in my opinion, the Court should make an order under the Contracts Review Act which varies it so as to limit it strictly to an amount of $18,854.00, and no more. (Submissions regarding costs)
In relation to costs, Mr. Davoren has submitted that the relief which has been obtained on the cross-claim was not the original subject of the proceedings, which were brought to extend the caveat in circumstances where the defendant, Mrs. Mastoris, was not entitled absolutely to have the caveat discharged, but had sought to do so. That submission may have had some force except for the circumstance that the character of the proceedings did change by the filing of the amended cross-claim, and in the event, I have given her the most favourable relief sought in that amended cross-claim. Mr. Garvis has obtained orders for costs in relation to the original extension of the caveat before
Justice Brownie, the costs of an appeal to the Court of Appeal, and the costs of a hearing before Justice McLelland when the amended cross-claim was filed. In circumstances where the position taken by Mr. Garvis since that time has indicated complete opposition to what was sought in the amended cross-claim, and where Mrs. Mastoris has been completely successful on that amended cross-claim,
I think the appropriate order is that she have the general costs of the proceedings: that order, of course, will not disturb any of the previous orders for costs made in favour of the plaintiffs.
Accordingly, I make the following orders.
I make declaration A in the amended cross-claim.
I order that the said mortgage be varied so as to limit the liability of the cross-claimant under the mortgage to $18,854.00.
I declare that the cross-claimant is entitled to have caveat E679176 removed in return for provision of appropriate alternative security in the amount of $18,854.00.
I reserve liberty to either party to apply on 2 days' notice at a time arranged with my Associate in the event of any difficulty in arranging for the removal of the caveat.
 .
I order that the plaintiffs pay the defendant's costs of the proceedings, such order not to disturb previous costs orders made in favour of the plaintiffs.
The exhibits may be returned.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/114.html  
