

Regina versus Allan Wayne Nelson [1996] NSWSC 151 (23 May 1996) 
REGINA versus Allan Wayne NELSON /95 
THURSDAY 23 May 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
HANDLEY JA, ABADEE J, HULME J 
CATCHWORDS: Criminal Law and Procedure - 
Accused's case suggested that significant prosecution witness was a perpetrator of the offence - Trial judge's directions in relation to his evidence adequate and appropriate - No accomplice or so called tainted witness direction required - 
No direction in relation to lies or regarding right to silence required - 
Application of rule 4 - Verdict not unsafe and unsatisfactory - 
Sentence not excessive.

RESULT: Appeal Dismissed 
JUDGMENT 
ABADEE J: The appellant was indicted before Judge Hosking QC in the Sydney District Court on 3 May 1995 on a charge of attempting to obtain a financial advantage by deception contrary to the provisions of <case> of the Crimes Act.

The appellant pleaded not guilty and was tried before his Honour and a jury of twelve. On 18 May 1995 the appellant was found guilty and was sentenced to a minimum term of 18 months with an additional term of six months.

The Crown case may be summarised as follows. In January 1991 one Brian McGain lived with his wife Beverley and his youngest son Douglas, in a Sydney suburb.

It appears that prior to January 1991 there had been a dispute between
Beverley McGain's mother (a Beatrice Mead) and Beverley's brother, one David
Collins, concerning a family business. Collins had commenced litigation against Mrs Mead. The matter was resolved in 1990, with Collins being unsuccessful.

A Mark Whitbourn, a friend of Douglas McGain became acquainted with the McGain family. In late 1990 Whitbourn enrolled in and commenced a "private investigator's course" run by the appellant at Parramatta. The Crown asserted that the appellant used Whitbourn to find out more about the McGain family and then to act as a courier to suggest to the McGains that some harm might come to them at the instigation of Collins. On 12 January 1991 Brian McGain telephoned the appellant and later that day they met at Gladesville. At this meeting the appellant said that he had received information that Collins had enlisted the aid of certain persons to cause harm to the McGain family. The most consistent threat was that an ex-Detective Roger Rogerson and other serving police officers had been engaged by Collins and that their most likely approach would be to "load up" the son, Douglas McGain, with drugs and have him arrested. The appellant mentioned various names in his conversations with
McGain such as Roger Rogerson, Tim Bristow and Ray Millanta and used terms such as "a nine millimetre to the head", and "we could find ourselves with an open brain". The appellant said he could help McGain by carrying out counter surveillance work and buying off some or all of the persons engaged by
Collins.

Brian McGain involved his solicitor who met the appellant on 13 January 1991 and had a number of telephone conversations over the ensuing weeks. Both
McGain and his solicitor kept notes of the conversations and meetings. McGain reported the matter to the police in early February 1991. Until the arrest of the appellant, McGain was basically acting under police instructions. Two of the meetings in February were secretly tape recorded. On the appeal the Court had the opportunity of reading the transcripts and listening to the tapes.
More importantly the jury as the tribunal of fact heard the tapes played at the trial. They were able to evaluate what the appellant said in the tapes and the mode and manner of his doing so. Initially McGain had been in fear of his own safety, however as time passed by he became more confident that there was no such threat of the type discussed. His solicitor gave evidence of a meeting with the appellant at which the appellant told him of Collins having been unhappy with the result of the litigation and that he, Collins, had "retained"
Rogerson to see if some of his police contacts could arrange to have one of
McGain's sons set up on a drugs charge. He said the source of his information was Millanta. The solicitor also gave evidence that the appellant thought there might be a possibility that Rogerson might be persuaded to change sides "as it were". The appellant said that he could offer counter surveillance, that he knew Millanta had been retained by Collins to carry out surveillance work, and that he would keep tabs on Millanta. He said Millanta was to be paid $5,000 by Collins. The solicitor also gave evidence of a telephone conversation on 13 February 1991 when the appellant said that he had been "shafted" or double crossed by Brian McGain, and later that Millanta would change sides for $5,000. The solicitor said that McGain wanted to meet
Millanta. The appellant said that this would be a good idea. There was also conversation with the appellant about being paid, involving a sum of $15,000 including $4,500 for surveillance work done by persons for him, $500 for air and car fares; $5,000 for Millanta and $5,000 for his own efforts.

At the time of the trial Brian McGain was deceased. However, his depositions (of some 120 pages in length) given at the committal were read without objection at the trial. His evidence included evidence of being approached by the appellant, of meetings at a boat ramp on four occasions, of the accused telling him that there was an extortion attempt in the wind, and of the accused mentioning Tim Bristow and Roger Rogerson and the danger stemming from his brother-in-law, one David Collins.

Whilst initially sums in the order of tens of thousands of dollars were mentioned as being necessary to buy off "the conspirators", with the effluxion of time, the appellant asked only for payment for work done by himself and
Millanta. The appellant finally agreed to accept $15,000. He was arrested when
McGain handed the money to him whilst they were both under police surveillance.

The Crown case essentially was that no plot against the McGain's had ever existed, that the appellant had acted dishonestly and fabricated the plot, and that he had made the representation in order to obtain money.

The appellant made a lengthy unsworn statement. It extended over almost three hours, occupying as his Honour told the jury some 71 pages of typescript. In his summing-up, his Honour summarised the appellant's case. The appellant in that statement claimed that Millanta had provided him with information about the plot to harm the McGain family. Further, the appellant said that he had conducted a lesson during his private investigation course in which the case had been discussed and that a student by the name of Whitbourn had approached him and had said that he knew Douglas McGain. He told of asking Whitbourn to get a message to the McGain family, of Brian McGain telephoning him, and of them both later meeting at a hotel. There the appellant told McGain of the plot and that he thought Rogerson was involved. He told McGain he had no proof that the plot existed but he believed what Millanta had said.

In his statement the appellant spoke of meeting McGain's solicitor, and claimed that it was the solicitor who had suggested buying them off and mentioned the sum of "$40,000 for that" (T 363), (I would mention that this allegation was not earlier put to the McGain's solicitor in cross- examination). The appellant said that he had spoken to Millanta who suggested that the plot would be called off if those involved knew it had leaked and mentioned a sum of $5,000. He said that he had told the McGain's solicitor about the $5,000 mentioned by Millanta and the surveillance fees of a man by the name of Schweitzer. He had a further conversation with McGain about money and they met at Taplin Park where he told McGain he needed a retainer of $4,500 to cover costs. He later said he needed $10,000 for himself! The appellant said that at all times he had acted in good faith and that he had believed at the time that what had been put to him by Millanta was probable.
He claimed in effect that he was an innocent pawn, put up to the matter and duped by Millanta who was in effect solely responsible for the offence. The appellant on his version did not assert that he was an accomplice of Millanta.
His case was one of absolute denial that he was a principal or accomplice and that alternatively Millanta, if anyone, was the principal or one of them. He thus sought, inter alia, to assert that Millanta was responsible for the offence. He, in effect sought to exculpate himself from involvement in any offence by inculpating Millanta. On 11 February 1991 he claimed that Millanta had told him that it was all over and that he wanted to be paid. The appellant claimed that he had contacted McGain and arranged for the payover at Taplin
Park with Millanta present. The appellant in fact received $15,000 just before he was arrested. Many of the matters raised in the lengthy statement were not put to Millanta in cross-examination.

Raymond Millanta, Roger Rogerson and David Collins gave evidence and all denied involvement in the conspiracy. There was evidence in the tape recording of a meeting between McGain, Millanta and the appellant on 14 February 1994 in relation to the role played by Millanta at that meeting.

Millanta denied ever meeting David Collins or even knowing him. He had not met
Roger Rogerson. He told of meeting McGain on 14 February, the day of the arrest of both he and the appellant. He was asked in what circumstances he met
Brian McGain and replied that the appellant had asked him when he met McGain to tell him that the job had been finished and the appellant would tell him all about it. This he did. He did not know what job the appellant was referring to. This was his only conversation with McGain. He said that he agreed to do as asked by the appellant because he had faith in his integrity.

He was extensively cross-examined and he denied telling lies. He objected to the appellant having sought to involve him. He denied involvement in the offence and said that in effect, he too was a victim, an innocent dupe of the appellant, and not otherwise. On his own evidence Millanta was not involved nor had he participated in the offence with which the appellant was charged.
He was not a principal, nor was he an accomplice of the appellant in relation to the offence.

A witness Schwietzer testified that he had conducted surveillance work at the
McGain house for the appellant.

His Honour told the jury at (SU 22-23) that the appellant's case had two strands: first, that at all times he had acted honestly and professionally, and second, that if there was no conspiracy against the McGains then he had been duped by Millanta. Alternatively, it was said, that if there was a conspiracy the appellant was as much a victim as McGain because he was used by
Millanta and/or by others. In a further direction to the jury his Honour told them (SU 32-33) that in relation to the money being handed over, his case was that he had earnt such money.

Ground 1 
His Honour, the trial judge erred in failing properly to warn the jury regarding the evidence of the prosecution witnesses, Rogerson and Millanta.

Before us the appellant abandoned this ground of complaint in relation to
Rogerson. The ground is advanced in relation to the witness Millanta.

At the trial no such point on this ground was taken. Consequently rule 4 applies to this ground of appeal. No complaint was made of the directions of the trial judge with regard to the evidence of Millanta. This is not surprising bearing in mind how the parties fought the issues in the case. It is also not surprising having regard to the extensive directions given in relation to the evidence of Millanta and his importance as a Crown witness. It is appropriate to here refer to the directions in fact given in order that the ground of complaint ultimately advanced should be better understood. These passages inter alia, would have made it obvious to the lay mind, the importance of Millanta and his evidence. Indeed, the jury could have been in little doubt about that importance.

His Honour directed the jury as follows. He said (SU 14-15): "The accused's case, as I understand it, is that he was passing the information on in good faith and if it were not true well then it was not an invention on his part but he had been, as it were, ensnared by the lies of
Millanta who is the real villain. Of course, that is the question of what weight you give to Millanta's evidence, is quintessentially a jury matter. If you said, for example, I do not accept Millanta at all, I did not find his evidence at all convincing, well that would be the end of the Crown case, because he is a very important pivotal Crown witness". (Emphasis added).

Again at (SU 19) his Honour told the jury: "As I have already indicated to you Mr William Ray Millanta is a most important witness so far as the Crown is concerned. Your assessment of his credibility is of very great importance. Did you find him a convincing and truthful witness or the opposite or did you make some different assessment of him?" 
Further at (SU 24-25) the relevance of the evidence of Millanta to the defence case was emphasised. His Honour carefully reminded the jury in some detail of
Millanta's role according to the accused's case.

The importance of accepting Millanta was again made clear by his Honour at (SU -27). His Honour said: "Members of the Jury, you have been here for a fortnight and as I have already indicated there are over 400 pages of transcript but really the case is a comparatively simple one. It is a simple one to define what the issues are, it may not be a simple one to decide. But it is basically a matters of credibility and, indeed, I would say this to you that if you are not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that Millanta is telling the truth in relation to essential matters well then it would not be safe for you to convict.
(Emphasis added). If, on the other hand, you accept, beyond reasonable doubt, the evidence of Millanta, and if you accept the evidence of Whitbourn and the deposition of Mr McGain, which has not been substantially challenged, but how could it be, really in this court, except it would have been open to the accused to say that certain parts of it were either untrue or mistaken, if you accept these essential Crown witnesses it would be open to you to convict if you were satisfied beyond reasonable doubt as to the elements." 
The jury would have been left in no doubt about having to accept or reject the evidence of Millanta in order to convict. Without more, one could be readily forgiven for thinking that further directions in relation to Millanta's evidence even if required, would really have done little more than reflect what had been said, and state the obvious.

Before this Court and more extensively in counsel's additional written submissions, furnished after the hearing of the appeal, it was submitted that the trial judge was required to give an "accomplice direction" in relation to
Millanta's evidence.

The theory that Millanta was or might have been an accomplice is not based upon anything that Millanta said in his evidence at the trial. He claimed that he was innocently involved and had in no way participated in a criminal sense in the offence. Cross-examination did not prove otherwise. That he might have been an accomplice is essentially based solely upon the unsworn evidence of the appellant. I have no need to say more on this point. In the instant case the argument advanced was that the request for an accomplice type direction was satisfied in circumstances where the appellant was claiming that he was a dupe of Millanta. He sought to exculpate himself from any responsibility or participation by seeking to inculpate Millanta, not merely in terms of participation but as being really criminally responsible for the offence.

Whilst it is true that there are some aspects of Millanta's story that may have required it to be approached with suspicion, this was a matter debated at length before the jury. Were it necessary for me to decide I see no reason why the jury could, or would have reasonably inferred on the basis of the accused's unsworn statement that Millanta was not merely involved or participated in the offence but was responsible for it. The objective evidence led in the trial proved or was capable of proving the appellant's involvement with the "scam" in approaching the victim, and setting up the "sting", his interest in obtaining money from the victim and the way he dealt with the matter as the principal. His power to unilaterally reduce the amount required to be paid by McGain to $15,000 further pointed to the appellant's involvement as a principal and Millanta's non involvement.

Putting the question aside as to whether Millanta was an accomplice I turn to consider whether, in any event an accomplice direction was required in relation to Millanta's evidence.

In relation to a witness who falls into one of the accepted categories of suspect witnesses, the jury should be instructed that it is dangerous to convict on his or her uncorroborated testimony. One such category is that of an accomplice witness of whose evidence the common law requires such a warning to be given. But the recognised categories should not be regarded as closed:
B versus The Queen <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 599] per Dawson and Gaudron JJ at 616. In saying this I leave aside the provisions of ss 164 and 165 of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/), which were not applicable at the time of the trial. However, Brennan J (as he then was) perhaps went further in Bromley versus The Queen <case>; [(1986) 161 CLR 315] at pp 324-325 and suggested that in any category of case, it does not follow that the failure to give the warning will always result in a miscarriage of justice or provide a ground for quashing a conviction, if the dangers with which the warning is concerned are equally obvious to the lay mind. In Webb versus The Queen <case>; [(1994) 181 CLR 41] at 65 Brennan J observed that in the circumstances of the case, "an accomplice warning was a warning of the obvious". Were it necessary to so decide, I am disposed to the view that in the particular circumstances of this case, for reasons given, even assuming that it was open to conclude that there was evidence upon which the jury could conclude that Millanta was an accomplice so that a accomplice warning should also have been given, such was not required because it would have added little and that such warning would have been no more than a warning of the obvious. Thus even assuming that the matter of whether or not Millanta was an accomplice should have been left to the jury ( and it did not cross anyone's mind at the trial that the issue arose or should be left) in the particular circumstances, I do not consider that the failure to leave it and an accompanying accomplice warning resulted in a miscarriage of justice or provide a ground for quashing the conviction.

Indeed, in the instant case the directions given in fact would have brought home to the jury that if they were to find Millanta participated or was involved in the crime or was responsible for it then the jury should acquit the appellant.

Further in my analysis of the appellant's submission I am reminded of the paradox referred to by the Chief Justice in Regina versus Rogers (CCA 24
November 1992, unreported), (where the question of whether the important Crown witness was an accomplice was also raised for the first time on appeal). His
Honour said (at 12): "The hypothesis that Andrews himself, and not the appellant, was the person who accompanied Walsh at the robberies, which underlies the necessity for the judge to give, and the jury to take account of, the warning, is one which, if accepted as a reasonable hypothesis, must be destructive of the Crown's case against the appellant. In other words, if the jury thought enough of the possibility to bring the accomplice warning into play, they ought to have acquitted the appellant anyway. However, it is unnecessary to pursue that paradox." 
In the circumstances I do not find it necessary to deal with the Crown's further submission that the decision as to whether or not an accomplice warning is required is really one for the discretion of the trial judge. There is nothing said in Webb's case requiring that such a warning had to be given in the circumstances of a case such as the present (let alone supporting the view that Millanta was even an accomplice for the purposes of the accomplice warning rule). Further, I do not consider there was any miscarriage of justice in failing to give one: R versus Yuill [(1994) 34 NSWLR 179] at 186.
Were it necessary to decide I would be disposed to the view that the accomplice warning was not required for another reason. In a sense Millanta did not in terms directly implicate the appellant. The evidence implicating the appellant was perhaps really in essence the evidence of his personal dealings with Whitbourn, his asking for an introduction to McGain, and his personal dealings with McGain and McGain's solicitor. Millanta's evidence was of his innocent involvement limited to really confirming for the appellant that a job had been done.

The fact that no supplementary direction was sought at the trial in relation to Millanta's evidence means that [rule ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/s4.html) applies. In relation to [rule ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/s4.html), I repeat some observations that I made in Regina versus Pantoja (CCA 6 February 1996, unreported at 15). I also believe that some care must be taken to ensure that the Court says nothing to encourage the raising of issues and arguments on appeal which were never addressed at the trial. To do so would undermine the community's confidence in the integrity of the trial process. I say nothing as to the cost and burdens such imposes or might impose in relation to the administration of justice. A trial imposes great responsibility upon advocates to decide for their clients exactly how and upon what grounds the issues will be fought. The case went to the jury on the issues as formulated and contested at the trial.

On this appeal it was alternatively submitted, that even if an accomplice direction was not required, then directions of the type discussed in Regina v Faure <case>; [(1993) 67 A Crim R 172.] should have been given. However, it seems to me that Faure is illustrative of the general principle discussed by Gibbs CJ in Bromley.
His Honour said (at 319): "What is required, in a case where the evidence of a witness may be potentially unreliable, but which does not fall within one of the established categories in relation to which a full warning as to the necessity of corroboration must be given, is that the jury must be made aware, in words which meet the justice of the particular case, of the dangers of convicting on such evidence." 
Further Brennan J said (at 325): "When a warning is needed to avoid a miscarriage of justice, it must be given; when none is needed to avoid a miscarriage of justice none need be given. The possibility of a miscarriage of justice is both the occasion for the giving of the warning and the determinant of its content".

I have already indicated in relation to the accomplice issue that a relevant warning was not required. I do not repeat many of these reasons which are equally relevant as to whether an analogous warning was required because
Millanta was alleged by the appellant in his unsworn statement to be an unreliable or tainted witness. Nothing I have said should be taken to support any view as to whether Millanta could be so described. The directions given and the jury's findings would suggest this own conclusion.

Furthermore, the point to be made about Faure is that it does not provide authority for any new principle: Regina versus Lowe (Supreme Court of
Victoria Court of Appeal 13 November 1995, unreported at 14). What Lowe makes clear is that particular circumstances may require a form of potentially unreliable witness direction to be moulded to meet them. In Regina v
Yalda (CCA 27 September 1994, unreported) it was held after citing
Faure that no special warning was required in circumstances where similar argument was advanced. Nor for that matter did the Court treat
Yalda as requiring an accomplice type warning, despite the appellant's allegations. Indeed, it concluded that in the light of the way the case was contested and the directions, given the jury could have been in no doubt that the jury could not convict unless they accepted the relevant Crown witness.
Any further warning type direction was not required. Nor was it in the instant case. The decision in Rogers did not require the direction. Nor do I understand such a case as Regina versus Glencourse [(1995) 78 A Crim R ] to require a warning of the type essentially argued for the appellant. In the particular circumstances of this case what his Honour told the jury (which was not the subject of any request for redirection) could have left the jury in no doubt as to the importance of Millanta to the Crown case.

In my view there is no substance in the second aspect of complaint. The directions given were appropriate and adequate in the circumstances. There was no miscarriage of justice. Leave to argue this second aspect of the ground should be refused.

Ground 2 
His Honour the trial judge failed properly to direct the jury regarding the evidence of lies told by the appellant.

The first aspect concerned the evidence of Detective Sergeant Navin testifying that the appellant had claimed that $15,000 was payment for his work and denied using the name "Roger Rogerson" in conversation with McGain or anyone associated with McGain. In his unsworn statement the appellant explained why he said $15,000 was for "my work" - he said he was confused. He admitted making a conscious decision to lie about "Rogerson" he thought there might be a mate of Rogerson involved.

The trial judge referred to this evidence at (SU 26). It is complained that his Honour failed to provide guidance to the jury regarding the acknowledged lie by emphasising that it was basically a matter going to credibility.

In my view there is no substance in the complaint. There is nothing to suggest that the Crown relied upon this alleged lie as told by the appellant to prove consciousness of guilt on the part of the appellant or to corroborate any piece of evidence. Indeed, the lie(s) told were to be assessed as going to no more than the credit of the appellant. There was no need for the trial judge to provide a direction to the jury on lies: Edwards versus The Queen <case>; [(1993) 178 CLR 193.] Indeed, no such direction was sought, a matter of itself indicating that trial counsel did not consider such was required or appropriate in the circumstances.

There is no substance in this ground and leave to argue it should be refused.

Ground 2A 
The trial judge erred in failing to direct the jury regarding the right to silence.

In the appellant's counsel's submission, it was submitted that when the appellant was asked by police whether he wished to say anything about the charge of attempting to obtain money by deception, he said "No". In his unsworn statement the appellant stated that he had made a conscious decision "not to try to talk my way into explaining that I had in fact done work for
McGain et cetera" since he thought he was "caught in the middle of a load up".

No directions were given at any stage to the jury regarding the right to silence and the prohibition against the drawing of adverse inferences in relation to its exercise. An affidavit sworn by the appellant's trial counsel discloses that his decision not to seek a direction was not a tactical one and that it did not occur to him that such a direction might be necessary. This of itself suggests that it was not a matter of importance in the context of the trial, the issues, the way the defence case was fought and in the context of the whole of the summing-up. If it was of importance it could have been easily corrected. The matter has assumed on appeal an importance that it did not apparently have at the trial. [Rule ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/s4.html) applies in respect of this ground. The appellant has submitted that there was a danger in this case that the jury may have drawn an adverse inference from the fact that the appellant chose not to say anything in response to the allegation that he had attempted to obtain money by deception. He has also submitted that the questioning of the appellant had begun with a reference to enquiries involving "an attempt to obtain an amount of money" from Brian McGain. Then a caution was given. The appellant answered questions. However, it was argued that it was only after he answered these questions that the appellant was informed of an allegation of "attempting to obtain that money by deception". This it was said to be the first reference to an allegation of deception, and that he then declined to say anything. It was submitted that there was a real danger that the jury may have drawn an adverse inference from the fact that the appellant chose not to say anything at that point, that he thereby showed a consciousness of guilt that he had been involved in a deception or at least a consciousness that there had been a deception. Indeed, it was said that the jury may have regarded it as very suspicious that the appellant did not, at that point, ask "what deception are you talking about".

It was also submitted that there was a risk that the jury in resolving the conflicting accounts of the appellant and Millanta wrongly took into account the appellant's refusal to respond to the charge that he had been engaged in deception.

The appellant's submissions should be rejected.

There is nothing to really suggest that the Crown placed any importance on the appellant's so called refusal to say anything in response to the charge. In the circumstances it is difficult to see how the jury could have construed the appellant's failure to answer the last question as being any admission of guilt or otherwise and have drawn an adverse inference, as claimed by the appellant. Indeed, in the light of the answers already given by the appellant in the interview after being appropriately warned, I find it difficult to see how the jury could have construed the appellant's failure to answer the last question as an admission that he was guilty of the offence charged. Nor I might add did trial counsel. Next, the question asked by the Detective was the last question asked in a lengthy record of interview in which the appellant had not exercised any right to silence. The answer itself does not appear to raise the right of silence but appears to have been a simple answer to the question asked. It also appears that it was asked after a decision had been made to charge the appellant.

Indeed, it appears to me that the appellant knew that he had been interviewed in relation to a deception charge and that he consented to answering questions in relation to the offence of deception. The submission that the last question was the first reference to an allegation of deception ignores the evidence of the background to the interview. The appellant was arrested by police shortly after he had taken receipt of $15,000 from McGain. Before he was taken to Five
Dock Police Station a conversation took place between the appellant and a
Detective Owen in which Detective Owen inter alia, told the appellant "We believe that you have just obtained a large sum of money by means of deception" (my emphasis) followed by a warning to which he replied "Yes".
In my view the evidence supports a view that the appellant was aware of the fact that he was being arrested for a charge that involved an allegation of obtaining money by deception, and with this knowledge he was then shortly thereafter interviewed by Detective Navin at the Police Station. Detective
Navin asked a number of questions relating to the allegations made against him to which the appellant also uniformly responded. Having done so it was then that Detective Navin informed the accused that he intended to charge him with the offence of obtaining money by deception and invited a response with the accused refusing and answering "No". The failure of trial counsel in not seeking a supplementary direction is also telling and significant in terms of the sense in which Detective Navin's question was answered.

In my view the appellant's submissions should be rejected. I see no merit in the submission. Indeed, in the circumstances I do not perceive any miscarriage of justice. I would apply [rule ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/s4.html) and refuse leave to rely upon this ground: Regina versus H (CCA 24 October 1994, unreported per Dunford J at pp 18-20); Regina versus Abernethy (CCA, 6
December 1994, unreported).

The second ground should be rejected.

Ground 3 
The conviction is unsafe and unsatisfactory.

As I understand the argument this submission has two aspects.

In the first place it was submitted that the verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory because the cumulative effect of defects in the trial (which the earlier grounds of appeal dealt with) has been to produce a miscarriage of justice notwithstanding that any one of those defects alone may not have had such result: Regina versus Clough [(1992) 28 NSWLR 396] and 498.
However, it was essentially submitted that the verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory because notwithstanding that there was sufficient evidence to sustain a conviction, the quality of the evidence was such that it was not open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt as to the guilt of the accused. As to the concept of a verdict which is unsafe and unsatisfactory having these two distinct connotations - this was examined in the recent decision of this Court in Regina versus Trad & Ors (CCA 19 February 1996, unreported) in which Clough was considered and applied.

The submission that the verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory and produced a miscarriage of justice in the Clough sense should be rejected simply because the defects which, the culmination of which is said to produce that result, are not themselves made out, the other grounds of appeal having been rejected.

In his helpful written submission the appellant has also set forth various considerations in support of this ground. Presumably they were advanced at the trial and rejected by the jury. They do not need to be repeated nor do the supplementary submissions that were advanced at the hearing of the appeal, albeit I do not repeat them. Indeed, in discussing the foregoing grounds of appeal, I have referred at some length to the evidence before the jury. What I have set out above generally makes clear the nature of the evidence, albeit, I have not in terms stated the precise particulars or details relied upon in support of this ground.

The principles according to which an appellate court reviews the verdict of the jury for the purpose of considering whether a conviction was unsafe or unsatisfactory are set out in M versus The Queen [(1994) 181 CLR 487.] 
In the instant case his Honour told the jury that the case was a simple one and as I have said, that it was basically (but not exclusively) a matter of credibility. In particular he directed that the credibility of Millanta was one of "very great importance". I have earlier detailed the extensive directions given in relation to this matter inter alia, again referring to his
Honour's directions at (SU 26-27) to which I have already made reference. The jury saw and heard Millanta. He was extensively cross-examined. Clearly they accepted him. They were given extensive instructions as to how to evaluate his demeanour and his evidence. The appellant did not give evidence at the trial:
Regina versus Blade (CCA 1 May 1991, unreported); Regina versus Dellapatrona [(1993) 31 NSWLR 123] at 146. However, the appellant made an extensive unsworn statement lasting some hours. To this extent the jury had the advantage (denied to us) of fully evaluating and assessing his demeanour. The jury clearly did not accept the appellant. We have not had the advantage of seeing or hearing any of the witnesses at the trial. Clearly in a case such as the present the jury's assessment of a number of witnesses, particularly of
Millanta would have been very important to their ultimate conclusion. The judge even told the jury of such importance. We must evaluate the evidence put before us in written form but we must also take account of the jury's capacity to judge the reliability and truthfulness of witnesses and more particularly
Millanta based on their own observations of the witnesses in the atmosphere of the trial: Regina versus D.J.McC (CCA 28 November 1995, unreported). The jury were presumably prepared to accept the evidence of Millanta beyond reasonable doubt. The matters or considerations raised by the appellant, jointly, severally or in the alternative, do not after independent assessment show that the conviction of the appellant was unsafe or unsatisfactory. I have made an independent examination of the relevant evidence which was before the jury and made my own assessment of the sufficiency and quality of that evidence in order to base my own judgment as to whether the jury ought to have had a reasonable doubt. In my view the jury acting reasonably were particularly entitled to accept the evidence of Millanta and be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the appellant's guilt. Indeed, in my view the quality of such evidence was not such that the jury ought to have entertained a doubt about the guilt of the accused.
 
This ground should be rejected.

In the result I have come to the conclusion that the appeal against conviction should be dismissed.

Severity of Sentence 
In relation to this matter no written submissions were advanced in support of the argument that the sentence was too severe. Oral submissions were entertained by the Court. In my opinion the sentence was appropriate and I state briefly my reasons for this conclusion.

In respect of his conviction, the sentence was for a period of two years, made up of a minimum term of 18 months and an additional term of six months. The maximum penalty is five years imprisonment. In sentencing his Honour stated that the offence was on "any view, a wicked one". His Honour noted that it was a "cruel hoax". It was not suggested that these observations incorrectly and inaccurately summarised the situation. His Honour also found that there was no evidence of remorse.

His Honour considered the various subjective factors. He ultimately had regard to the various subjective features, and the various significant mitigating features. The appellant's health was considered and recommendations made in relation to it. His Honour found no special circumstances. He was not bound to find such. Indeed, it was conceded that there were no special circumstances.

I detect no error of principle in the expressed reasons of the sentencing judge for imposing the sentence. The sentence was within the appropriate range.

In my view the sentence imposed was just and no error in fact or in principle has been shown in Hosking DCJ's reasoning. In my view the application for leave to appeal against sentence should be refused.

The formal orders I would propose are as follows:
The appeal against conviction be dismissed.
Leave to appeal against sentence be refused.
Time spent in custody pending the appeal to count towards the sentence.

HULME J: I agree with the Reasons of Abadee J and the orders that he proposes.
 * * * 
