

Eurocars (Northside) Pty Ltd versus Francis Marketing Pty Ltd and Anor No.
/91 Equity [1995] NSWSC 69 (10 October 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
EQUITY DIVISION
WINDEYER J
HRNG
SYDNEY #DATE 15:9:1995 #ADD 10:10:1995 
Counsel for the Plaintiff      C.R.C. Newlinds 
Solicitors for the Plaintiff    Kemp Strang and Chippindall 
Counsel for the
Defendants     D.E. Dubler 
Solicitors for the Defendants    Corrs Chambers Westgarth
ORDER
Orders made
JUDGE1
WINDEYER
J The plaintiff, Eurocars (Northside) Pty Ltd (Eurocars), seeks rectification of separate agreements made with the respective defendants for the sale to each defendant of a Mazda RX-7 motor car. In the alternative,
Eurocars seeks declarations that under the relevant contracts on their terms each defendant is bound to pay to the plaintiff an additional amount being the amount required to pay out the lease in respect of the traded in vehicle at the date of completion of the agreement, less the amount which was actually provided towards that pay out figure. The second claim was not expressed that way in the summons but that was the intention. The sums in question total $27000.
 
Factual Background
The first defendant is controlled by a Mr Francis. The second defendant is controlled by Mr
Costello. Either the first defendant or Mr Francis was lessee from a finance company of a Calais motor vehicle. At the time in question, namely May 1991, the amount required to pay out the lease was $16846. Mr
Costello or his company was lessee of an Alfa Romeo motor vehicle. The amount required to pay out the lease on that vehicle was $26900.
Both defendants were interested in acquiring new vehicles. Mr Costello called at the Eurocars showroom at Crows Nest on 4 May 1991. He spoke to Mr
Mangan, a car salesman employed by the plaintiffs. It was through Mr Mangan that all negotiations were conducted after that. Mr Costello said he was thinking of purchasing two cars between the partners. He asked the price of a
RX-7 and was told that the advertised price was $58900 plus on road costs.
Costello said that they did not want to pay more than $50000 per vehicle and there were trade-ins involved. He arranged for the two vehicles to be traded in together with a third vehicle which might have been the subject of a trade-in and an additional purchase to be inspected. Mr Mangan attended to inspect those vehicles with a valuer. He there met Mr Francis. He asked about the pay out figures. He was given the correct figure for the Alfa and an approximate figure of $15000 on the Calais. He prepared a quotation.
So that the problem which arose can be understood I set out that quotation. The trade-in figure for the Mazda can be disregarded as the trade-in did not proceed: "QUOTATION
To supply 3 x Mazda RX7 Infini Turbo's 
Cost per unit          $58,990.00
Pre Delivery                     795.00
Business Registration and Stamp
Duty        1,815.00 
On Road                      $61,600.00 x 3 =             $184,800.00
Less Discount                   22,000.00 $162,800.00 
Less Trade ins
Alfa GTV      $15,000.00
Mazda 929      $12,000.00
Holden
Calais    $12,000.00           39,000.00 $123,800.00 
Plus
Minus Equity * Calais       $3,395.00 * Alfa        $9,900.00           13,295.00 $137,095.00
Divide by 3 = $45,698.30   Cost per each RX7 Turbo."
The mistake in this quotation, made by Mr Mangan, was that while giving credit for the trade-in values he did not deduct the full amounts to be paid out on the leases of the traded cars. "Minus equity" represents the difference between the pay out figure and the trade-in value.
Those two figures, on the then information are correct. Without the trade-in allowances of $15000 and $12000 the figures would have been correct. If the "minus equity" heading had been deleted and the pay out figures of $26900 and $15395 inserted in lieu all would have been well. There was some sort of argument that there was no mistake on Eurocars' part but that had no substance whatever. The figures had been checked by Mr Milne, an accountant of the plaintiff. I am satisfied from his evidence that he thought the "minus equity" figure was the lease pay out figure.
A second quote was received, probably on the same day, without the Mazda motor vehicle, Mr Mangan having been told that it would not be involved. That quote was as follows: "To supply 2 x Mazda RX7 Infini
Turbos 
Cost per unit                 $58,990.00
Pre Delivery                    795.00
Business Registration and Stamp Duty       1,815.00 $61,600.00 x
 =                     $123,200.00
Less Discount                  16,000.00 $107,200.00 
Less Trade in
Alfa          $15,000.00
Calais      $12,000.00       $27,000.00 $80,200.00 
Plus Minus Equity 
Alfa          $9,900.00
Calais         $3,395.00        13,295.00 $93,495.00 
Divide by 2 = $46,747.50  Cost per each RX7 Turbo"
Mr Francis was in touch with a friend,
Mr Bore, at the Mazda dealer at
Hornsby. On the evidence what could be described as "good deals" were being done by Mazda dealers at the time on RX-7s which were presumably slow to sell.
At some stage Mr Bore gave a quote it seems of $45500 a vehicle. That was the cash payment required by the dealer but where the responsibility lay for the lease payment is not quite clear. In any event Mr
Costello told Mr Mangan of this other quote, although it seems not the precise figures; Mr Mangan said that he thought that they could match it and after I think consultation with
Mr Milne sent off a final quotation (the 3rd quote) which increased the discount figure to $17946 and reduced the minus equity figure for the Calais to $1846, which on that basis was correct as the lease payout figure was $13846. This brought about a cash cost per vehicle of $45000. The discount can be any combination of manufacturer's bonus to the dealer and dealer's reduction in profit margins. Whatever else was clear about this case it was that all figures in this sort of business are somewhat of a mystery. On the evidence there is no regular basis for these adjustments; many deals are done which involve a loss to the dealer on a particular transaction.
After the second quote was received on 10 May Mr Costello confirmed with
Mangan the effect of that quote. He said: "I don't understand these figures on your facsimile. Are you saying that if we give you a cheque for $46747.50 for each car, hand over our car keys and registration papers, you will give us two
Mazda RX-7s Infini's and pay out the lease residuals on the Alfa and Calais?".
Mr Mangan said "Yes, that's right subject to working out what the precise lease payout figures are. Can I have the lease contract numbers so I can check the lease figures with the leasing company's". It is obvious that he did check those figures as the right ones later appeared.
After he got the third quote on 13 May Mr Costello rang Mr Mangan again to confirm the figures. As I have said by then the precise pay out figures had been checked. Before this happened
Mr Bore had either been told of the Eurocar quotation details or had seen a copy of one of the quotations. He discussed it with this superior, Mr Potter, who could not understand how the deal could be done. He told Francis that he could not match it. I accept that he said to
Francis at the end of the conversation "If you find Eurocars has made a mistake come back and see us". Mr Francis did not accept that was said or certainly did not remember it having been said but I accept the evidence of Mr
Bore and of Mr Potter that it was. As Mr Potter said, it was a customary phrase used when Mazda Hornsby had missed out on a sale.
On 14 May Costello accepted the Eurocar quotation in a conversation with
Mangan. He said he would fax an order. Mr Mangan however said that a special order form was required and that he would bring it down which he did. Mr
Costello was present but Mr Francis was not. Mangan provided the two order forms. The figures on the order form were set out in a schedule on the front page. I set out below those for Mr Costello, or the second defendant, with the ones on the Francis quotation shown in brackets: 
The Schedule 
Price of Goods    
Terms of Settlement
Sale Price   $58990    Deposit     1815.00
Cash Delivery .00 .00
Dealer charge   795
Trade-in allowance 15000.00 (12000.00)
Registration   1815  Other allowances  11500.00 (6446.00) .00 (63446.00)
Total price of goods     61600 Less trade-in payment 9900.00 (1846.00) .00 (61600.00)
The figures were all completed except the deposit. It was agreed that the registration fees would be paid by way of deposit so that the total amount was $3630. That explains the crossing out of the $45000 figure and the substitution of the figure of $43185 which I have shown above. Mr Costello said that he did not understand the figures. Mangan said that the columns had to match and the figures had to be apportioned differently from the quote to achieve this. He confirmed that $45000 was what to be paid. On page 2 of the
Costello document was a trade-in offer for the Alfa.
The price was left blank.
The encumbrance of the leasing company was noted with a pay out figure of $24900, that being filled in when the document was signed, the leasing documents being handed over to Mangan. Neither the trade in price nor the final pay out figure were completed on the Francis document.
The order contract was subject to certain conditions.
Condition 2(d) was as follows: "2(d) On or before taking delivery of the goods I shall pay to you the balance payable as shown in the Schedule and shall deliver the Trade-in (if any) to you and shall assign to you the benefit of its existing registration and insurance.
Property in the Trade-in shall pass to you upon delivery. If at the time of delivery of the Trade-in to you the amount required to discharge any encumbrance on the Trade-in is more or less than the Trade-in payout shown in the Schedule you may adjust the balance payable set out in the Schedule on page 1 to allow for the difference. if the Trade-in is not at the time of its delivery to you in substantially the same condition as at the date hereof, fair wear and tear only excepted, you may reduce the Trade-in allowance shown in the Schedule on page 1 by a reasonable amount having regard to the deterioration in the
Trade-in, but if I have not taken delivery of the goods and I am not prepared to accept such reduction, you may decline to accept delivery of the Trade-in, rescind the contract and retain the goods without incurring any liability to me".
 .
Costello asked what this meant and whether it meant that if the car were damaged before delivery the price could be adjusted. Mangan confirmed that and said that the payment for the Calais might have to be adjusted as a couple of monthly payments had not been acknowledged.
Mr Costello signed both forms. It was not suggested he did not have authority of Mr Francis to sign for the 1st defendant.
 .
The order form at its foot contained an acknowledgment by the purchaser that it constituted the entire agreement, that all material parts were completed, and that it was not binding on the dealer until the form of acceptance was signed by the dealer. Neither form was ever so signed. In the long run I do not think anything turns on that. The parties proceeded on the basis that its terms were the terms of the contract and I should say on the clear basis that Mr Mangan had said that the deal was that which was set out in his previous faxes. It was clear that a formal written document was required. In effect he confirmed all that mattered that Mr Costello said and that he had intended the deal to be that the sum of $45000 would be paid for each car, that the cars would be handed over and that the dealer would pay out the amounts due to the leasing company.
On 17 May 1991 Costello and Francis went to collect the cars. Mr Costello saw a bill of sale for his car prepared for $60000. Mr Mangan said to him "Don't worry. Here is the cheque requisition to Perpetual Leasing" -that was for $24900.
The old cars to be traded were handed over. The new vehicles were handed over and accepted.
On 21 May Mr Mangan rang Francis to say that he had made an error. He said that there had been an underpayment of $27000. He said he would send a fax which he did. It was clear enough from this where the mistake was made. On 
May Mr Pritchard of Eurocars rang Mr Costello saying there had been an error and they were owed $27000. Costello said that he did not agree and that $45000 had always been the figure and that he would rather give the cars back and call it off. Mr Pritchard said that could not be done, apparently because the traded in vehicles were "the new finance company's property". That turned out not to be the fact and I do not accept the deal could not have been rescinded by agreement.
There was then correspondence and a meeting to attempt to resolve the question without satisfactory result. It was said by the plaintiff that this showed some sort of intractable behaviour and quick fastening upon purported rights; and in some way that showed that the defendants had always known of the mistake. I do not accept that as the clear evidence is that the defendants were prepared to "unwind" the transactions.
 .
The plaintiff company did not pay out the leasing companies. I was told from the bar table without objection that a court order was obtained for possession of one of the motor cars and the other was eventually returned to the leasing company. The first defendant then paid a total of $3612 on the
Calais. It is not quite clear what amount has been paid out to the finance company by the second defendant but it appears that the amount paid out is $553 and the amount due is $16159.73 up to 9 August 1995. There is a claim for interest on the $553 at Supreme Court rates up to 9 August 1995 of $262. There is no contest about these figures and the precise amounts could if necessary be worked out in due course as a result of my judgment.
 
Pleaded Claims
The claim of the plaintiff is in effect for the $27000 plus interest either by way of rectification of the contract or by way of an amount due pursuant to clause (d) of the contract.
By second amended cross claim the defendants mix both cross claims and defences to the plaintiff's claim which is made by summons. The cross claim is a document in form of a pleading. The defences inappropriately raised by way of cross claim are: that the plaintiff is estopped from asserting the effect of the order form contract is different from the contract alleged in paragraphs 2 and 3 of the cross claim relating to the agreement made, by acquisition of the facsimile offer - this really goes to the 2(d) claim.
That any right of adjustment pursuant to clause 2(d) merged on conveyance of the defendants' interests in the vehicles traded in;
That acceptance of the traded in vehicles and the payment of $86390 and delivery of the new vehicles on 17 May was by way of final account stated and in full satisfaction of any rights under the agreement including any rights under clause 2(d).

In addition to this the defendant resisted rectification.
 .
The true cross claim was based upon a contract represented by the facsimile of 13 May 1991 and its acceptance under the implied terms relating to the sale of the vehicle to be traded in and the payment out of the lessees by the plaintiff and breach of that contract. Alternatively, it was said that if the order form documents constituted the contracts they were entered into upon the representations of Mr Mangan that they were in conformity with and consistent with the agreement come to by acceptance of the 3rd quotation, that the cross claimants relied upon such representations which were misleading and deceptive and acted to their detriment in acting as they did. Damages are therefore claimed under the Trade Practices Act.
On the basis of the above facts I turn to the plaintiff's claim.
 
Rectification
It was first submitted that there was a mutual mistake in that both parties intended the figure in the schedule opposite "less trade-in payment" to reflect the amount actually due. I do not accept that. Mr Milne never saw that figure until it was too late. As far as the evidence shows Mr Mangan intended the figure to be the one written and intended the deal to be the one written and so did Mr Costello and Mr Francis. Mutual mistake is not made out as a basis for rectification.
The claim for unilateral mistake presents more difficulty. I am satisfied that there was a mistake in that the plaintiff did not intend to contract on the basis that it did. It did not intend to make a loss and it was mistaken in that while Mr Mangan wrote down his understanding of the contracts so far as the plaintiff was concerned the mistake was in thinking that the "minus equity" figure was the balance due to the finance company on the cars agreed to be traded in. While from a strict point of view there is a lot to be said for Mr Dubler's able argument that there was no mistake in that what was written down was what was intended to be written down it is too late to turn the tide back to enable that argument to be upheld. The plaintiff misunderstood the deal it was making and was mistaken in entering upon it.
That I think is obvious enough.
Rectification is not generally available in the case of unilateral mistake. But it is clearly established that rectification on the basis of unilateral mistake is available where the other party actually knew of the mistake - not when the other party ought to have known of it. A. Roberts and
Co Ltd versus Leicestershire County
Council [(1961) Ch 555]; Majestic Homes Pty Ltd versus Wise [(1978) Qd R .] This law was not contested. The question is whether or not there was the necessary knowledge whether regarded as that, sharp practice or equitable fraud such that rectification should be ordered.
The plaintiff relied on a number of matters as indicating knowledge of the mistake. These were: the obviously good deal which could hardly have been real; the continued questioning of Mr Mangan about its terms; the parting words of Mr Bore about a mistake; the knowledge of Mr Costello and Mr Francis of the actual pay out figures; the fact that other quotes had been obtained which obviously would have been less beneficial to the purchasers.
I do not consider the plaintiff has established the necessary knowledge in the defendants of a mistake. First it must be remembered that it was not obvious to Mr Mangan whose job it was to bring about this type of deal; secondly the fact that the agreement was confirmed does not to my mind indicate knowledge that it was a mistaken offer but rather that it was the actual offer; thirdly it was on the query being made about the schedule figures that Mr Mangan said they had to balance and the deal was as he had faxed previously; and fourthly whatever other quotes had been obtained it is clear from the evidence that the way the figures are manipulated in these transactions - I do not say in any way wrongly - a purchaser would not be likely to know what was being done. All that a purchaser wanted to know was the ultimate result. That result, as Mr Mangan said, was the requirement to pay $45000. The purpose of the bill of sale price being shown to be $60000 was quite unexplained. The conduct after the mistake was raised was, I consider, no indication of knowledge or sharp practice. The offer of unwinding the agreement is against this. The claim for rectification fails.
I should add that in any event as a matter of discretion the Court would not have readily granted rectification without imposing some conditions. That is because an order for rectification as sought in the summons with judgment as sought in the summons would result in the defendants between them paying the sum of $27000 without the plaintiffs carrying out their part of the bargain to pay out the leases, that no longer being possible. Incapacity to perform the contract sought to be rectified is no longer a certain bar to rectification; see the discussion of Borrowman versus Rossell <case>; [(1864) 16 CB (NS) 58] at 345; and Meagher Gummow and Lehane, Equity: Doctrine and Remedies 3rd Ed at 682,
Greig and Davis, Law of Contract, 5th Cumulative
Supplement 235; but that does not mean that in all cases rectification will be granted. In the present case rectification would result in an additional sum of $27000 in cash becoming payable to the plaintiffs pursuant to the rectified contract yet the plaintiff would no longer be in a position to perform its part of the contract. It might have been possible to seek common law damages for breach of the rectified contract but I do not understand how these could be calculated in the way they were by Mr Milne which appears to overlook the fact that part of the purchase price was to be satisfied by the value of the vehicles traded in yet such vehicles were ultimately repossessed by the true owners. The conditions under which any rectification order would have had to be granted would at the very least have required more detailed consideration than was given to them.
 
Clause 2(d)
The plaintiff says that it can rely on clause 2(d) and its demand to claim the additional total of $27000. I do not think this is correct. It is perfectly clear that the plaintiff was well aware of the pay out figures whether those in the schedule were correct or not. It had been told of them and in fact the Costello contract included the pay out figure. The schedule figures were, as Mr Mangan said, balancing figures to correspond to the agreed mistaken deal. Mr Mangan told the defendants what was involved under clause (d) and as they had enquired and accepted that explanation, which is consistent with the balancing explanation and the statement that $45000 was the cash figure to be paid, the plaintiff cannot now be heard to say clause (d) has some other meaning. It was said by the plaintiff, but not very loudly, on this estoppel point, that there was no detriment; but that I think mistakes the position. The detriment was in entering into the contract on the represented basis. The evidence so far as it goes is that there would have been no contract if a higher cash payment was required. It is one of the cases where to afford proper relief equity would require the representation to be made good.
It is not now really necessary for me to deal with the questions of accord and satisfaction and merger. So far as the former is concerned while there is no doubt everybody thought the deal was done and completed that was on the basis of its being as represented by Mr Mangan. Without that it would be difficult to say there was consideration given for any waiver of clause (d) rights, if those rights remained after completion of the transaction.
As to merger the defendants said that any rights under clause 2(d) merged on the conveyance of their interests in the traded in vehicles on 17 May 1991.
The principle of merger is well enough settled; see Knight Sugar Co Ltd versus The
Alberta Railway and Irrigation Co [(1938) 1 All ER 266]; but the principle is that the provisions of the executory contract merge in the deed of conveyance; they do not merge as a result of execution or completion of the contract.
During the hearing I suggested it was a doctrine restricted to contracts for the sale of land completed by deed of conveyance but that is not so; see
Leggot versus Barrott [(1880) 15 Ch 306] where a deed of dissolution of partnership relating to personal estate was involved. However it is not a doctrine under which the rights under the contract could be said to merge on delivery of the vehicles and handing over signed transfers of registration papers by both sides.
It follows that the summons should be dismissed.
 
Cross Claim
The primary cross claim, as I have said, is for damages for breach of the contract made up of the acceptance of the 3rd faxed offer together with the unexceptional implied terms of delivery up of the trade in vehicles and the payment of the lease companies. The damages claimed are those arising from failure to pay out the leases.
I should perhaps set out more fully why I do not consider the documents relied upon constituted the contract between the parties. The facsimile quote of 13 September was a combined quotation yet it was clear separate contracts were needed for each defendant even if incorporated into one document. Next,
Mr Mangan made it quite clear a formal document was required and the defendants accepted that. Mr Costello and Mr Francis were both clearly aware, by their questions about the later document, that it was the one which contained the contractual terms. The fact it was not signed by the plaintiff does not I think bear on this situation. The parties, in their negotiations after the problem became apparent, never suggested those were not the terms which subsumed those agreed in the earlier discussions.
An alternative claim is made in the cross claim that, if the signed offer documents constituted the contracts then those contracts were entered into in reliance upon the representation of Mr
Mangan that they were in accordance with the terms of the accepted quotation. That is I think made out. However in so far as that claim is made out, and the claim is for misleading and deceptive conduct in breach of [s52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the [Trade Practices Act 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) and for damages under [s82](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s82.html) of that Act, the question is what damages have been suffered as a result of such reliance or in more conventional terms what is the detriment. There is no evidence to establish that a similar deal was available from any other source; in fact the only relevant evidence was from one other dealer who said that such a deal was not available, at least from that source.
As there was some evidence of the defendants going to other dealers, although for other types of cars, it can be concluded that no deal was available which the defendants thought as good as that offered by Eurocars. Damages on this claim could not be the amounts required to be paid to the lessor companies because they would have had to have been paid in any event. It would require evidence of loss on the entire transaction for the [s52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) claim to lead to quantifiable damages. That would require evidence of value of the newly purchased cars which was certainly not necessarily $45000. The cross claim fails.
I confess to some reluctance in coming to this conclusion although it would seem to adjust the claims on some reasonably fair basis. But the courts have been warned against that; see Riverlate Properties Ltd versus Paul [(1975) 1 Ch .] My conclusion is reached on the basis of the pleaded cross claim. That is to some extent an unsatisfactory document as the added paragraphs BA, 8B and
C are really defences to the plaintiff's claim on the summons and have nothing to do with the cross claim.
However the cross claim as originally pleaded without those paragraphs seeks damages for breach of a particular contract which I have found-was not the contract entered into between the parties. The position might have been different had the claim been for damages for breach of the contract subject to the unsuccessful application for rectification.
It follows that the summons and the cross claim should be dismissed.
Rather than dismiss both with costs it might be more sensible to give to the defendants a proportionate amount of the costs on the summons as far more time was devoted to it than the cross claim and to make no order as to costs on the cross claim and I will hear submissions on that.
I certify that this and preceding IF pages are a true copy of the reasons for judgment herein of The Honourable Mr Justice Windeyer.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/69.html  
