

Regina versus Forsyth Matter No 60443/97 [1997] NSWSC 667 (19 December 1997) 
Regina versus David John Forsyth /97 December 1997 
Grove J, James J, Simpson J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales 
Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal from District Court (Shillington DCJ) 
FILE NO: 60443/97 
DELIVERED: Friday 19 December 1997 
HEARING DATE: Friday 12 December 1997 
PARTIES: REGINA versus DAVID JOHN FORSYTH 
JUDGMENT OF: Grove J, James J, Simpson J 
COUNSEL 
APPELLANT: A J Bellanto QC & B Rowe 
RESPONDENT: W G Dawe QC 
SOLICITORS 
APPELLANT: Somerville & Co 
RESPONDENT: S E O'Connor 
RESULT: (By majority) Appeal allowed; new trial ordered 
CATCHWORDS 
CRIMINAL LAW & PROCEDURE - SEXUAL ASSAULT - JURY VERDICT NOT UNSAFE AND
UNSATISFACTORY - REFUSAL BY TRIAL JUDGE TO DISCHARGE JURY - EXCEPTIONAL
CIRCUMSTANCES - POSSIBLE INFLUENCE ON DELIBERATIONS BY JURORS OF MEDIA
COVERAGE OF MATTERS CLOSE TO SUBJECT MATTER OF TRIAL 
NO OF PAGES: 30 
REGINA versus DAVID JOHN FORSYTH 
The appellant was convicted upon a single count of sexual intercourse with a child aged ten or eleven years. The offence consisted of an act of fellatio. The trial reached the point of jury retirement for deliberation after one and a half days. On the afternoon of the second day the report of the Royal Commission into the N.S.W. Police Service on its reference to matters concerning paedophilia was delivered and there was very extensive media coverage on the topic on that and following days. The jury was allowed to separate at intervals during its deliberations which extended over that afternoon and the next day, reaching a verdict shortly before lunch on the day after. 
HELD: On assessment by the appellate court of the sufficiency and quality of the evidence it should not be concluded that the jury acting reasonably ought to have had a doubt about the guilt of the appellant and the verdict was not in that sense unsafe and unsatisfactory. (By James and Simpson, JJ) The exceptional conjunction of circumstances regarding the allegation in the count and the thrust and extent of media coverage upon matters allied and similar to that allegation led to the conclusion that the exercise of discretion to refuse discharge of the jury had miscarried and there should be a new trial.
 (By Grove J, dissenting) The chronology of events did not lead to a conclusion that the trial judge's discretion miscarried and it would be entirely speculative to associate the verdict with media attention to broader issues.

REGINA versus DAVID JOHN FORSYTH 
JUDGMENT 
GROVE J: David John Forsyth was convicted on a single count of sexual intercourse with a child aged between ten and sixteen years after a trial before Judge Shillington QC and a jury in the Sydney District Court. The appellant is a man of mature years having been born on 17 August 1923 and had no prior convictions. He had retired from employment as an accountant in a public company. He resided with his mother until approximately 1995 when she, aged in her late nineties, moved to a nursing home in the suburb of Chatswood. Thereafter the appellant resided alone in a unit in the adjoining suburb of Artarmon. He is a man of comfortable means and answered affirmatively to questions by his counsel at trial as to whether he had "accessible funds in a savings bank account in excess of a couple of hundred thousand dollars." 
The charge against the appellant related to a single act of fellatio upon a boy whose first name was Clinton and who was aged ten or eleven years. The complainant could not specify the exact date of offence and his birthday fell in the range of time during which it was said to have occurred, hence the relative imprecision about his age. He was aged twelve when he gave evidence at the trial.

The only witnesses at trial were the complainant and the appellant and a police officer who gave evidence of conversations with the appellant after his arrest in April 1996. The appellant gave evidence that a number of young people used to come to his unit and ask for money and he said he gave it to them in response to claims of need "because I had plenty of money to give them". One of the persons who imposed upon the appellant in this fashion was called Daniel and he was well known to him. Daniel was in the complainant's stepbrother. On at least one occasion Daniel, probably with others, stole money and jewellery from the appellant's premises. He may have gained access by climbing up a drainpipe and at some point the appellant placed barbed wire around that pipe. He also put up a notice addressed to Daniel telling him not to come around.

The complainant testified that he had first met the appellant when he and his brother called to sell chocolates. The evidence is not elaborate but it is reasonable to assume that what was being suggested was the sort of chocolates that are variously sold for fund raising purposes. The complainant said that on a later occasion he called on his own to see whether the appellant would give him some money. He said he knocked on the door and was admitted after which the appellant locked the door. He said he requested and went to the bathroom to get a drink and then the appellant took him to the bedroom where he pulled down his pants and sucked his penis. He said that the appellant held his arms against his hips so that he could not move them. He said that the appellant removed his "pants and undies" and that after the incident he just ran and unlocked the door and went home. He went to bed and waited for his brother to come home. He testified that the appellant had given him money on previous occasions totalling about $150.

The appellant when questioned by police denied that he knew the complainant by name. In his evidence he said that he did not know the face of the complainant. The complainant had given evidence by video link and his reference was to the face which he had seen at trial on the screen. In cross examination he conceded that at some point he came to know that Daniel had a brother. It may be said that the evidence of the appellant appeared somewhat confused in his explanations as to non recognition of names and faces and by inference attaching names to faces. It was made clear at trial however that the complainant's name was Clinton and that he was the stepbrother of Daniel.
Included in the cross examination was the following passage of evidence: "Q. Certainly Daniel had been in your flat on a number of occasions? 
A. Yes.

Q. On a number of those occasions you gave him money? 
A. Yes.

Q. I suggest also that the boy Clinton had been in your flat? 
A. Yes.

Q. And on three different occasions you gave him money? 
A. Yes.

Q. Approximately $150? 
A. Maybe.

Q. You don't deny that Clinton was in your flat? 
A. No.

Q. And, indeed, in 1995 there was an occasion that Clinton was in your flat on his own with you, wasn't there? 
A. He used - when he - he would have walked in the door and waited for me to give him money.

Q. And he was there by himself? 
A. Dawson would have been downstairs waiting for him.

Q. There was an occasion when Clinton was in your flat with you by yourself, that's correct, isn't it? 
A. When I opened the door he'd walk in and stand and wait for me to give him the money. That's the only time he was there. He'd walk in, by himself, but he always came with Dawson who used to make him come to get - I found out he used to make him come to get the money." 
Dawson is also a reference to Daniel.

The appellant relies upon two grounds of appeal:
That the verdict is unsafe and unsatisfactory, and
That the trial judge erred in not discharging the jury upon defence counsel's application on Wednesday morning 27 August 1997 (during the jury's deliberation).

Where a ground such a ground 1 is raised the duty of this Court to assess the evidence both as to sufficiency and quality has been recently restated by courts of authority on several occasions and there is no need to dilate upon it. The test to be applied has also been expressed with some variety of articulation but it is clear that in essence this Court must assess whether the jury acting reasonably ought to have entertained a doubt as to the guilt of the appellant.

A number of specific matters have been adverted to on behalf of the appellant contributing, it was contended, to support the first ground.

It is said that the jury's task was circumscribed in the manner in which the complainant gave evidence via the video facility. The giving of evidence in that fashion is expressly authorized by law. Senior counsel for the appellant adverted to the inability of the jury to view the whole person thus restricting any perception of the demeanour of the witness. Senior counsel for the Crown pointed to the enhancement of the size of the face on the video screen and the consequent capacity for gauging and assessing facial expressions. There are obviously differences between appearance of a witness in the flesh and on a screen and I would attribute to the legislature an anticipation of those differences. As the counter submissions demonstrate, utilization of the video link may alter some of the incidents available for appreciation of witness demeanour but I would reject the submission on behalf of the appellant that it should be concluded that evidence given in that fashion should, by reason of the manner of its being given, be assessed as of lesser cogency than that of a witness appearing in the flesh. It can be observed that arrangements were made for documents and photographs to be placed before the witness for the purpose of both examination in chief and cross examination and no complaint about use of the facility was raised before the trial judge.

It is stated that there was no corroboration and no complaint. As to the latter there was a ruling by the presiding judge before empanelment concerning this matter but it is accurate to state that there was no evidence of complaint before the jury. Similarly it is accurate to state that there was no corroboration of the complainant's evidence. There is no legal requirement that there be corroboration and the situation was made clear to the jury in his Honour's charge to them. In cases such as Regina versus WEC CCA unreported 23
May 1994 observations have been made that insistence upon proof beyond reasonable doubt will often have the practical result of making it difficult to sustain a conviction when it comes down to a conflict between the sworn testimony of a complainant and that of an accused. That observation is far from saying however that it is not open to a jury to accept the evidence of a complainant to the necessary standard. Credibility may be strengthened by circumstance.

Next it was stated that the evidence of the complainant was interspersed with periods of crying and what was described as verbal abuse at the cross examiner. Although a reading of the transcript reveals that the complainant did become upset from time to time and that he did use vulgar language he was nevertheless a twelve year old boy and although seen by the jury on a video screen they were undoubtedly in a suitable position to make a judgment about whether his evidence should be discounted for any reason associated with this complaint.

A number of inconsistent statements are scheduled as having been made or acknowledged by the complainant. Each one of these was traversed in cross examination. Each one of them related not to the central incident of sexual assault but to some peripheral matter of detail relating to the complainant's knowledge of the activities of other persons, the dealing with money or the presence of persons from time to time. On one occasion he responded that he was muddled and I see no reason why a jury might not in the context of reading the persistent, although I emphasise in no way improper, cross examination have taken that view of the apparent inconsistencies but have been convinced of the truth of the essential complaint.

Emphasis was placed upon the concession by the complainant that he had told lies to the appellant. These related to circumstances about which it was apparently hoped that he would continue distributing money. A jury may well have disapproved that conduct but found it useful in demonstrating but there was a pattern of contact between the young boy and the elderly man which would provide an opportunity for sexual molestation if the latter were so minded. It is to be observed that these matters were raised in the context of the appellant's denials that he recognized the complainant. That is not to suggest that mere opportunity is incriminating but to show that the mere telling of the lies by the complainant was not in the circumstances necessarily destructive of his credit.

Reference was made to questions asked by the police officer of the appellant as to whether he had threatened the complainant with a knife. The evidence of the conversation wherein the appellant denied that matter was not objected to at trial. It was apparently sought to be used by the defence in order to demonstrate that the complainant was the source of the police officer's question and that having not given evidence about it to the jury his credibility could thereby be diminished.

Whilst a criminal trial is by no means an occasion whereby the jury is invited to make a selection between the version of a complainant and the version of an accused, it is not insignificant to observe that the confusion which is sought to be examined with detailed particularity in the case of the complainant was in this case somewhat matched by the confusion manifest in the evidence of the appellant. No doubt the jury was able to take into account that on the one hand they were dealing with a twelve year old child and on the other, a man of seventy four years. There is no suggestion that the jury were directed other than in appropriate terms to apply the onus and standard of proof and for my part I do not regard the matters of detail now being canvassed as provocative of necessary doubt in the mind of a jury about the guilt of the appellant.

It should be observed that there was detail which was capable of being seen by a jury as supportive of the complainant's assertion. There could have been no reason for him to be in the appellant's bedroom as opposed to other parts of his premises if he merely called to obtain money as the appellant (on the assumption that the complainant was one of the young persons who imposed upon him from time to time) testified. There was in the bedroom a wooden crocodile which the complainant was able to describe. Some time was spent at trial investigating whether this crocodile could be seen from other parts of the house or from the doorway but this was a jury question. It might also be noted that although the appellant had denied knowing the complainant by face or by name, yet had given the evidence which I have above set out, the learned trial judge declined to give the jury a direction that lies by the appellant might manifest a consciousness of guilt. That ruling was of course favourable to the appellant but it would follow that the jury therefore were invited to decide whether they were convinced to the necessary standard of the truth of the complaint in quite a direct context.

I have had the opportunity to read the transcript of this relatively short trial in its entirety. That examination does not lead me to any sense of unease about the jury verdict and I would not uphold the first ground.

The second ground relates to a coincidence of timing derived from the retirement by the jury shortly before 1 pm on Tuesday 26 August 1997, their dispersal later on that afternoon and their resumption of deliberations on
Wednesday 27 August 1997. On the afternoon of Tuesday 26 August the extended reference to the Royal Commission into the New South Wales Police Service concerning paedophilia was the subject of the delivery of a report by the
Royal Commissioner. As is demonstrated by the annexures to the affidavit of
Robert John Picone sworn 10 November 1997 there was considerable publicity about the topic of paedophilia deriving from the report on both of the dates in August that I have mentioned, particularly the latter. The material exhibited to the affidavit shows extensive coverage by print, radio and television dissemination.

Application was made by counsel on the morning of Wednesday 27th to discharge the jury on the ground that there had been what was described as this saturation coverage of paedophilia at a delicate stage of the jury's deliberation.

The presiding judge declined to discharge the jury. This was a discretionary judgment for him to make in the circumstances. I am unable to discern any basis upon which this Court should find that his discretion has miscarried. It is not suggested that there was any mention of the appellant's trial nor of the allegation against him in any of the media coverage. In giving his ruling
Shillington DCJ said: "I must say that in my reasonably long experience in the criminal courts juries do follow the directions they are given. They do consider the case in hand, they are not diverted by general information of the nature which I have referred to and I have no hesitation in refusing the application." 
His Honour is a very experienced judge and I see no reason to dissent from his remarks. As he did, I see no reason to conclude that the jury may have been diverted from their task by the ventilation of general matters of community interest and concern.

It was argued that appreciation of the risk of miscarriage was fortified by "difficulty" which the jury had in reaching agreement. I chronicle some events. On 26 August jury first retired to deliberate at 12.45 pm. At 3.36 pm they sent a note to the presiding judge indicating that they were undecided.
His Honour foreshadowed that he would give them a direction and raised the matter of whether they wished to continue or return the following day. The jury returned to discuss the matter for five minutes (3.27 pm to 3.32 pm) and asked to be "dismissed". His Honour gave a direction as specified in Black v
The Queen [1993 179 CLLR 44] and the foreman of the jury indicated then that they would return on the following day. The jury then separated.

On the following morning the application to discharge was made, adverting to the matters now the subject of ground 2.

At 10.17 am the jury were brought in to respond to their request for the transcript of the evidence of the complainant and the police officer. It was supplied shortly thereafter.

At 3.41 pm the foreman reported that they had made progress. A juror commented that they were exhausted. The jury separated at 3.44 pm.

The following morning there was a request from the jury for the transcript of the appellant's evidence. Some discussion about arranging transcription occurred and counsel for the appellant submitted that the evidence should be in the same form as the other material, that is in writing, rather than being read from shorthand notes. The record does not go beyond this but it was not suggested that the transcription was not made and sent to the jury.

At 1.15 pm the jury returned its verdict.

Far from suggesting that the jury were diverted from their task by what was described as saturation media coverage about paedophilia the above chronicle strongly suggests an appropriate focus upon the task in hand. Before verdict the jury effectively obtained the entire transcript for analysis. As is revealed in the affidavit of Mr Picone and the documents exhibited to it, the media coverage was at its most extensive (and freshest) immediately following delivery of the report on 26th August. On 27th and 28th August the jury made the transcript requests.

I consider it entirely speculative to associate the jury's verdict with the concentration of media attention on the broader issue.

I would not sustain the second ground of appeal.

In my opinion the appeal against conviction should be dismissed.

Leave to appeal against sentence was sought. The appellant was sentenced to a total term of two years. Shillington DCJ found that there were special circumstances within the meaning of [s5](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/s5.html) (2) of the [Sentencing Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/) and divided the sentence into a minimum term of six months penal servitude with an additional term of eighteen months. He directed that the appellant be released on parole at the expiry of the minimum term.

It is not submitted that his Honour made any factual error concerning sentence. The argument was centred upon the proposition that the assessment of total term of two years penal servitude against a prescribed statutory maximum of eight years was, in all the circumstances, manifestly excessive.

The need for deterrence of those who would prey upon children scarcely requires reiteration.

In a careful written submission counsel for the appellant drew attention to what the claim to be features which called for appellate intervention. These were listed as follows: "(a) An isolated act, not part of a series of acts of sexual misconduct.

The applicant did not seek out the boy. On the contrary the boy frequented the applicant's flat asking for money.

The brother of the boy had broken and entered the applicant's flat and stolen money and jewellery. The boy received some of the proceeds.

The act of fellatio is not as serious as anal intercourse.

There is no evidence of harm to the boy either physical or psychological.
No victim impact evidence was tendered.

The sentencing Judge accepted that although relatively innocent the boy was perhaps `street wise'.

The applicant is `elderly' and somewhat restricted in gait. He is 74 years old.

He has served a period in custody as a result of this offence.

He has no prior convictions.

He has served his country in military service.

He has maintained a forty-six year work history with Burns Philp.

I do not comment on all the above however it is difficult to perceive that the complainant's receiving some part of the proceeds of his step-brother's apparent crime (the evidence referred to $10) would be germane to appropriate punishment of the appellant for his offence. I would agree that, generally speaking, an act of fellatio is not as serious as an act of (forced) anal intercourse but the relevance of that observation in this case is obscure.

It is not suggested that the judge at first instance omitted to take any appropriate factor into account. Allowing for the matters above listed I would regard the total term as high but not outside the range of the sound exercise of discretion. It was submitted that were this Court to intervene a sentence should be substituted which would not involve the appellant's being returned to serve any full time custody beyond the sixteen days already served. I would observe that such a conclusion would imply that sound sentencing discretion should not encompass full time custody even for a relatively short period where a man of advanced years with no prior conviction committed an offence such as this against a child. If that be intended, I would not endorse that proposition.

In my opinion, therefore, the appeal against conviction should be dismissed.
The appellant should have leave to appeal against sentence but that appeal should also be dismissed.

Regina versus David John FORSYTH 
JUDGMENT 
JAMES J: I have had the advantage of reading in draft both the judgment of Grove J and the judgment of Simpson J. I agree with both of their Honours that the first ground of appeal, that the verdict of the jury was unsafe and unsatisfactory (in the sense in which that expression is used in such cases as M versus The Queen [(1994) 181 CLR 487)] should be rejected. 
The second ground of appeal as stated in the appellant's grounds of appeal was "that the trial judge erred in not discharging the jury upon defence counsel's application on Wednesday morning 27 August 1997 (during the jury's deliberation)".

An application for a discharge of the jury having been made at the trial and having been refused by the trial judge, a question for this Court is whether the refusal by the trial judge to discharge the jury led to a miscarriage of justice. See for example R versus GAC (unreported Court of Criminal Appeal 1
April 1997). A related question which, in my opinion, arises in the present case is whether the verdict of the jury, although not unsafe in the sense in which that expression is used in the first ground of appeal, should nevertheless be regarded as unsafe on other grounds. For different meanings of "unsafe", as applying to verdicts by juries, see for example R versus Clough [(1992) 28 NSWLR 396] especially at 406-408. I would regard the further questions I have referred to as falling within the argument which was addressed to the
Court in relation to the second ground of appeal.

I have concluded that because of the extraordinary combination of circumstances referred to by Simpson J in her judgment the jury's verdict of guilty should be regarded as unsafe and that the appeal against conviction should be upheld. In my opinion, there is an unacceptable likelihood that some member or members of the jury, who were not prepared to find the appellant guilty on the afternoon of Tuesday 26 August, ultimately did so, two days later, partly as a result of the publicity which had in the meantime been given to the publication of the Royal Commission's report.

An important matter in the present case (but by no means the only important matter) is the scale of the publicity which was given to the Royal
Commission's report, which far exceeded, by a factor of many times, the publicity which would ordinarily be given to a speech by a politician or a public figure or remarks by some media commentator about some aspect of criminal justice. In the present case, unlike many other cases in which prejudicial material is published during a trial, it is certain that many (I would think all) members of the jury would have seen, read or heard some of the publicity and I think it highly probable that members of the jury would have talked about the Royal Commission report among themselves.

I am conscious that the system of trial by jury depends on juries being relied upon to comply with the directions of law given to them by trial judges and I am also conscious of remarks made from time to time by both trial judges and appeal courts expressing confidence in the capacity of juries faithfully to comply with the directions they are given. In the present case the trial judge, in refusing the application for a discharge of the jury, expressed confidence that juries follow directions which they are given by trial judges and "are not diverted by general information" of the kind to which counsel for the appellant at the trial had referred the trial judge in support of his application for a discharge of the jury.

However, in the present case such arguments are, in my opinion, weakened by the circumstance that the jury were never in fact given any direction that they were to disregard any information appearing in the media about the kind of offence with which the appellant was charged. It is true that when the application for a discharge of the jury was refused, counsel for the appellant at the trial did not ask for such a direction. However, in his submissions in support of the application for a discharge, counsel had contended that no direction the trial judge could give would expunge the prejudice caused by the publicity given to the Royal Commission report and that any direction would only "heighten what is already a sorry situation". I would myself accept that any direction which could have been given on 27 August would only have accentuated and exacerbated the problem.

As both Simpson J and I have been at pains to point out in our judgments, our decision in regard to the second ground of appeal depends upon the quite extraordinary combination of circumstances which existed in the present case.
Our decision is unlikely to be of any value as a precedent in any other case.

I would allow the appeal against conviction quash the conviction and order a new trial.

REGINA versus David John FORSYTH 
JUDGMENT 
SIMPSON J: I have read in draft the judgment of Grove J and I agree that the first ground of appeal, that the verdict is unsafe and unsatisfactory, should be rejected for the reasons he gives. All factual matters raised in support of this ground of appeal were matters properly the subject of jury determination and were undoubtedly put before the jury with some force. It was open to the jury, on the whole of the evidence, to convict the appellant. 
With respect to Grove J, however, I cannot agree that the second ground of appeal should likewise be rejected. There was, in this case, an exceptional conjunction of circumstances. After a very short trial - just a day and a half - the jury retired at 12.45 pm on 26 August. At 3.26 pm they sent a note stating that they were "undecided". The trial judge was uncertain what was implied in that statement and refrained from inquiring. He outlined to the jury what he said were the three alternatives open to him. The third of these, which he told them he would not, at that stage, adopt, was to discharge them.
The remaining two alternatives were for the jury to return to the jury room further to deliberate that afternoon, or to break for the day and return the following morning. He invited the jury to consider which of these they found preferable. It is clear that the jury did not fully understand what he had said, because, after withdrawing briefly, they returned and the foreperson told his Honour that they would like to be "dismissed". His Honour then gave the jury the direction prescribed in Black versus R <case>; [(1993) 179 CLR 44.] Following that, the foreperson advised that the jury's preference was to return the following day.

That was 26 August. That was the day on which the Royal Commission into the
NSW Police Service released a report concerning paedophilia. That report received extensive media coverage. Put before this court, without objection, were a bundle of copies of extracts of the newspaper reports and transcripts of coverage in the electronic media that occurred on the evening of 26 and the morning of 27 August. Perusal of the material demonstrates the very high level of interest in the general subject of paedophilia. Most of it, so far as I could discern, was generally responsible reportage on a matter of intense public interest. But it brought with it a degree of concentration on, and antagonism to, that subject, and on some of the more notorious alleged practitioners of paedophilia, that could not have made it easy for the jury to focus on a case with which they were already having difficulty. Counsel at the trial, not inappropriately, in my view, described the attention given to the report by the media as "saturation" coverage. He sought the discharge of the jury. He referred to some of the more sensational and more hostile of the reports. While this application was being discussed the jury sent a note requesting a transcript of the evidence of the complainant and the police officer, the only two witnesses called in the prosecution case. His Honour refused the application for discharge and arranged for the transcripts requested to be made available. At 3.41 pm the court reconvened, the judge having received a note from the jury, the precise terms of which do not appear in the material before this court. The note prompted his Honour to address a question to the foreperson, asking if there were any prospect that further deliberation might result in a verdict. To this the foreperson replied that she thought the jury had made some progress. His Honour then gave the jury the option of further deliberating that afternoon or returning the following morning. The transcript records one juror as saying that they were exhausted and they were accordingly released for the remainder of the day.

On the morning of 28 August the jury requested a transcript of the appellant's evidence and steps were taken to provide this to them. At 1.15 pm they returned with a verdict of guilty.

I am acutely conscious of the respect to be accorded to the capacity and commitment of juries in fulfilling the role allocated to them and in complying with the directions given by the trial judge. The system of criminal justice depends heavily upon the recognition that juries do indeed understand and observe with care and integrity the instructions they are given: see, for example, R versus Lansdell, unreported, 22 May 1995, Court of Criminal
Appeal, per Gleeson CJ. Nevertheless, the unique combination of events and circumstances in the present case leads me to the conclusion that this was a case in which it was appropriate and, in my view, necessary, to discharge the jury. The particular circumstances are: the unusually short span of time in which the evidence and addresses in the trial were concluded; the relative early stage at which the jury signified their inability to reach a unanimous verdict; the expressed wish to be discharged, from which I infer a re-statement of the unlikelihood of a unanimous verdict being reached; the exceptionally widespread media coverage on the general subject of paedophilia at the very time the jury were having, and expressing, real difficulties in reaching agreement; the statement by a juror, at the end of the second day of deliberation, that they were exhausted; the jury's requests for transcripts, ultimately, of the whole of the evidence.

I appreciate that the requests for transcripts in particular are indicative of a jury attempting, in accordance with their oaths or affirmations and the directions given to them, to resolve the issues entrusted to them. It is true, also, that none of the media reports made any reference to the appellant, or to his trial which was then part heard. But in the context of the whole of the events of and surrounding the trial I cannot exclude the real possibility that some of the media commentary upon matters so close to the subject matter of the trial influenced one or more wavering members of the jury. In my view, this goes beyond speculation and discloses a very real risk that matters extraneous to the trial crept into the final verdict.

I would allow the appeal, quash the conviction and order a new trial.
 * * * 
