

Regina versus Stephen Mifsud No. 60457/95 Criminal Law and Practice - Fitness to be tried [1996] NSWSC 6 (8 January 1996) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
GLEESON CJ(1), LEVINE(2) AND DOWD(3) JJ
HRNG
SYDNEY, 8 November #DATE 8:11:1995 #ADD 8:1:1996 
Counsel for the Appellant       D A Buchanan 
Solicitor for the Appellant   
T A Murphy 
Counsel for the Respondent       R N Howie QC 
Solicitor for the Respondent      S E O'Connor
ORDER
Leave to appeal refused
JUDGE1
GLEESON CJ This is an application for leave to appeal under [s5F](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5f.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act 1912](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) against a judgment of His Honour Judge Solomon given on 9 August 1995.
The Crown disputes that what is involved is an interlocutory judgment within the meaning of [s5F](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5f.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/), but before addressing that question it is convenient to state in summary form the nature of the proceedings that were before his
Honour.
The applicant, Stephen Mifsud, has been charged with the offence of robbery with striking. It was and is common ground that on 9 August 1995 the applicant was affected by a serious mental disorder of such a nature as to call in question his fitness to be tried. Accordingly the provisions of the
Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act 1990 came into play.
The matter came before Solomon DCJ for the purpose of a determination of the question of the applicant's unfitness to be tried. It became necessary for his Honour to decide, pursuant to the provisions of s11 and s11A of the Act, whether the question was to be determined by a judge alone or whether it was to be determined by a jury constituted for the purpose.
Section 11 provides that the question of a person's unfitness to be tried for an offence is to be determined by a jury constituted for that purpose, except as provided by s11A.
Section 11A provides as follows: "11A(1) The question of a person's unfitness to be tried for an offence is to be determined by the Judge alone if the person so elects in accordance with this section and the Judge is satisfied that the person, before making the election, sought and received advice in relation to the election from a barrister or solicitor.

An election may be made only with the consent of the prosecutor.

A person who elects to have the question determined by the 
Judge alone may, at any time before the date fixed for the determination of the person's unfitness to be tried, subsequently elect to have the question determined by a jury.

The Judge may make any findings that could have been made by a
jury on the question of a person's unfitness to be tried. Any such finding has, for all purposes, the same effect as a finding of a jury.

Any determination by the Judge under this section must include the principles of law applied by the Judge and the findings of fact on which the Judge relied.

Rules Of Court may be made with respect to elections under this section."
The following observations may be made concerning s11A. By hypothesis the section is concerned with the making of an election by a person whose fitness to be tried is in question because of some mental disorder. For such a person to make an effective election requires that the person understands what he or she is doing. The person must be able to understand what is involved in such an election.
In addition the judge must be satisfied that the person, before making the election, sought and received advice in relation to the election from a barrister or solicitor. In practice, of course, there will ordinarily be a close relationship between the question whether the person has sought and received advice in relation to the election and the question whether the person is capable of understanding and understands what is involved in the making of an election.
The requirement that the legal advice be "sought and received" does not mean that the person must take the initiative in obtaining legal advice. On the other hand it is not sufficient that a barrister or solicitor merely tenders advice, which may or may not be understood by the person to whom it is tendered. What is required is that the person should be willing to be advised on the matter and should understand the advice that is tendered.
In the present case Solomon DCJ had before him a document bearing the signature of the applicant, which contained the following statement: "I, Stephen Mifsud, of Long Bay Hospital, being charged with robbery, elect to have the question of my fitness to be tried in respect of the alleged offence, by a Judge alone (sic).

I have, before making this election, sought and received advice in relation to the election from Sunil De Silva."
However, Solomon DCJ also had before him as exhibits a number of psychiatric reports which caused him concern about the matters raised by s11A.
A report of Dr William
Lucas dated 29 May 1995 stated that the applicant was suffering from schizophrenia. The report concluded with the following opinion: "I was asked to form an opinion as to whether Mr Mifsud was fit to stand trial. Unfortunately, it was not possible to address issues, such as his ability to comprehend his legal situation, instruct his solicitor and participate in his trial. However,
I think a preliminary view can be formed because he was quite unable to give me an account of the circumstances leading to the charge. What he told me was completely unrelated and off the point.

I think the key question on the issue of his fitness to stand trial is his ability to give you clear instructions. As yet he has not done so and if he holds to the account he gave me then
I think it unlikely that you will receive satisfactory instructions. If this is the case then I believe he is not fit to stand trial."
A report of Dr Rosalie Wilcox dated 3 July 1995 said that the applicant was unable to discuss his alleged offence in a rational manner. The report concluded: "1 He has a chronic mental illness.
 His behaviour is inappropriate and he is sexually disinhibited with both males and females.
 He could not manage in the main prison system.
 He is not fit for trial.
He is a danger to the community and has no insight into his drug abuse".
A report of Dr Strum dated 7 August 1995 contained the following opinion: "Mr Mifsud remains psychotic although he has shown improvement since taking medication. Whether he will ever be well is another question. I believe that his ability to plead and to give an answer to the charges against him are superficial. I do not think he could deal with the information that has accumulated against him. His only defence is really to deny it and to say that it did not happen. Also, his statement that the briefcase was found at his mother's place seems to be very far from the truth. One wonders, at times, whether he is telling the truth or whether he confabulates. There is some doubt as to Mr Mifsud's understanding of what has happened and the charge concerning the girl. It is hard to tell how much of his beliefs is reality and how much is delusional.

I believe that Mr Mifsud's concentration is poor. I do not believe he could concentrate or follow a trial sufficiently in order to give adequate answers to the charges against him, or to be able to adequately defend himself I believe that there is still too much psychosis present.
This could affect his ability with respect to the above.

I have said that, superficially, Mr Mifsud appears fit to be tried. In reality I do not think he is. I believe that his ability to instruct his solicitor is very superficial. I do not think he could go beyond mere denial."
Having those reports before him, Solomon DCJ expressed concern about the efficacy of the election that had been signed by the applicant and about whether he could be satisfied that the applicant had "sought and received" advice in relation to the election.
In an attempt to allay such concern the lawyer representing the applicant called the following evidence from Mr De Silva, the person named in the election. Mr De Silva's evidence was very brief and was to the following effect: He said that he arrived at the gaol to discuss with Mr Mifsud his evidence at the trial. He then gave the following evidence: "Q And did you then discuss with him his right to elect to have a judge alone rather than a jury trial in relation to the question of his fitness? 
A I told him that the issue of fitness to be tried, that he had two options in respect of that issue; either to be tried by a judge sitting alone or a judge with a jury.
 ...

A I told him that, you know, that 'The
Judge is the person on the rostrum wearing a wig and robes' and he said 'I know', and
I said 'The jury is a group of people in civilian clothes who sit as a group' and he said 'Yes, I know'.

Q Is it the case in fact that he cut you short and explained that he already knew their roles? 
A Yes. Actually when I went to see him I was told that he was having an interview with a psychiatrist and he appeared to be anxious to get back to that interview ... . "
The above represents what was, in effect, the totality of Mr De Silva's account of the advice that was given to the applicant in relation to his election. Solomon
DCJ decided the case fell within s11 and not within 11A and indicated that he would proceed to empanel a jury. His Honour expressed his reasons for that decision as follows: "Well, the evidence of Mr De Silva does not hold up with the election made because the question put by Mr De Silva to Mr
Mifsud was whether he consented to a Judge alone and the document tendered is an election, and there is no material before me on which I could be satisfied that an election was made after the accused sought and received advice.

The evidence from Mr De Silva is clear that he asked the accused whether he consented, and that was not the purpose of the election. That is under s11A, so I am not satisfied that he made the election after he sought and received advice.

There is no material before me that in fact he did seek and receive advice about the election. It appears to me that it was put to him on the basis did he consent and he said yes, he did consent to the matter proceeding by way of Judge alone.
He had two options and did he consent? They are his words.
 ...

I am not satisfied on the evidence of Mr De Silva, nor on the material tendered by the Crown, that this man properly sought and received advice in relation to an election. I am satisfied that he knows the difference between a Judge and a Jury but that does not assist me, so the matter should proceed with a jury."
The basis upon which Solomon DCJ made his decision was that on the material before him he was not satisfied that the applicant had sought and received advice in relation to the election. By implication his Honour was also not satisfied that an effective election had been made.
Depending upon the circumstances of an individual case it may well be that a person who is ultimately found to be unfit to be tried is, nevertheless, fit to make an election under s11A and is capable of seeking and receiving advice in relation to that election. I have already indicated my views as to the meaning of the expression "sought and received advice".
On the other hand, depending upon the circumstances of an individual case, matter which throws doubt upon a person's fitness to be tried may also throw doubt upon a person's capacity to make an election under s11A and to seek and receive legal advice in relation to such an election.
It was submitted on behalf of the Crown that the present application does not fall within [s5F](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5f.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) because Solomon DCJ made no interlocutory judgment or order. I am unable to accept this submission.
Solomon DCJ made a decision that the case fell within [s11](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s11.html) and was about to implement that decision by empanelling a jury when he was asked to interrupt the proceedings to enable his ruling to be tested by an appeal to this Court.
There was no necessity for his Honour to make any further judgment or order in order to give effect to his decision. All he needed to do was to empanel the jury.
In my view what was involved was an interlocutory judgment, the effect of the judgment being a finding that the case fell within [s11](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s11.html) and not s11A of the
Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act.
On the other hand it is necessary for the applicant to have leave to appeal under s5F, and in my opinion the case is not a proper case for leave.
The factual information that was before Solomon DCJ appears to me to have contained ample grounds for a failure on his Honour's part to be satisfied that the applicant sought and received advice in relation to the election and for failing to accept the efficacy of the election.
In particular, having regard to the information contained in the psychiatric reports, the evidence of Mr De Silva as to his brief and perfunctory communication with the applicant, at a time when the applicant was anxious to get off to another meeting, and simply responded to what Mr De
Silva said to him by words such as "I know" and "Yes", did not constitute a satisfactory basis for a conclusion that the case fell within s11A.
It might be expected that in a case such as the present, at least one of the psychiatrists whose reports were to be received in relation to the determination of fitness to be tried, might have been asked to express an opinion on the applicant's fitness to make an election under s11A.
Furthermore, in a case where it was evident that the applicant was suffering from a serious mental disorder it might have been expected that the important issue of tendering legal advice in relation to the making of the election would have been treated with rather more formality.
The Crown accepts that there would be nothing to stop the applicant now from seeking to supplement deficiencies in the evidence when the matter next comes before the Court for a determination of the question of his fitness or unfitness to be tried. It may very well be that, on proper evidence, it could be demonstrated to a Judge that the case falls within s11A.
However, in my view the evidence that was tendered before Solomon DCJ was inadequate to that purpose.
I do not consider that the case is one for appellate intervention and because of what I regard as the inadequacy of the evidence before Solomon DCJ, I would refuse leave to appeal from his Honour's interlocutory judgment.
The order of the Court will be as I have proposed.
JUDGE2
LEVINE J I agree with the Chief Justice.
JUDGE3
DOWD J I agree with the Chief Justice and would also add that although at the transcript at p8 his Honour said he was not satisfied as to the condition precedent contained within s11A, his Honour had already, at p7 made very clear his attitude towards Mr De Silva's evidence when at line 39 his Honour clearly said: "It appears to me it was put to him" - that is to Mr Mifsud - "On the basis did he consent, and he said yes he did consent to the matter proceeding by way of Judge alone."
His Honour, having previously said that the document which his Honour the
Chief Justice has referred to, is an election: "but there is no evidence that his, Mr De Silva's evidence, upon which
I could be satisfied that an election was made after the accused sought and received legal advice. The evidence from
Mr De
Silva is clear that he asked the accused whether he consented, and that was not the purpose of the election. So I am not satisfied he made the election after he sought and received advice."
His Honour made it clear that it was on that factual basis that he made his decision under s11A and for those reasons and for the reasons given, I agree.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1996/6.html  
