

Regina versus P J Hartley [1996] NSWSC 535 (8 November 1996) 
REGINA versus PAUL JOHN HARTLEY /96 
WEDNESDAY 28 AUGUST 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
HUNT CJ AT CL, SMART J, JAMES J 
JUDGMENT 
JAMES J: This is an appeal by the Crown pursuant to section 5D of the Criminal Appeal Act from an order made on 10 May 1996 by his Honour Judge J B Phelan in the District Court, standing over proceedings for sentence for approximately six months to 8 November 1996, that is a Griffiths remand. (See Griffiths versus The Queen (1977) 137 CLR 293.) During the period of the remand the respondent was placed under the supervision of the Probation and Parole Service and was directed to undergo such psychological counselling as that Service saw fit, particularly having regard to matters referred to in a pre-sentence report and reports by Associate Professor Susan Hayes, a clinical psychologist, and Dr Neil Schultz, a consultant physician in psychological medicine. The respondent was granted bail to 8 November 1996.

By virtue of the extended definition of "sentence" in section 2 of the
Criminal Appeal Act, a Griffiths remand is a sentence for the purposes of the
Criminal Appeal Act and may be the subject of an appeal under that Act.

On 18 March 1996 the respondent had on being indicted pleaded guilty to four charges of child sexual assault. Two of the charges involved the respondent's natural daughter, who I will refer to as P. The other two charges involved the respondent's adopted daughter, who I will refer to as L and who is the natural daughter of the respondent's wife.

The first charge involving P was a charge that in 1986 the respondent had indecently assaulted P. Although the indictment is unclear, it appears that this was an offence under section 61E(1A) of the Crimes Act as it then stood.
The second charge involving P was a charge that in 1992 the respondent had committed an aggravated indecent assault on P, an offence under section 61M of the Crimes Act.

The first charge involving the victim L was a charge that in 1990 the respondent had committed an indecent assault on L, she then being under the age of 16 years, namely 10 years, and under the authority of the respondent, an offence under section 61E(1A) of the Crimes Act as it then stood. The second charge involving L was a charge that in 1993 the respondent had committed an aggravated indecent assault on L, an offence under section 61M of the Crimes Act. On the back of the indictment this offence is wrongly stated to be an offence under section 66C(2) of the Crimes Act.

There was admitted into evidence in the proceedings on sentence, without objection, a statement of facts and a number of statements by witnesses. The facts of the four offences can be briefly summarised as follows. At the time the first offence against P was committed, P was only four years old. In the family home the respondent removed his pants and P's pants, took hold of P under her arms and rubbed her up and down against his body. The second offence against P was committed when P was nine or ten years old in the victim's bedroom in the family home. The respondent rubbed the victim's bottom and vagina on the outside of her clothing. The first offence involving L was committed when L was ten years old. The respondent entered L's bedroom, got into L's bed with her, tried to kiss her and then touched L's vagina with his hand. The second offence involving L was committed when L was 13 years old. L entered the respondent's bedroom to investigate a noise she had heard. The respondent pulled L onto his bed and forced her hand onto his penis, saying that he was just trying to teach her. The statements by both P and L show that the offences to which the respondent had pleaded guilty were not isolated offences. The respondent had a minor criminal history, not including any previous convictions for child sexual assault. He had never been sentenced to imprisonment.

In the proceedings on sentence there was admitted into evidence a pre-sentence report, which disclosed inter alia that the respondent was 38 years old, that the respondent's father had sometimes been abusive and violent to him, that the respondent had left school when he was 14, that he had been in employment only spasmodically and that during the period in which the offences were committed the respondent had been dependent on both cannabis and alcohol but more recently had ceased using cannabis. The officer who prepared the pre- sentence report observed that, ". . . it seemed difficult for (the respondent) to articulate either remorse concerning the offences or an understanding of the effects that his actions could have on the children." The pre-sentence report continued: "It appears that Mr Hartley experienced his early years as difficult and threatening. He was a poor achiever who appears to have had a conflictual relationship with his father, although his mother offered some support. His marriage was fraught with issues of mistrust, arguments, idleness, alcohol and cannabis abuse.

The early sexual assaults alleged to have been perpetrated against him appear to have been dismissed by his father. Later alleged assaults were unreported and appear to be unverifiable. These issues, if able to be verified, may have contributed to Mr Hartley's lack of inclination to deal with his own issues.

The offender was unable to explain his conduct with his daughters and seemed to confuse the conduct with expressions of love. He appeared to have little or no sense of guilt or remorse and when questioned concerning the facts, dwelt on what the events had cost him rather than on what the children may have experienced.

A psychiatrist's evaluations indicated that the offender was most likely to be suffering from a personality disorder which became activated with substance abuse." 
Associate Professor Hayes who saw the respondent on 29 April 1996 concluded that the respondent had no signs of any psychiatric symptoms, that he had little insight into his behaviour or the effects of his behaviour on the victims and that he regarded the offences as being, at least in part, the fault of the victims' mother. Associate Professor Hayes was of the opinion that the respondent needed extensive and long-term counselling in order to be able to take responsibility for his actions. He would need to participate in a program specifically designed for sex offenders and also in drug and alcohol counselling.

Dr Schultz began his report on 17 April 1996 by noting that the respondent had arrived approximately three-quarters of an hour late for his interview with Dr
Schultz. Dr Schultz said in his report that the most likely diagnoses of the respondent included paedophilia, anti-social personality disorder and alcohol dependence and abuse for which he had not sought any treatment. Dr Schultz's report continued: "The current assessment has been restricted to some extent by time constraints. However, the interview revealed that Mr Hartley continues to rationalise his behaviour with respect to his daughters and now with respect to his plea of guilty in a way that projects himself as an innocent victim.
Given the assumption that Mr Hartley's plea of guilty is correct, I would make the following observations with regard to issues of remorse and suitability for treatment. First, Mr Hartley minimised the allegations to the extent of presenting a scenario in which none of the allegations occurred and that he had been merely acting in an appropriate manner for a father. This reflects an ongoing inability to accept any level of responsibility for the charges to which he has pleaded guilty. Second, he presented in the same scenario the notion that the problems he now faces are all a response to his ex-wife's "vindictive nature". This further supports the notion that not only is Mr
Hartley unable to accept responsibility for his actions, he blames others for his behaviour. Third, I note from the report prepared by Cedar Cottage, that
Mr Hartley was also late for his appointment, attended after drinking alcohol and later failed to attend for followup interviews. This report, prepared by
Peter Chandran, also added that Mr Hartley showed little empathy or remorse and that he was concerned about the effects on himself rather than his children.

If one were to assume that Mr Hartley's current version of event is accurate, in other words, that he did plead guilty to the charges in order "to make it easier for my daughters" he could be viewed as a very caring father. However, the history presented to regarding his previous levels of irresponsibility do not suggest that Mr Hartley would be able to follow this course of action and
I seriously doubt the validity of his claims." 
Dr Schultz stated in his report that a condition of treating an individual with an anti-social personality disorder who is sexually abusive, is that the individual is able to accept responsibility for what has happened and is prepared to engage in a long-term psychological program which would be emotionally difficult. However, in Dr Schultz' view the respondent: ". . . accepts no responsibility for what he has done, he continues to demonstrate an inability to be responsible enough to attend appointments on time, he continues to blame others for his problems and he continues to use alcohol excessively as one way of 'covering up'. I do not believe that (the respondent) would be able to be involved in any outpatient program to address issues of his personality and sexual abuse at this time." 
In his remarks on sentence delivered on 10 May 1996, Judge Phelan observed that the offences were serious matters extending over a number of years and involving a number of offences. However, his Honour did not otherwise advert to the objective facts of the offences. His Honour expressed some concern that the pre-sentence report and the reports by Associate Professor Hayes and Dr
Schultz suggested that the respondent was reluctant to admit that he was responsible for causing any problem. However, his Honour thought that in committing the offences the respondent had been affected by alcohol and that, just as the respondent had, in his Honour's view, apparently overcome the problem he had had with marijuana, the respondent might be able to overcome his problem with alcohol if he was afforded counselling. His Honour also considered that the respondent was in need of "intensive psycho counselling".
His Honour directed that during the period of the Griffiths remand the respondent should undergo such counselling as the Probation and Parole Service thought fit. His Honour concluded his remarks by saying: "Now that means you have got to really admit that you do have a problem, both in terms of alcohol and psycho sexuality, and you have got to work positively to try to face up to those problems. If the report that I get is a favourable report, the option of you going to full-time gaol becomes academic. If I am not satisfied at the end of it, you leave me with a number of options, one of which is gaol." 
The principles which should be applied by a sentencing judge in deciding whether to grant a Griffiths remand were stated by Hunt CJ at CL in R v
Tindall & Gunton [(1993) 74 ACrimR 275.] In that case his Honour said, inter alia, that such a remand should only be granted when there is a real expectation, founded upon solid grounds rather than upon mere sentimentality, that rehabilitation and reform of the offender are likely to be achieved and, importantly, such a remand should only be granted where, in the event that rehabilitation and reform are achieved, it would be appropriate to impose a non-custodial sentence.

In the present case I consider that the sentencing judge failed to comply with those principles. His Honour would not appear to have addressed the question whether, however much the respondent was in need of counselling, there was a real expectation founded upon solid grounds, that if the respondent underwent counselling during the period of six months, his rehabilitation and reform were likely to be achieved. In my opinion, the evidence in the pre-sentence report and in the reports of Associate Professor Hayes and particularly Dr
Schultz, parts of which I have already quoted or referred to, showed that there could not be any real expectation that during the period of the
Griffiths remand the respondent's rehabilitation and reform were likely to be achieved.

In the concluding part of his Honour's remarks on 10 May 1996, his Honour stated: "If the report that I get is a favourable report, the option of you going to full-time gaol becomes academic." 
In this part of his Honour's remarks I understand his Honour to have been saying that if, during the period of the Griffiths remand, the respondent's rehabilitation and reform were achieved, then it would be appropriate for his
Honour to grant a non-custodial sentence or at least a sentence not involving full-time custody. I consider that in saying this his Honour fell into error.
In my opinion, on the evidence before his Honour on 10 May, the objective facts of the offences, including that there were two complainants, that there were four offences, that the offences occurred over an extended period of time and that the offences of which the respondent was convicted were not isolated offences, were such that even if the respondent's rehabilitation and reform could be achieved by a course of counselling, a full-time custodial sentence would be required and any lesser sentence would be manifestly inadequate.

I am, accordingly, of the opinion that in granting the Griffiths remand the sentencing judge fell into error on matters of sentencing principle and that accordingly the Crown appeal should be upheld, unless there are discretionary reasons why this Court should not intervene.

In his written submissions counsel for the respondent urged a number of discretionary considerations. Counsel pointed out that notice of the Crown appeal was not served on the respondent until 11 June, a month and a day after the date of the Griffiths remand, and that a further delay of two and a half months had occurred up to the hearing of the appeal. It was submitted that any offender who has received a Griffiths remand is likely to feel a keen sense of grievance if, after receiving a Griffiths remand, he is subsequently sentenced to imprisonment and this, it was submitted, was a reason why it was particularly incumbent upon the Crown to act with expedition if it wished to bring a Crown appeal against the granting of a Griffiths remand. It was submitted that since the granting of the Griffiths remand the respondent had been seeking to comply with the conditions subject to which the remand had been granted. It was submitted that the 8 November 1996, the date to which the proceedings on sentence are adjourned, is only about 10 weeks off and that this court should not intervene but simply allow the respondent to come up for sentence on 8 November in the District Court. A further argument put was that this Court should not allow a Crown appeal against the granting of a Griffiths remand, unless the Crown has applied for a review of the bail granted to the offender during the period of the Griffiths remand.

I do not consider that this Court should, for any discretionary reasons, refrain from upholding the Crown appeal. It is of course important that early notice of Crown appeals against sentence be given to the person sentenced.
However, the delay here was only about a month. The Court received an affidavit by the respondent dealing with the extent to which the respondent has complied with Judge Phelan's direction that he undergo counselling. The affidavit establishes that the respondent has taken certain steps with a view to obtaining counselling; however, he did not actually receive any counselling until yesterday, when more than half of the period of the Griffiths remand had already run. The Court received a report from Professor Neil McConaghy,
Professor of Psychiatry, who examined the respondent on 27 August 1996, in which he expressed some guarded opinions. Professor McConaghy considered that
Mr Hartley is capable of being rehabilitated, although the treatment program would need to be prolonged and intensive and combined with treatment for his sexual offences and for drug and alcohol problems.

In some cases this Court has, as a matter of discretion, declined to intervene when, although the Court has concluded that a sentencing judge erred in granting a Griffiths remand, the date to which the respondent has been remanded is only a very short time after the date of the hearing of the appeal. However, in the present case there is a substantial period of about two and a half months before 8 November.

I do not accept the proposition that this Court should not allow, or even that this Court should be reluctant to allow, a Crown appeal against the granting of a Griffiths remand, unless the Crown has applied for a review of the grant of bail to the offender during the period of the Griffiths remand. It is, of course, open to the Crown to apply, pursuant to [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ba41/index.html#p6) of the [Bail Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ba41/), for the review of a bail decision, including a decision by a judge that a convicted person should be allowed bail during the period of a Griffiths remand.
However, any such application for the review of a grant of bail during the period of a Griffiths remand would, in my opinion, fall within the principles in R versus Travis Murray Rowe (unreported Court of Appeal 20 December 1991) to the effect that if an applicant for bail or a person to whom bail has already been granted is already within the effective jurisdiction of a judge either of the District Court or of the Supreme Court during a trial or pending sentence, the practice is for a single judge of the Supreme Court to decline to entertain an application under the [Bail
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ba41/), but, if the judge thinks that circumstances have been shown which might be thought to justify reconsideration of bail, to return the matter to the trial judge or the sentencing judge, or if that course is inconvenient, to remove the bail application to the Court of Appeal. To merely return the bail application to the sentencing judge who granted bail would be unlikely to serve any purpose.
However, it would be inappropriate for a single judge of the Supreme Court to express any view on whether a judge, in whose jurisdiction proceedings on sentence are, should or should not have granted the Griffiths remand to which the grant of bail was ancillary. On the other hand, it is undesirable that the
Court of Appeal should have to deal with bail applications.

In my opinion the Crown appeal should be upheld. However, I would propose that this Court should not itself resentence the respondent. Amongst other things, if this Court were to resentence the respondent, both parties would be deprived of the opportunity of any further appeal to this Court. I would propose that the matter be remitted to the District Court for the purpose of sentencing the respondent. The matter should be listed for mention in the
District Court within seven days of to-day for the purpose of fixing a date on which the respondent is to be sentenced. Bail should be continued until the day, within seven days of today, on which the matter is listed for mention in the District Court. It is appropriate, in my view, that I should reiterate the opinion I have expressed earlier in this judgment that at least on the evidence before his Honour Judge Phelan on 10 May 1996, any sentence less than a sentence of full-time custody would be manifestly inadequate.

HUNT CJ AT CL: I agree with the orders proposed by James J.

In my view, and upon the information which is now before this Court, any sentence other than a full-time custodial one is likely to be inappropriate in the circumstances of this case. My interpretation of Professor McConaghy's report, tendered today, is that the treatment which the Professor says could perhaps be successful for the respondent is one which should be carried out after the custodial sentence and whilst the respondent is under the constraints of a parole order. Any sentence to be served by way of periodic detention does not impose those constraints.

We have not, however, had the benefit of hearing Professor McConaghy give evidence in which this issue could be explored with him. For that reason,, and for that reason alone, I refrain from stating my view more strongly in relation to the need for a full-time custodial sentence in this case.

SMART J: I agree that on the material before Phelan DCJ it was inappropriate to grant a Griffiths remand. The material before Phelan DCJ was in an unsatisfactory state having regard to the divergence of view between Dr Schultz and Associate Professor Hayes. Associate Professor Hayes, while adverting to the need for Mr Hartley to participate in extensive and long-term counselling, did not express a view as to the likelihood of success of that counselling or what she envisaged by long-term counselling.

Dr Schultz' view was pessimistic. I could have understood a judge, faced with the reports of Associate Professor Hayes and Dr Schultz, requiring further information, particularly from somebody who was going to treat Mr Hartley, and, for that purpose, adjourning the matter for a short period of time. I would have been unhappy to proceed on the material that was before the judge.

Since that time the report of Professor McConaghy is to hand and a program of treatment has now been propounded. Professor McConaghy has indicated that it has produced good results in combination with the behavioural program aimed at inhibiting any compulsive tendencies to offend sexually.

I agree that the matter should be remitted to Phelan DCJ to be dealt with expeditiously. As the evidence before the judge when sentencing may be fuller or perhaps even differ from that before us I express no view as to the sentence which should be imposed.

One of the problems in this matter is obviously the intelligence level of Mr
Hartley indicated by Professor McConaghy.

I agree with the orders proposed.

HUNT CJ AT CL: The orders of the Court are as proposed by James J.
 * * * 
