

Sunlea Investments Pty Ltd versus The State of NSW and Anor No. 1183/94 Real
Property - Deeds [1996] NSWSC 10 (12 January 1996) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
EQUITY DIVISION
WINDEYER J
HRNG
SYDNEY, 30 October, 21 November 1995 #DATE 14:12:1995 #ADD 12:1:1996 
Counsel for the Plaintiff     W.S. Johnson 
Solicitor for the Plaintiff    June Vile 
Counsel for the Defendant     I.M. Wales 
Solicitor for the Defendant    H.K. Roberts, Crown Solicitor
ORDER
Summons dismissed with costs
JUDGE1
WINDEYER J The preliminary question for decision in this matter is whether the benefit of accretion attaches to the northern boundary of the land in
Certificate of Title Folio Identifier 1/739877. If it does, then the question of whether there has been accretion, and if so, its extent will have to be determined; and if it does not, then that will finally determine the matter.
It is admitted the Myall River was tidal at the relevant position.
The land in question is of course Lot 1 in Deposited Plan
It is part of the land originally comprised in land grant Volume 681 Folio 145 originally granted to John Barnes on 21 November , having an area of about acres and being Portion 12 of the Parish of Fens. Section 12 of the Real
Property Act 1862 provided that all unalienated land should, when alienated, be subject to that Act and provided that "every such grant in addition to proper words of description should contain a diagram of the land thereby granted".
The description of land in the original land grant is as follows: "All that allotment or parcel of land in our said Colony containing by admeasurement forty acres be the same more or less situated in the County of Gloucester and Parish of Fens,
Situated between Port Stephens and the Myall River
Portion
Twelve COMMENCING on the foreshore of Port Stephens at the
Southern end of the Western boundary line of C. McRae's forty acres and bounded thence on the East by part of that boundary line bearing North eleven chains on the North West North
North
East again on the North West again on the North, and on the West in by lines bearing South thirty two degrees forty minutes West five chains South nineteen degrees twenty minutes West six chains South fifty two degrees West five chains North eight five degrees fifty minutes West seven chains North sixty eight degrees West one chain and ninety links North twenty eight degrees twenty five minutes West six chains eleven links North fifty one degrees thirty four minutes West eleven chains
North seventy seven degrees twenty nine minutes West two chains forty two links South twenty two degrees one minute West three chains fifty links South fifty one degrees 23 minutes West 3 chains 52 links South 75 degrees 30 minutes West 2 chains links North Degrees 5 minutes West 5 chains South 14 Degrees 10 minutes
West 2 chains 60 links South 8 Degrees 2 minutes
East 2 chains links South 24 Degrees 29 minutes East 2 chains South 3 chains 8 links and then South 68 Degrees 28 minutes
West 3 chains 30 links on the South West by a line bearing South 67
Degrees 52 minutes East 12 chains 76 links to the foreshore of
Port Stephens and on the South East again on the South West and again on the South East by lines along that foreshore, bearing
North 40 Degrees 10 minutes East 2 chains 50 links North 51
Degrees 34 minutes East 10 chains South 74 Degrees 9 minutes
East 6 chains South 63 Degrees 30 minutes East 4 chains South Degrees 30 minutes East 8 chains 50 links North Degrees minutes East 6 chains and thence North 32 Degrees 42 minutes
East 3 chains 81 links to the point of commencement
As per plan in the margin hereof. with all the Rights and Appurtenances whatsoever thereto belonging"
The plan refeered to is as being in the margin is copied below: (Diagram omitted)
The land owned by the plaintiff is Lot in DP 739877. It is the only lot in that plan. The diagram from the plan is shown below: (Diagram omitted)
It is accepted that although it might seem from this that the land fronts the Myall River nothing really turns on that. If the boundary of the Crown
Grant on the north was the high water mark and if it was entitled to accretion then the boundary of the plaintiff's land remains the high water mark.
The task involved in determining the question at issue is the proper construction of the Crown Grant. If it is clear on its wording nothing further need be looked at.
In deciding this question it may be desirable to set out a number of relevant principles: 
At common law the doctrine of accretion or alluvion applies to land which borders the sea or a tidal river or lake. The boundary is the high water mark unless the contrary appears from the grant. Gifford versus Lord
Yarborough 5
Bingham 163; <case>; [130 ER 1023] and the earlier authorities there set out commencing from Bracton. 
High water mark means the mean high water mark being the median tide between the springs and the neaps; Attorney General versus Chambers (1854) 4 DeG M and G 206; <case>; [43 ER 486.] 
Torrens Title land is subject to the benefit or detriment of accretion or erosion; Verrall versus Nott <case>; [(1939) 39 SR 89] at 99. 
If the boundary of land is a tidal stream or other tidal water the fact that it is described in the grant by a metes and bounds description does not exclude the land from taking the benefit of accretion or from the burden of erosion. Southern Centre of Theosophy Inc versus State of South Australia [(1982) AC .] The description is not sufficient to exclude the land from the benefit of accretion. And if land is described by diagram or words as bounded by or abutting tidal water with a metes and bounds description which does not accord with that fact then the boundary measurements generally give way to the physical boundary description; Attorney General of Southern Nigeria versus John
Holt and Co (Liverpool)
Ltd [(1915) AC 599] at 610; Southern Centre of Theosophy
Inc p717. In other words the abuttals prevail; see also Overland versus Lenehan QLJ 59.
The decision in Baxendale versus Instow Parish Council [(1982) 1
Ch 14] seems to doubt this but in that respect is not supported by Southern
Centre of Theosophy. Nevertheless it remains in all cases a question of construction. 
Foreshore is technically land between mean high water mark and mean low water mark. But where a boundary is described as being the foreshore or running along the foreshore that would normally indicate mean high water mark as the boundary.
Mellor versus Walmesley [(1904) 2 Ch 525] at 435.
Applying these general principles to this case it is, I think, likely that the land in the grant is entitled to the benefit of accretion and subject to the burden of erosion on the southern side. The Registrar General appeared to accept this when
Certificate of Title volume 2800 Folio 163 was issued. The question is whether it is so entitled on the north.
I do not think it possible to come to a decision on the wording alone coupled with the diagram on the original grant. The line of the river shown by the dotted line appears to be north of a swamp area but no actual land is shown to the north of the metes and bounds line; the land on the south is subject to a metes and bounds description but is described as being "along the foreshore" the traverse being irregular but not as irregular as the northern traverse; and the land is described as being situated between Port Stephens and the
Myall River. In addition if the grant is of Portion 12 one would be entitled to consider whether the measured boundaries were the boundaries of
Portion 12. There is I consider an ambiguity which requires consideration of relevant material for its resolution.
The grant is stated to comprise Portion 12 of the Parish. The first plan to inspect is therefore the original plan of that portion from the Department of Lands. The original, which is somewhat fragile, was produced to the court for inspection and a near perfect copy is Exhibit A. It was prepared in 1875 after application by John Barnes pursuant to section 13 of the Crown Lands
Alienation
Act 1861. A copy of the Lands Department plan of Portion 12 is set out below without the colouring on it, some of the marks on it having been added later. For present purposes what is important is the diagram and the material in the tables of reference to corners and reference to traverse which is all part of the original plan. What would appear on the plan to be the boundary line is outlined in pink. Outside the pink the boundaries a-b and c-d are outlined in black. The line from 22 to 24 may be outlined in black but that is not clear. The line which appears to divide Port Stephens from the land outlined is an unbroken black line and the line which appears to be the line of the Myall River is a broken black line, the shading outside it being blue.
The Crown Lands (Alienation)
Act of 1861 was the first Act of New South
Wales legislature under responsible government dealing with the alienation of
Crown Land after the great selection before survey debates. Section 13 gave the right to apply for the conditional purchase of areas from 40 to 320 acres at 20 shillings an acre and to obtain such land unless a prior or simultaneous application was made. Section 17 of the
Act was as follows: "17 Crown Lands conditionally purchased under this Act shall if measured by the authority of the Government previously to such purchase be taken in portions as measured if not exceeding three hundred and twenty acres and if unmeasured and having frontage to any river creek road or intended road shall if within the
First Class Settled Districts have a depth of not less than twenty chains and otherwise shall have a depth of not less than sixty chains and shall have their boundaries other than the frontages directed to the cardinal points by compass and if having no frontages as aforesaid shall be measured in square blocks and with boundaries directed to such cardinal points provided that should it seem to the Minister to be expedient the boundaries of portions having frontages may be made approximately at right angles with the frontage and otherwise modified and the boundaries of portions having no frontages may be modified and necessary roadways and water reserves excluded from such measurement".

Frontage was defined as: "Frontage to any road river stream or watercourse which according to the practice of the Survey Department ought to form a boundary between different sections or lots of land".
Regulations were made under the Act on 1 November 1861. Regulation 21 required applications to be made in accordance with Form B which required the nomination of "the name of the river creek or road in which the land is situated". McRae's conditional purchase of 40 acres to the east of the subject land which became portion 33 and which is referred to in the description on
Barnes's grant was surveyed in
It would seem from this plan and the grant of McRae's portion in Certificate of Title Volume 933 Folio 219 that there was some land between the north eastern boundary of Portion 12 and the
River as the western boundary of McRae's grant is described as "commencing on the high water mark of Port Stephens Harbour at the southern end of the eastern boundary line of Portion 12 of 40 acres and bounded thence on the west by that boundary line and its northerly continuation in all bearing north 15 chains 6 links to the left bank of the Myall River" and it seems that there was a distance of about 300 links shown from the north eastern boundary of
Barnes' land to the bank of the River. However the description is taken from the 1865 Lands Department plan (Exhibit DI) and is not necessarily determinative of the matter as it is perfectly clear there is a substantial inlet at the north eastern end of the subject land and, although admitted into evidence without objection, the description in a later grant cannot bear upon the boundaries of an earlier grant Smith versus Nie1d(1889) [10 NSWR 171.] That principle however really applies where the later grant might derogate from the former and not in a case such as this where there is no dispute as to boundaries of adjoining portions.
There are some other surrounding circumstances of importance. The survey for Portion 12 was made under the 1872 surveyor's instructions. Or at least it was made when they were in force. These instructions had superseded the prior regulations. Both regulations are in evidence. It was put that regulation was significant, it stating that boundaries should follow natural features and otherwise be directed towards cardinal points but that regulation refers quite clearly to parish boundaries and not to portion boundaries. However section 17 of the Crown Lands (Alienation) Act 1861 and Regulation of the
Regulations under that Act are of like effect. There are however other regulations which I now set out: "37. In consequence of certain indefinite rights being conceded by the sale by the Crown of land having a frontage to swamps of fresh water, or lands liable to inundation otherwise than by tidal overflow, the margin of such swamps, etc, should not be made to form frontages for portions measured, but right lines should be adopted.
Offsets from traverse lines to fix the position of rivers, creeks, etc, should not exceed 150 links in surveys of country portions, nor 75 links in suburban portions. In cases where it is necessary to exceed the above limits, lines should be run and shewn on the plan.
The boundaries other than the frontages, or other road or natural feature boundaries which it may be necessary to adopt, cannot be directed merely at the desire of the purchaser otherwise than to the cardinal points by compass, although they may deviate from the cardinal points where a general subdivision, either at the time or afterwards, would unquestionably be improved thereby.
Traverse lines of survey are to shown in blue lines, and the bearings or angles and lengths, are either to be introduced in blue on the lines, or stated in a tabular form on the plan, with reference by numbers to the lines.
Lines of coasts, rivers, and creeks, etc, are to be shown, where the position is determined with precision, by black lines, and where otherwise by broken black lines; both sides of rivers are to be shown, and an arrow inserted to show the direction in which the waters flow.
The boundaries of swamps, forests, plains, lands liable to inundations, etc, are also to be represented, and the position and extent of any artificial improvements, such as buildings, fences, cultivation, etc, which may exist on or adjacent to lands being measured are to be clearly shown, and their character and approximate value stated in a note.
Boundaries of portions and allotments should be shown by black lines, whether dividing them from previous measurements, from unmeasured lands, or from roads, and the bearings or angles and lengths of all boundary lines should be clearly shown upon them."
These differ little from the 1864 regulations except that while under the earlier instruction a traverse could be shown in blue or pink under the 1872 regulations the traverse line was required to be coloured blue.
The application by
Barnes for his Conditional Purchase was not in evidence and I was told it could not be found. There was other subsequent material in evidence but it was not complete. The land in the original grant was transferred by John Barnes to his wife in 1887 and by her to Henry
Waddingham in November 1897. By transfer dated 3 July 1916 Henry Waddingham transferred part of the land to Allen Taylor and Company Ltd and the crown grant was then cancelled and a new Certificate of Title Volume 2800 Folio 163 issued for the residue.
The plan of subdivision required for the sale of part of the land from Waddingham to Taylor was apparently originally lodged as file plan 953878 and is now deposited plan 953878. That plan shows those parts of the original grant transferred being two parts not connected, the first comprising two acres at the eastern end and joining McRae's land and the second comprising 8 acres which appears to run on the north from traverse point 7 to just past point 10 on the plan of Portion 12. The plan shows a road between the relevant land and the river which might indicate that there was land between the original grant and the river but the evidence of Mr Surveyor
Clark was that this was a road on paper only to comply with the requirements of s89 of the Crown Lands Act 1884.
Certificate of
Title Volume 2800 Folio 163 shows nothing between the land in question and the river and describes the land as being "Portion 12 delineated in the Parish Map of the said Parish in the Department of Lands originally granted to John Barnes..." but excluding the land sold to Allen
Taylor and Company Ltd under the transfer which I have mentioned. Under the notifications on the Certificate of
Title it is stated that the title is issued "subject to such rights, if any, as the Crown may have acquired by reason of erosion by the sea". On the other hand the Certificate of Title
Volume 2732 Folio 206 which issued to Allen Taylor and Company Ltd shows there being a road to the north of the 8 acre parcel and would appear to indicate, at least as to the north eastern end, that the original high water mark was north of the original grant. It is clear that the original pegs for the traverse, being broad arrow pegs, were used for some of the corners for the file plan 953878 subdivision. There is also in evidence a proclamation reserving land west of Portion 12 from sale by a description indicating the north west boundary point of Portion 12 borders the River.
 .
Reference to subsequent material is said to be admissible in matters concerning boundaries as an exception to the rule which would generally exclude evidence of subsequent events to determine questions of ambiguous construction, although such evidence has in general not been highly regarded;
Wickman Tools versus Schuler AG <case>; [(1974) AC 235] at 261. A lot of the subsequent material is not directly relevant to the land in question, and it was not pressed upon me as having any great significance, if it had any significance at all. It was however admitted without objection. My view is that this material is not of assistance and in the absence of evidence of subsequent consensual conduct I should determine the matter on the wording of the grant and the evidence of surrounding circumstances at the time to establish the intention of grantor and grantee.

This is a very difficult matter, there being facts which support accretion and facts against it. Is the northern boundary determined by right lines or is it the mean high water mark of the river?
There are a number of facts which the plaintiff says indicate that the northern boundary is the mean high water mark of the Myall River. These are: a. That the land is described as being situated between Port Stephens and the Myall River. b. That no useful land is shown on the plan between the marked boundary and the river.
 c. That on the plan, Exhibit A, of the portion "the reference to corners" refers only to the corners a, b, c and d although it does go on to say "and good pegs placed at each traverse station". d. That the other lines are referred to as traverse lines being the lines running in general along Port Stephens and the mangroves on the Myall River.
Traverses are not generally boundaries but points taken for the purpose of calculating bearings and offset areas. e. That only the lines a-b, and c-d are outlined or bounded in black outside the pink line whereas that is not the position with the north and south boundaries. There is some unresolved question about the traverse of line 22 to f. That mangroves need to be under tidal influence to survive. g. There is a traverse line description of the southern boundary which is described as running along the foreshore of Port Stephens. Good pegs at traverse points would not be located in an area often under water and were obviously placed above mean high water mark. If that is a traverse line it is likely the northern line is also. h. The provisions of s17 of the Crown Lands Alienation Act 1861 as to form and frontage of portions.
As against this the defendant points to the following facts: a. It seems likely that there were broad arrow pegs placed at each traverse station. The evidence is that these are usually placed at boundary corners and not at traverse stations.
 b. Reference to "good pegs" appearing in the reference to corners table indicates that those pegs were intended to be boundary pegs. c. Broad arrow pegs on the traverse have been located and used for actual boundaries on a later subdivision under rile plan d. McRae's grant encompasses land 300 links north of the subject land at its north east corner indicating that point (a) is not and was not the mean high water mark as his grant extended to the dotted line indicating the river. It is described in Land
Grant Volume 933 Folio 219 as bounded on the west by the eastern line of Portion 12 of 40 acres "and its northerly continuation to the left bank of the Myall River". e. The description of the subject boundary of the southern boundary refers to Port Stephens whereas the description of the northern side does not refer to the Myall River. f. The northern boundary on the traverse line or metes and bounds description is accepted to be slightly south of the location of high water mark on the mangrove swamp. g.
What was thought to be the approximate high water mark is shown by the dotted line. It is clear that was not the boundary as it would have added about 10 acres to the grant. h. The north and south lines are pink not blue.
There are various possibilities about which it is quite impossible to draw a firm conclusion. I do not think the word "between" is sufficient to carry the day. The surveyor may not have considered the swamp to be subject to tidal influence or he may have thought it too doubtful to adopt its frontage as a boundary; or it may be that on preparing the grant description it was decided the matter was uncertain and it should be made certain by grant as grants were prepared in the Crown Lands Office or Lands Department. As I have said I have found this a most difficult matter. It is however for the plaintiff to make out its case. To do that it is necessary to establish that the true boundary was high water mark -and not that mark shown on the plans - thus requiring the description to be set aside as an error it being accepted that the metes and bounds description was not at the time a true description of the swamp boundary. In other words it would need to be accepted that there needed to be no metes and bounds description of the boundary other than lines a-b and c-d. I have come to the conclusion that is not the position. While I would accept it for the southern boundary I consider it would be too great a step outside the decided cases to accept it for the northern boundary there being a reference to the foreshore of Port Stephens but no reference to the banks of the Myall River. While I have some hesitation I determine that the northern boundary is a right line boundary.
It follows that the preliminary issue being the claim in paragraph 1 of the summons for a declaration that the doctrine accretion applies to the northern boundary should be answered by dismissing that claim.
It follows that the summons should be dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1996/10.html  
