

Regina versus Christine Jane Armstrong [1997] NSWSC 435 (26 September 1997) 
REGINA versus Christine Jane ARMSTRONG /96, 060669/96 
Friday 9 May 1997 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
SMART J, BRUCE J 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: Christine Jane Armstrong seeks leave to appeal against the severity of a sentence comprising a minimum term of eighteen months and an additional term of six months for possessing a prohibited drug for supply, being 19 gm of heroin. 
The applicant and K M Haynes, her boyfriend, who were convicted by a jury after a five-day trial, operated as a team. They did not deny joint possession. They claimed that the heroin was for their own use and not for supply.

On 11 April 1996, the applicant and Haynes were arrested at Rushcutters Bay by police who had been keeping an eye on that area. Nothing was found on them.
They were taken to their room at a Randwick motel where there were scales, bags, balloons, the heroin, $6430 in casino chips and $5430 in cash. The cash was stated to be winnings from the casino. The heroin was valued at $8000 and it was alleged by the accused that the heroin, the chips and the cash represented the proceeds of a $19,800 win at the casino. The records established that that sum had been so received but used in the purchase of a yacht for $60,000 with a man called Sinanovic.

The applicant and Haynes had a mobile phone. After their arrest it rang eleven times in twenty minutes with callers arranging meetings at a variety of inner city locations within the next hour. Consideration of their means, on a conservative estimate, revealed a $1700 per week call on their resources for drugs which was never satisfactorily explained by either of them. Nor did they explain their additional ability to live in motels and rent a car.

At their motel room, the usual accoutrements which accompany personal use of heroin were not found. However, both the applicant and Haynes were heroin addicts and it was obvious they were both using and supplying heroin. The
Judge found that the pair was running a profitable drug business of some size and had done so for some time.

Between early 1993 and early 1994 the applicant was sentenced for the offences of using a prohibited drug, stealing, dishonestly obtain a financial advantage and soliciting.

The applicant was born on 14 August 1965. The Judge, despite her protestations to the contrary, found that while she had worked in Australia, drug supply and prostitution had been her major sources of income. These findings were open to the Judge in respect of the two years before the subject offence.

In her evidence on sentence, the applicant maintained her innocence. She stated that she had a drug habit and now realised that she needed help to overcome it. She said that she had dried out but needed to ensure that she did not go back to taking drugs. She said that she had lost all her assets and had nothing.

The applicant submitted that her criminal history was not lengthy and that all her offences took place in a twelve-month period. It was a bad period in her life. She had kept the terms of the bond which she had been given. The Judge did not suggest that her record was a bad one.

The applicant submitted that a community service order or periodic detention would be more appropriate. She could continue her work as an aromatherapist and continue with counselling.

She relied on never having been in gaol before and said that it had been a very frightening and traumatic experience. She said that she had been rehabilitated and would not offend again.

She stated that the counselling available in gaol was limited because of the number of prisoners who were seeking the services of the counsellor. She produced certificates of achievement relating to some of the courses which she had undertaken in gaol.

There can be no challenge to the head sentence which the Judge imposed, namely, two years. The real question is whether this was a case where a longer than usual additional term was required.

Bearing in mind the applicant's drug addiction and the necessity to ensure that she does not go back to taking drugs, this was a case where a longer than usual additional term was required to ensure that she was supervised and did not go back to taking drugs, so far as that can be done.

It will be important that when the applicant is released on parole there be conditions set, having regard to the circumstances at the time, which ensure that she receives adequate counselling and treatment and even, if necessary, spends a period in a rehabilitation unit so as to ensure that she does not go back to heroin addiction.

Leave to appeal should be granted, the appeal should be allowed and the sentence imposed quashed. In lieu thereof the applicant should be sentenced to a minimum term of twelve months commencing on 27 September 1996 and ending on September 1997, and an additional term of twelve months commencing on 27
September 1997. The applicant is to be released on parole as from 27 September upon conditions determined by the Parole Board designed to deal with her drug condition and her rehabilitation.

BRUCE J: I agree.

SMART J: The orders will be as I have proposed.
 * * * 
