

Noel Raymond Campbell versus Rosine Campbell [1997] NSWSC 136 (16 April 1997) 
NOEL RAYMOND CAMPBELL versus ROSINE CAMPBELL /95; ED6469/92 
Wednesday 16 April 1997 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
MASON P, HANDLEY JA, BROWNIE AJA 
CATCHWORDS: [DE FACTO RELATIONSHIPS ACT](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/dfra220/) - property rights adjustment - no question of principle 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Allowed 
JUDGMENT 
MASON P: I agree with Brownie AJA 
HANDLEY JA: I agree with Brownie AJA.

Brownie AJA: 
The appellant, Noel Raymond Campbell, and the respondent, Rosine Campbell, lived together for a time in a de facto relationship within the meaning of the
De Facto Relationships Act 1984 (the Act), in a home unit which the appellant had bought some years before the relationship began. He was employed by Australia Post, and also had an interest in an organisation called Pro Ma
Distributors (Pro Ma). The respondent became involved in the Pro Ma business, and the parties entered into a partnership agreement regulating their affairs so far as concerned this business. At about the time that they separated, they entered into an agreement to terminate this partnership.

Afterwards, the respondent sued the appellant, claiming that he held the home unit subject to a constructive trust in her favour; alternatively, that he was estopped from denying that this was so; relief under the [Contracts Review
Act 1980](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) in relation to the termination of the partnership; an order for the adjustment of property rights under the provisions of the Act in relation to the home unit, the appellant's superannuation rights, and other assets; and an order for maintenance. The appellant brought a cross-claim seeking relief in relation to a car owned by the parties jointly, and an order for the removal of a caveat lodged by the respondent, claiming an interest in the home unit. By consent,
Young J ordered that the whole of the proceedings be heard by a master.

On the hearing, before Master McLaughlin, the respondent withdrew her claim for maintenance. The learned master dismissed the claims relating to the supposed trust, and under the [Contracts Review
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/); and there was no appeal from these findings. However, he ordered the appellant to pay $50,000 to the respondent, by way of adjustment of property rights; and made an order that the caveat be withdrawn upon the payment of that sum. The appeal is against the order for the payment of $50,000, and the lack of an order for the removal of the caveat.

The background 
The parties commenced living together on 17 May 1988, although they had enjoyed a personal relationship from September 1986 onwards. They ceased living together in December 1990. The respondent lived in the USA from
December 1990 until 11 May 1991, and the parties then resumed a personal, but not a de facto relationship. There were no children of the relationship, but each had children by earlier relationships.

The respondent was born on 31 May 1942. At the time of the commencement of the de facto relationship, she was self employed as a nail artist, or fingernail decorator.

The appellant was born on 4 December 1945. He had been employed by Australia
Post, and its predecessor, and had been contributing to a superannuation scheme, since 1962. He owned his home unit, subject to a mortgage.

Each party owned a car, and the two cars were sold. The proceeds of sale were used as part of the price paid for a new car, that they owned jointly.
Additionally, each brought other assets into the relationship. There is some controversy about the detail of this, dealt with below. The Pro Ma business never generated any profit, although each of the parties contributed substantially to that business, in terms of time, energy and enthusiasm.

The parties carried out some refurbishment work on the appellant's home unit, which had the effect of increasing its value by about $10,000. The respondent also made substantial contributions to the welfare of the appellant, as a homemaker.

The master found that the appellant had contributed about two thirds of the cost of acquiring the jointly owned car, but that after the end of the de facto relationship he had had by far the greater use of it, before he had sold it for $10,000; and the master concluded that it was proper to make an order in favour of the respondent for $5,000, in relation to the car. This part of the master's judgment was accepted on appeal.

In July 1991, after the termination of the de facto relationship, the appellant was made redundant, and was paid about $290,000, including about $54,000 by way of superannuation. He used part of this money, about $47,000, to pay off the mortgage debt on the home unit. The master rejected the respondent's claim to a proportion of the superannuation entitlement, and, again, there was no challenge to this finding on appeal.

The master went on to say: "The [respondent] relied upon an expectation interest. I am satisfied that both parties were genuinely of the view that the relationship would continue permanently. Indeed, the fact that on 29 May, 1988, shortly after the de facto relationship commenced, the [appellant] had made a will in favour of the [respondent] is clear evidence of his belief in this regard. I am satisfied that there was an expectation of the [respondent] that she would be entitled to rely on the continuation of the de facto relationship.

However, the existence of such an expectation is not necessarily decisive of the question of whether the plaintiff is entitled to receive financial recognition in consequence of that expectation. The factual context of the present claim is very far removed from that in the case of Dwyer versus Kaljo [(1992) 27 NSWLR 782], upon which this claim in regard to an expectation interest is based.

Nevertheless, the [respondent], on account of her expectation that the relationship would continue indefinitely, did not take any steps to preserve the assets which she had at the commencement of the relationship, with the consequence that her situation at the end of the relationship was, from a financial and material point of view, worse than at the beginning. In this latter regard I should refer to the evidence of the [respondent] about the necessity for her to sleep on a mattress on the floor, sharing her sleeping arrangements with her adult and ill daughter. Further, there was also evidence concerning the present health problems of the [respondent].

All in all, I consider that there was an expectation interest, but that that expectation interest should be reflected in the [respondent] receiving no more than a relatively small sum, essentially in respect to assets which she had at the commencement of the relationship but no longer had at the termination of the relationship. I consider it appropriate for the [respondent] to receive a component to reflect such expectation interest in the sum of $15,000.

Further, I consider that the [respondent] is entitled to receive a component to reflect her contributions in the role of homemaker, and her direct contributions towards the relationship by way of the provision of chattels and her relatively small monetary contribution (small in relation to the monetary contributions of the [appellant]) towards the renovation and improvements to the home unit. That component must, however, be viewed in the context that the [respondent] throughout the period of the relationship had the benefit of residing, free of rent or occupation fee, or of any formal monetary contribution towards the outgoings, in the residence of the [appellant] for a period of about two and a half years. It seems to me that these contributions should be reflected by a component by the sum of $30,000." 
The appellant complained about many matters.

Fresh evidence, and procedural unfairness 
The appellant sought to adduce fresh evidence. The Court refused to receive that evidence, stating that reasons for doing so would be given now.
 [Section
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s75a.html) of the [Supreme Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) provides that in a case such as this one, the Court is not to receive fresh evidence "except on special grounds", and it is well established that fresh evidence is inadmissible on appeal unless it can be said that it could not have been obtained and used at the trial if the appellant had exercised reasonable diligence, and also that if the fresh evidence had been adduced at the trial, a different result would have been so likely that it is unreasonable to suppose the contrary: Greater Wollongong Council versus Cowan <case>; [(1955) 93 CLR 435], 444. That is simply not this case.

The appellant complained that, contrary to the usual practice, he had been compelled to file his affidavit before the respondent filed hers, and that he had no opportunity at the trial to deal with the matters raised in her affidavit. However, the Court file shows that on the occasion when then the case was first listed for directions, on 13 July 1993, the parties joined together in asking the Court to make various directions. At that stage the respondent had recently filed an Amended Statement of Claim; and the directions that the parties sought included one that the appellant serve his affidavits in reply to the Amended Statement of Claim by one date, and another that the respondent serve her affidavits in reply by a later date. That is, the appellant consented to the giving of the directions he now complains about. Additionally, some 10 months passed by before the trial began, so that it is not correct to say that the appellant had no opportunity to answer the matters dealt with in the respondent's affidavit. He could have done so either by affidavit, or, with leave, by oral evidence at the trial, but, at least so far as appears on the material before us, he did not then seek to do so, or mention the topic at all.

Further, the whole of the evidence now sought to be adduced relates to events known to the appellant before the trial began, except for a letter dated 11
December 1992 from the respondent to the appellant's solicitors, which the respondent tendered, and which the appellant says he himself did not see until after the master had given judgment. There is no evidence that this is so, but assuming it to be so, any matter responsive to the letter is not shown to be evidence that was not available to the appellant at the trial, exercising reasonable diligence.

In any event, it is not at all clear that the argumentative matter put forward by the respondent in this letter influenced the judgment of the master, or that anything the appellant might want to say in response would make a different result likely.

The appellant also complained that his lawyers had not put before the master all the available evidence. Again, assuming that this was so, the appellant has not shown "special grounds", sufficient to justify the admission of this evidence now.

The limitation point 
Section 18 of the Act requires proceedings seeking orders for the adjustment of property rights to be brought within two years of the day upon which the parties ceased to live together, although there is a power to extend this time. The appellant now contends that the parties ceased to live together on 6
December 1990, but that the proceedings were not commenced until 24 December .

The appellant did not take this point, either in his pleadings or otherwise at the trial. Indeed, by his cross-claim, he sought an order for the adjustment of property rights in relation to the jointly owned car, and he could only have obtained that order if the proceedings under the Act had been properly before the Court. Further, in his affidavit he said: "The parties resided together as husband and wife from the 17th May 1988 to the 29th December ." In these circumstances, it is hardly surprising that in his reasons for judgment, the master adopted the date 29 December (at one stage, only, wrongly recorded as 27 December) as the date when the relationship ended, and did not examine the evidence to which the appellant now points, suggesting that it might have ended on 6 December.

The appellant contends that on 6 December, the day after the respondent returned from a trip to the USA, she moved out of the bedroom in which they had been sleeping, into a separate bedroom in the same home unit. There might well be room for a good deal of debate as to whether this meant that the de facto relationship ended on 6 December, but in any event it seems plain that if the limitation defence had been raised at the trial, there may well have been felt a need to investigate, and debate, the factual foundation for the defence, or to seek an extension of the two year period, so that it is now too late to raise the point: Suttor versus Gundowda Pty Ltd <case>; [(1950) 81 CLR 418], 438.

The appellant also submitted that the master had shown bias, in that he accepted the "ambiguous" statement in the appellant's affidavit, that the parties had lived together until 29 December 1990, without referring to the other evidence. Since, admittedly, there was no issue taken before the master as to the date of termination of the de facto relationship, this submission is without merit: it was not the master's function to explore the facts relating to a topic not put in issue before him.

Questions of credibility 
The master said: "I have already observed that there were many evidentiary matters which were in dispute between the parties. Evidence was given by other persons, who might be regarded in the nature of independent witnesses. Their evidence was essentially directed to relatively limited areas of the relationship between the parties, in particular, to the work of the parties for Pro Ma, that being an area concerning which I have already expressed the view that I find considerable difficulty in making any award to the [respondent]. The evidence of the chartered accountant, Mr. Day, on behalf of the [respondent], did little to advance her claim, since Mr. Day had to rely upon information provided by others, which information was far from complete. For example, he had not even been informed of the existence of the partnership agreement between the parties.

On other matters of dispute, essentially the evidence for the [respondent] was the evidence given by the [respondent] herself, and the evidence for the [appellant] was that given by the [appellant] himself. Accordingly, where it is appropriate that I make findings of fact concerning issues in dispute, those findings will depend largely upon the evidence of the [respondent] and the evidence of the [appellant]. It is proper, therefore, that I set forth my views concerning the credibility of those witnesses.

The [respondent] was voluble in her oral evidence, and spoke with a strong accent (which, at times, made it somewhat difficult to follow her evidence), since English was not her first language. Nevertheless, I considered that the [respondent] was a genuine witness, who was attempting to tell the truth. The evidence of the [respondent] was, however, far from complete or satisfactory.
She prepared a list of assets which she said she owned at the time of the commencement of the relationship (being the annexure to her affidavit to which
I have already referred), and a further list of assets which she said that she did not have at the termination of the relationship. The fate of many of those assets was obscure. For example, there was no adequate explanation as to what happened to a credit balance of $10,000 in the bank account which the [respondent] said that she held at the commencement of the relationship. As to the chattels, I do not consider that the evidence justifies the conclusion that where the [respondent] at the termination of the relationship did not have chattels which she had at the commencement of the relationship, the [appellant] necessarily either retained those chattels or received any benefit from them.

Nevertheless, it is quite clear that the [respondent] did bring into the relationship a not inconsiderable quantity of chattels and other assets, and that she ended the relationship with considerably less than she entered it.

The evidence of the [appellant] was far more precise than that of the [respondent] and was delivered with a greater degree of clarity. It should be recorded, however, that the [appellant] conceded that, in providing information for the preparation of partnership income tax returns, he had falsely asserted that the [respondent] had received a salary of $2,550 (pages -24 of the transcript). I am reluctant, therefore, to accept the unsupported evidence of the [appellant] where on matters of substance it conflicts with that of the [respondent]. My view in this regard does not mean, however, that
I necessarily accept the evidence of the [respondent] on such matters. I have already expressed my opinion that, although the [respondent] certainly was not attempting deliberately to mislead the Court, her evidence was far from complete or satisfactory, and in many respects (especially details of events and transactions) was lacking in precision." 
The appellant contended that the evidence of the respondent should have been rejected by the master, and should be rejected now, as being untruthful, intended to deceive, and unreliable. However, to the extent that the master formed a view about any fact, based upon the credibility of the parties, no appellate court can set aside that finding, because it thinks that the probabilities are against, or even strongly against that finding of fact; and the finding must stand unless it can be shown that the trial judge (or, here, the master) has failed to use or has palpably misused his advantage as trial judge, or has acted on evidence which was inconsistent with facts incontrovertibly established by the evidence, or which was glaringly improbable: Devries versus Australian National Railways Commission <case>; [(1993) 177 CLR 472], 479.

The appellant did not submit that the master had failed to use or had misused his position, but submitted, with copious references to the evidence, that the master should have preferred his evidence to that of the respondent. As
Devries shows, this approach falls short of what must be demonstrated before findings such as those in question can be overturned by an appellate court, but in any event, having read all of the evidence to which the appellant points, I am not persuaded that the master was in error in generally preferring the evidence of the respondent to that of the appellant, in the passage just quoted. I should, however, deal with some of this detail.

Early in the period of the de facto relationship, the respondent adopted the appellant's surname, at least for some purposes. In her affidavit, the respondent spoke of the parties travelling to Indonesia, in connection with the appellant's work, and then to Thailand and Nepal on a holiday. She attributed to him the statement that it would be better if "they" thought that she was his wife, and she said, between two passages that were objected to and rejected: "I was content simply to change my name for the time being". The master said: "Essentially for sociological reasons, especially associated with travel in foreign parts, the [respondent] used the surname Campbell during the Asian journey, and it would appear that she formalised that change of name shortly after their return to Australia at the end of August, 1988." 
The appellant pointed to evidence showing that the respondent did not adopt the name Campbell for the purpose of a bank account, or, he said, her passport or her driving licence; and he submitted that she did not "formalise" her change of name, and did not do so at the time mentioned. He went on to submit that it follows that the master must have relied upon a passage in the respondent's affidavit that was rejected, in which she said: "When we returned to Australia the [appellant] asked me to change my name on my passport and other documents because he said it would be better for business." 
It is correct that the evidence that was admitted shows only that the respondent adopted the name for some purposes, and that the evidence does not show that the respondent "formalised" her change of name precisely at the time mentioned, that is, just after the parties returned to Australia, at the end of August 1988, but the respondent did say in oral evidence, without challenge, that the appellant and she decided, whilst they were in Indonesia, that she "would go back to Sydney and change all [her] paper work".

Certainly, the evidence did not establish the proposition that the respondent "changed her identity whenever it suited her", as the appellant submitted, and in my view there was ample evidence to support the master's finding that the respondent expected that the de facto relationship would continue indefinitely. He proposed marriage to her twice, although, of course, they did not marry. He made a will in her favour. She said (in a passage in her affidavit that was initially rejected, but later admitted, after her cross- examination): "During the time we were together [the appellant] had made promises to me that
I had a half share in the unit and it was on these promises that I did not feel it was necessary to make provision for myself independently of our relationship as I assumed we would stay together and that [the appellant] was taking care of me." 
The master rejected the claim that the appellant held the unit on a constructive trust for the respondent, but this rejection does not affect the question whether the respondent had the expectation in question.

The master referred, in a passage quoted above, to the respondent claiming to have had a credit balance of $10,000 in a bank account at the time of "the commencement of the relationship". The respondent (quite properly) did not dispute that the totality of the evidence showed that whilst she had this much money standing to her credit in a bank account at the time of the commencement of her personal relationship with the appellant, in September 1986, this money had gone, apparently all spent, by the time the de facto relationship commenced, in May 1988. Perhaps there is an ambiguity in the master's use, in this context, of the expression "the commencement of the relationship", but this is not clear.

The account was in the name of the respondent as trustee for her daughter, but the master accepted that the money was that of the respondent herself.
Apparently, it represented the money paid to her on the termination of an earlier relationship.

The respondent advanced a case that her contribution to the property of the parties included this sum, and the master appears to have accepted at least that she had that much money at the time of the commencement of the relationship. As I have said, the respondent now accepts that this was wrong, and this needs to be considered when assessing the fate of the appeal, but for the moment, I am dealing only with the appellant's claim that we should substitute for the master's findings as to credibility some different finding.

The appellant points to the fact that the respondent failed to provide documentary evidence, in sharp contrast to the detailed documentary evidence he adduced; to her use of the device of putting the bank account in her name as trustee for her daughter, he suggests improperly; to her failure to lodge tax returns; to her "series of confusing and misleading statements"; and to a number of details going to the probabilities as to where the $10,000 she had once, had gone; and he submits that she "tried to mislead the Court". I do not think that it is open to us to come to this conclusion, in substitution for the view of the master, even though it is clear now that she cannot be given credit for having brought the $10,000 mentioned into the de facto relationship.

The appellant also referred to the fact that the respondent had been in receipt of social security benefits, and submitted that this meant that it must have been the case that she had at least one other bank account covering the period of the de facto relationship, that she had not disclosed. However, the evidence that she had received these benefits related to different and later periods of time, and, on the evidence, it does not follow that one should infer she failed somehow to make an appropriate disclosure, or that any such failure was dishonest, or that she had some money standing to her credit in some other bank account, not disclosed.

In relation to the jointly owned car, the master said that the appellant had "acknowledged that the [respondent] needs the motor vehicle for her work". The appellant submitted that he had made no such acknowledgment. He did not, in those very words, but he did make a series of admissions that made inevitable the conclusion that the respondent needed the car for her work; and I do not think that any more than that should be read into what the master said.

The appellant then referred, in detail, to the respondent's evidence as to what other assets she had brought into the relationship. I do not think I need say more than that it seems clear that the master regarded this evidence as unreliable; and that we cannot properly substitute a finding that it was dishonestly given.

The appellant submitted that the evidence established that the respondent had moved to the USA on 29 December 1990 to live in a de facto relationship with another man. The appellant himself was in Sydney throughout the relevant period, to May 1991, so that he had no direct knowledge of what, if anything, passed between the respondent and this man in the USA. His evidence as to the inferences he drew is therefore of no probative value. He could of course have led evidence as to the material from which he drew these inferences, seeking to have the court draw the same inferences, but he did not put forward anything significant in this regard. The respondent denied the proposition, and there was scarcely any other evidence on the subject.

What material there is establishes the following. Mrs Holt, a business acquaintance of the parties, was called as a witness for the respondent. In cross-examination she said that her ex-husband (who did not give evidence) had told her that the respondent was "going back to someone else", but that the respondent had not told her that. She said that she had asked the respondent whether this was "the case and just the look on her face" (sic). Perhaps the transcript is imperfect; and perhaps one can infer that Mrs Holt concluded from the look on the respondent's face that the respondent intended to go back to someone else, but this is a far cry from proving that the respondent did in fact leave the appellant, for the purpose of living in a de facto relationship with another man, or that she later had that relationship; and the same may be said of the appellant's contention now that the respondent left him "for a wealthier man".

It is shown that the respondent left Australia, having just bought a considerable quantity of new clothes, leaving behind many of her possessions, and giving away others; and I do not think it was in issue that she then intended to live in the USA, at least for a time, but that is all that is established, in terms of findings as to credibility.

The appellant is on stronger ground when it comes to assessing the position comparing the respondent's financial worth at the beginning with her position at the end of the de facto relationship, and I will return to this topic later.

The appellant made many other submissions going to questions of credibility, but I do not think it is necessary to go into all this detail. Repeatedly, when one examines the detail of the evidence, and compares this with the appellant's submissions, one finds that the appellant seeks to have this Court draw inferences which are not open on the evidence, or to make findings not supported by the evidence, and to do this with a view to substituting a different view as to the credibility of the parties. Particularly in a case like this one, where the master accepted the respondent as a truthful witness, but also as an unreliable witness as to some topics, this is impermissible, except in the circumstances mentioned in cases such as Devries.

The "double counting" point 
The appellant submitted that the master had "double counted", in that, when assessing what order for the adjustment of property rights should be made, in relation to the respondent's expectation interest, and to reflect her contributions as a homemaker, he had allowed what amounted to a credit to her for her contribution to the assets of the parties: see the passage from the master's judgment, quoted at pages 3 - 4 above.

Reading the evidence as a whole, and the master's reasons, I think that this might be correct: whilst in relation to the respondent's contributions as a homemaker, he was referring in part to her non-financial contributions towards the renovation and improvements to the home unit, he also referred to her "provision of chattels ... towards the relationship"; but he had already referred to this contribution when assessing what might be an appropriate sum in respect of the expectation interest.

However, it is unnecessary to finally decide this question, since the admitted error in relation to the sum of $10,000 means that it will be necessary to reassess what order should be made.

Timing considerations 
Section 20(1) of the Act provides: "On an application by a de facto partner for an order under this Part to adjust interests with respect to the property of the de facto partners or either of them, a court may make such order adjusting the interests of the partners in the property as to it seems just and equitable having regard to: the financial and non-financial contributions made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of the de facto partners to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the partners or either of them or to the financial resources of the partners or either of them, and the contributions, including any contributions made in the capacity or a homemaker or parent, made by either of the de facto partners to the welfare of the other de facto partner or to the welfare of the family ..." 
The appellant submitted that the master erred in comparing the financial position of the respondent at the time of the commencement of the personal relationship, in September 1986, rather than at the time of the commencement of the de facto relationship, in May 1988, with her position in 1991, rather than her position in December 1990. As I have said, the respondent concedes now that it was wrong to take into account the $10,000 that the respondent had in September 1986, but had spent before May 1988. This was wrong, not because there is some rule requiring a court to examine the position as at the precise dates when the de facto relationship began and ended, but because, in the circumstances of this case, the $10,000 did not represent a contribution by the respondent within the meaning of section 20.

In any event, I do not accept that there is a rule such as the appellant contends for. It is easy to visualise cases where that construction of the section would lead to injustice, and be contrary to the plain intention of the statute. For example, if two people decided to live together, but not until they had a suitable home, and one of them bought the home, in their joint names, before they started to live together, it can hardly be right to think that this is not something to take into account when deciding what order should be made: it constitutes a contribution by that party to the acquisition of the property of the parties.

On the other hand, I do think that, in the circumstances of this case, it is correct to look at the assets of the respondent at the end of the de facto relationship, in December 1990, rather than some months later, for the purpose of comparing her financial position at the end of the de facto relationship with her financial position at the beginning of that relationship. Her assets were depleted by her conduct in deciding to go to the USA in December 1990, and in disposing of some of her Australian assets, perhaps because it was impractical to take them with her to the USA. To the extent that her assets were depleted in this way, it does not seem to me to be just or equitable to, as it were, debit the appellant and credit the respondent with the value of this depletion. It is not one of the matters mentioned in section 20, and it is not a matter arising out of the de facto relationship, as distinct from something that happened after the relationship ended. Since it is necessary to reassess what order should be made, it is not necessary to explore the detail of the submissions as to whether the master made an error in this regard.

The appellant made a further complaint. He says that his financial position should have been assessed as at December 1990, when he was still employed by
Australia Post, and not in or after July 1991, when he had been made redundant, and paid some $290,000. As I understood him, he did not dispute that it would be proper to allow for the value of his accumulated superannuation rights, as at December 1990, or even to look at the sum actually paid to him by way of superannuation, but he said that it is not proper to look at the other sums paid to him, as part of his redundancy package. On the facts of this particular case, I accept that this is the correct approach, reflecting what has to be done under section 20. However, once again, it is not clear that the master took a different approach, and, in any event, it is necessary to reassess what order should be made.
 
The Pro Ma business 
The appellant made a number of complaints about this topic generally.
However, the master found that it had generated no income, or assets, so that it is not easy to see that the questions raised have any continuing relevance to the resolution of the litigation. Both parties worked for the business, and had this work contributed to the assets of either or both of them, it would have been relevant; but it did not.

The appellant now submits that since the business made a loss, the master should have taken that into account, as a negative factor when evaluating the respondent's contribution as a homemaker. It is not at all apparent that, as a theoretical proposition, this would be a correct application of section 20, but in any event, in this case, the position is that the parties regulated their affairs, so far as concerned the Pro Ma business, by means of a partnership agreement, and later, by means of a further agreement, terminating the partnership. The parties chose to conduct the trial by not proving the latter agreement, and on what evidence there is, I do not see how it can be just or equitable to treat the loss in the way contended for. It might be a matter calling for consideration under section 20(1)(a), but, at least in the circumstances of this case, it would not be right to treat it as a matter diminishing what would otherwise be accepted as a contribution under section (1)(b).

Reassessment 
As already stated, it is necessary to reassess what order is appropriate, under section 20; and I consider that it is appropriate to start by allowing $5,000 in respect of the car, as the master did, and by accepting his views as to credibility, and his findings of fact, except to the extent mentioned above.

Proceeding in this way, and leaving out of account the $10,000 spent before the commencement of the de facto relationship, the respondent took into the relationship "a not inconsiderable quantity of chattels and other assets", and had "considerably less" when the relationship ended; however it was not shown that the appellant necessarily retained those assets, or received any benefit for them. As the appellant acknowledged, the respondent's material position was worse than it had been at the beginning of the relationship. The master apparently thought that, the $10,000 aside, the measure of this worsening of her financial position was about $5,000. The appellant argued in detail that this finding, or estimate, was wrong, and sought to have us make a different finding, based upon our preferring his evidence to the respondent's evidence, but, as already mentioned, this course is not open to us. The figure of $5,000 is, of course, only an estimate, but the nature of the case and the evidence permits nothing more.

Viewing the position of the parties as at December 1990, when they separated, the respondent had an interest in the Pro Ma business, that produced no income. She owned a modest quantity of personal property, and had no significant savings. She proposed to go to the USA, and I am content to infer that she expected to be able either to support herself there, or to be supported. The appellant owned his home unit, which on the valuer's evidence was then worth $170,000, subject to a mortgage debt of about $47,000. The hone unit was furnished. He owed about $9,000 to a credit union. He was employed by
Australia Post, and had an entitlement to superannuation then worth about $54,000, acquired by contributions he had been making since 1962; and he in fact received that money in July 1991. I do not think that it would be just or equitable, in the circumstances of this case, to take into account, for the benefit of the respondent, the fact that he was later made redundant, and paid other sums of money reflecting his having worked for the one employer since : she had not made any real contribution to the acquisition or conservation of that "property", or potential property, and in any event, as at December 1990, at least so far as the evidence shows, this was not a matter that the parties had contemplated. The only other significant assets of the parties consisted of furniture, and the jointly owned car.

The master recorded that at the trial there was no genuine dispute that the respondent had "exercised the primary role of homemaker". He also found that she had done most of the housework during the period of the de facto relationship, and had contributed to the refurbishment of the home unit, including paying $4,000 towards its cost, and carrying out some of the work, and that she had contributed to the furnishing of the home unit. She ceased working as a nail artist, apparently in about July 1990, shortly before going to the USA, initially at least on Pro Ma business. The de facto relationship lasted for a period of some 2 1/2 years.

The appellant contended that we should make various different findings, preferring his evidence to hers, but for the reasons stated above, this course is not open to us; and we are limited to the evidence given at the trial.

Weighing up all these matters, I propose substituting the sum of $35,000 for the sum of $50,000 fixed by the master.

Costs 
The appellant contended that the master was in error in ordering him to pay the respondent's costs, having regard to what she claimed, what she obtained, and what had happened in the course of the parties attempting to compromise the dispute. I am not persuaded that the case was not one where the ordinary rule, that costs follow the event, was inappropriate, and this view is reinforced by my conclusion as to the fate of the appeal.

The caveat 
It seems likely that the respondent did not have an estate or interest in the home unit property, capable of supporting a caveat, but no argument to this effect was advanced at the trial, and the order that the master made, that the caveat be removed upon payment of the sum of $50,000, was an order made by consent. In those circumstances, apart from varying the order by substituting the figure of $35,000, I do not think it is appropriate to vary or discharge the order now, but that should be without prejudice to the right of the parties to make such application to the Equity Division in relation to the caveat as they may be advised.

Orders 
I propose the following orders: Appeal allowed.
 Vary Orders 1 and 4 made by Master McLaughlin on 23 February 1995, by substituting the figure of $35,000 for the figure of $50,000.
 Otherwise appeal and cross-appeal dismissed, without prejudice to the right of the parties to make such application to the Equity Division as they may be advised concerning the caveat.
 Order the respondent to pay appellant's costs of appeal.
 Grant to the respondent a certificate under the [Suitors' Fund Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/).
 * * * 
