

Regina versus Bowhay (No. 5) Matter No 70074/97 [1998] NSWSC 662 (19 November )

Last Updated: 12 January 1999 
REGINA versus ADAM JOHN BOWHAY (NO. 5) /97 November 1998 
Dunford J and a Jury of Twelve 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Criminal Division 
JUDGMENT - (see p 564 of transcript) 
HIS HONOUR: A request has been made on behalf of the accused to recall, for further cross-examination, Det Const Merkel, who gave evidence earlier. In particular it is desired to cross-examine him on two points: one is whether the accused was given a meal at Wodonga Police Station prior to the second recorded interview, and the other is whether Merkel knew that a message had been received through the police system relating to the accused to the effect that he was possibly suicidal. (See the reverse side of MFI 7.) 
Generally a witness will be recalled at the request of an accused or those acting on his behalf if there is any possibility that he can give further useful evidence. However, in this case I am not satisfied that any useful purpose would be served in recalling the witness.

As regards whether he was given a meal, Merkel has said that he did not see him given a meal. The last witness, Constable Hunt, has said that he did see him eating a meal in the interview room at Wodonga Police Station shortly before the second recorded interview. I assume, for present purposes, although
I am not entirely sure of it, that Hunt also said that Merkel was in the room at some stage; he certainly was there during the recorded interview. It is therefore suggested that there is an inconsistency between Merkel and Hunt.

Part of the accused's case is that he was not given any food except a small repast shortly before the third recorded interview which commenced on Friday st some 24 hours later at Wangaratta Police Centre at about 9.20pm.

There is considerable evidence so far, which apparently is disputed, that he was given a number of meals in the intervening period. It is the accused's case that one of the reasons he gave the third recorded interview was that he was hungry and therefore distressed and uncomfortable, apart from the threats that had allegedly been made to him.

If Merkel now agrees, contrary to his earlier evidence, that he did see the accused given a meal at Wodonga Police Station before or shortly before the second recorded interview, that is, agrees with Hunt, it cannot in any way assist the accused's case that he was not given any meals prior to the Friday evening of the 21st.

If, on the other hand, Merkel maintains his position that he did not see him given any meal at Wodonga Police Station, it may tend to contradict Detective
Hunt, but all that amounts to is recalling Merkel to challenge the credibility of Hunt, which is not allowed. I see no third alternative.

For this reason I will not allow Merkel to be recalled for that purpose.

In relation to the other matter, whether they were aware that a notification had been received that the accused may have been suicidal, this only arose in the cross-examination of Hunt when he was challenged as to the notes that he had allegedly made regarding the conversation that he had had with the accused at Tallangatta Police Station, and it has been submitted that if Merkel knew, then further questions could have been asked of the accused to ensure his welfare, and in fairness to him.

What we do know is that the accused did not commit suicide, and there is no evidence that he attempted it. I fail to say to see what useful questions could have been asked but, in any event, whether Merkel knew of this suggestion that he may have been suicidal or not, seems to me to be totally irrelevant to the credibility of what was said by the accused in any of the recorded interviews.

It follows that I can see no useful point in having Merkel recalled and the application is refused.
 * * * 
