

Mike Gaffikin Marine P/L versus Princes Street Marina P/L and Ors [1997] NSWSC (4 February 1997) 
MIKE GAFFIKIN MARINE PTY LTD versus PRINCES STREET MARINA PTY LTD & ORS /92 
MONDAY 15 JULY 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: On 21 June 1995 I gave judgment in these rather complicated proceedings. The orders to carry out the reasons for judgment were entered on 6 October 1995. Although I stood the matter over for short minutes to be brought in, and if necessary their content to be discussed, my memory is that what actually happened is that the parties accepted the common set of short minutes, which contained the following: "THE COURT ORDERS THAT: ...
that the third defendant pay the costs of the proceedings as assessed or agreed. ...
liberty to restore upon three days' notice to the third and fifth defendants to argue any allocation of costs orders against them. ...
the fifth defendant pay the plaintiff's costs of the action in conjunction with the third defendant as agreed or assessed." 
The matter comes back to me today pursuant to the liberty to restore in order on the motion of the fifth defendant.

The plaintiff's costs were in due course assessed at $137,236.06. The question is whether those costs should (a) be jointly borne by the third and fifth defendants; or (b) borne by one of them; or (c) borne severally by them in some proportion which I should fix.

Mr Hogg for the fifth defendant says that the court should make an apportionment for three reasons: first, because there are here really two distinct claims, rather than a claim that two defendants are jointly liable under the same cause of action; secondly, it is appropriate where more costs are attributable to one part of the case than the other for the court to make an apportionment, and that is the case here; and thirdly, that the pleadings against the various defendants were in unequal amounts, being $120,000 in the case of the fifth defendant and $272,783 in respect of the third defendant.

The plaintiff takes the view that it has an order for costs against both the third and fifth defendants and it wishes to be paid the amount that was duly taxed or assessed.

The third defendant has appealed to the Court of Appeal. The fifth defendant did not appeal.

The third and fifth defendants would be content, pending the appeal, to each pay into court for payment out to the plaintiff fifty per cent of the amount of the costs taxed, provided that there were appropriate secured undertakings to repay. However, the plaintiff says that the present point needs to be decided because it is entitled, it says, to an order for costs in the full amount against both the third and fifth defendants and if the third defendant is successful in its appeal the plaintiff would still wish to be able to pursue the full amount of costs against the fifth defendant.

Thus whilst the proposal by the defendants should be implemented for practical reasons pending the determination of the appeal, it is still necessary to decide the question arising on Mr Hogg's notice of motion.

Ordinarily, orders for costs against two or more defendants are both joint and several, Thiess Watkins White Constructions Ltd versus Witan Nominees (1985) Pty
Ltd [[1992] 2 Qd R 452], 453. The present order 13 makes the liability joint only. However, the only consequence of this is that such a departure merely means that any proceedings to recover costs may have to be against both defendants, unless one is bankrupt. The court may make an order for costs to some other effect, but it will usually only do so if there is some special circumstances shown, Trade Practices Commission versus Nicholas Enterprises Pty
Ltd [(1979) 28 ALR 201], 210. It ordinarily will not do so if the defendants can in a practical sense be considered "partners in crime". The reason for this is that if one defendant should, for instance, become insolvent it is a more just solution that the other defendant should pay the costs, rather than the loss fall on the successful party: (The Nicholas case at p 210.) 
There are two examples, at least, in the authorities where separate orders have been made. In Dansk Rekylriffel Syndikat Aktieselskab versus Snell [[1908] Ch 127](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1908%5d%202%20Ch%20127 "View LawCiteRecord" ) at 138, one defendant did not put on a defence and there was judgment, the other went for trial and lost. It was held that there should be a special order as to costs so that the taxing officer would certify how much of the costs was properly attributable to the defendants jointly and what to each separately and several orders should be made.

In Stumm versus Dixon & Co [(1889) 22 QBD 529] at 533-4
Lord Esher MR said that where defendants put in separate defences and different issues were tried and different amounts of time were taken in respect of the various issues it may be appropriate to depart from the general rule.

There are a series of cases, of which the most recent relevant English example is Ellingsen versus Det Skandinaviske Compani [[1919] 2 KB 567], where various defendants each retained the same solicitor and it was held that each was only responsible for an aliquot part of the costs. However, for the reasons set out in Korner versus H Korner & Co Ltd [[1951] Ch 10] at 17, that principle does not apply in the situation where, as here, not only do the parties proffer separate issues, but they are separately represented by counsel and solicitors.

The question then is whether the circumstances of the present case are sufficiently special to go outside the normal rule. I do not consider they are. The activities of the two sets of defendants were interconnected. It is true, as Mr Hogg points out, that the third defendant was sued for breach of fiduciary duty to a co-venturer in a company under the provisions of <case> of the Corporations Law, and the fifth defendant was sued for breach of fiduciary duty as a mortgagee, but the essential matter which founded the liability of the defendants was that at the active suggestion of the third defendant and with, at least, naive incompetence of an officer of the fifth defendant the plaintiff lost out.

It does not seem to me to be a case where the evidence fell into compartments or where the parties were truly divorced one from another. The whole of the factual and legal situation was co-mixed and although "partners in crime" is an unfair epithet, the parties were partners in unconscionability.

Accordingly, it seems to me that as between the plaintiff and the defendants the normal rule should apply and the plaintiff is entitled to an order for costs against both the third and fifth defendants.

Mr Hogg also based his claim on the equitable doctrine of contribution. The third defendant has a similar claim pending by motion in the Court of Appeal against the fifth defendant. Both Mr Hogg and Mr W Hodgekiss, who appeared for the third defendant, agreed that the doctrine of contribution applied to the present situation. I am sure this is a proper concession, though a quick look through the Equity text books surprisingly shows no example where the doctrine has been applied in a situation where there has been a joint order for costs, but as Fisher J pointed out in the Nicholas case that situation in fact very rarely occurs in practice.

As the doctrine applies, one has to consider how it should apply in the present case.

I should point out that there is actually no claim or cross-claim in the litigation by either the third or fifth defendant for contribution against each other. Essentially (although it is practical to determine the matter in the existing suit) there should be a new suit between the third and fifth defendants. In that new suit any questions of unclean hands or unconscionability could be raised.

There is very little authority as to how one should approach questions of contribution in the present type of case. There seem to me to be three possible answers to the question in what shares would it be conscionable for the third and fifth defendants to bear between themselves the costs which have to be paid to the plaintiff. The first is that as "equality is equity" the third and fifth defendants should each bear a moiety of the costs. The second is that they should bear the costs in the proportion that $120,000 bears to $272,783. The third is that the contribution should be according to the amount of "fault".

It is clear from my reasons for judgment and from the comments that I have already made that the causa causans of the plaintiff's costs was more attributable to the third defendant than to the fifth defendant. However, as far as I know there are no authorities showing that this is the proper method of approaching assessment of contribution.

Counsel asked me not to decide the amount of contribution until they had had a chance to consider the matter further and I am happy to accede to this request. It may well be that the matter will be decided in the Court of Appeal on the third defendant's motion.

It seems to me that it would be helpful if I stated my present view as to the rough assessment of the degree of fault so that, unless the parties wish to address me further on the matter, the Court of Appeal would have figures before it which might save time and expense. Accordingly, I will record those figures and put them in a sealed envelope marked for identification 1001 with the words "Not to be opened without the leave of a Judge", so that if the parties do wish the Court of Appeal to decide the matter and they wish the
Court of Appeal to refer to the sealed envelope that can happen. I am quite happy also, if everybody agrees, to state the figure now, but I thought that it would probably be more appropriate for counsel to reflect upon the matter before the figure is revealed.

Accordingly, it follows that on the fifth defendant's motion filed in court this morning I decline to allocate the costs of the suit between the third and fifth defendants and stand over the motion, insofar as it relates to contribution, until the appeal is considered. In case no resolution is made earlier it will be listed in my list on 4 February 1997 at 9:30 am and if no parties appear on that occasion I will merely dismiss the motion.

As to costs, the plaintiff's costs of the notice of motion should be part of the plaintiff's costs of the suit. If that causes any problems I will reserve further consideration. I also reserve further consideration of the costs between the defendants.
 * * * 
