

Dorothy Dawn Sansom versus Dr. John Ewan Macdonald Gill and Ors [1996] NSWSC (24 December 1996) 
DOROTHY DAWN SANSOM v. DR. JOHN EWAN MACDONALD GILL & ORS /89 
TUESDAY 24 DECEMBER 1996 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
BADGERY-PARKER J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff commenced an action for damages on 28 July 1989 (No. 12727 of 1989) against five defendants named therein. She alleged causes of action relating to treatment she had received as a patient at Chelmsford Private Hospital.

On 9 February 1990, the plaintiff filed a notice of motion returnable on 16
March 1990 for leave to join two additional defendants, one of whom was Dr.
Gill, and for an extension of the limitation period against him. An affidavit in support was filed on 15 February. On 16 March 1990, the plaintiff and all of the defendants including the two proposed new defendants were represented and the matter was stood over generally by consent. It came before the
Prothonotary on 22 March 1991 and again was stood over generally. On 6
September 1991, an application was made to the then list judge, Studdert, J., to restore the motion to the list. By that time there had been a change in the identity of the plaintiff's solicitor. The associate's note says merely, "counsel to be notified as to further listing". Nothing seems to have been done thereafter, either by the court or by the parties, to bring the motion on until 25 August 1993.

On that date a notice of motion was filed on behalf of the plaintiff, returnable on 10 September 1993 seeking inter alia an order that the plaintiff's notices of motion of 9 February 1990 and 21 December 1990 be relisted for further directions. On 10 September that motion was listed before a registrar who adjourned it to 12 November. On 12 November there was no appearance of the parties and the motion was struck out.

In the meantime, I had assumed the management of all of the "Chelmsford" matters and they were listed before me on 25 November 1993. The plaintiff took steps to bring this matter before me on that occasion. Directions were given for the filing of affidavits and a direction was specifically given that the plaintiff's solicitor provide to Dr. Gill's solicitor "sufficient particulars to identify which of the material filed is to be relied upon against that defendant".

The Chelmsford matters next came before me on 8 April 1994. Times previously fixed for the filing of affidavits against the original defendants were extended but no further specific directions were given. On 28 July 1995, directions were given in the whole group of matters generally. The plaintiff and Dr. Gill were represented; no directions were given specific to this case.
It is clear that the plaintiff at that stage was not pressing to have resolved the question whether Dr. Gill should be added as a party.

On the next occasion, 22 September 1995, and again on 24 October 1995, there was no appearance by or on behalf of the plaintiff Sansom. Directions were given for the further conduct of matters generally involving Dr. Gill. On 14
December 1995, Mr. Gorrick of counsel appeared for the plaintiff. I made an order which is recorded in the following terms:- "I direct that should it be desired by the plaintiff to proceed with an application to extend time or any application to amend pleadings or any other interlocutory application that the same be filed and served on or before 24
January 1996 and that any affidavit material to be relied upon be filed and served by that date and that provided the defendant/respondents to any such application request particulars before 22 December 1995 those particulars are to be provided by 24 January 1996." 
In the meantime, the solicitor acting for Dr. Gill had filed a motion on 10
October 1995 returnable on 19 October 1995 seeking the dismissal of the plaintiff's motions. Affidavits of the plaintiff's solicitor sworn 17 October and 12 December 1995 were filed in support of that motion. On 16 February , the plaintiff sought and obtained leave to discontinue the proceedings against Dr. Gill, that is to say the motions for leave to join him as a defendant; and I ordered that the plaintiff pay the costs of Dr. Gill in respect of that motion. I reserved the question of whether the plaintiff should pay the costs of the motion filed by Dr. Gill seeking dismissal of the plaintiff's motion. I now give my reasons for the former order and deal with the second issue. I deal with the second matter first.

The question whether the plaintiff's motions for joinder of Dr. Gill and related orders should be dismissed was a question to be argued upon the hearing of those motions. There was therefore no need for Dr. Gill to file a separate motion to have such an order made. If, as I gather was clearly the case, he was concerned at the delay in bringing the matter to a head, it was open to him simply to take steps to have the plaintiff's motions listed for hearing. I therefore make no order in respect of the costs of the notice of motion filed on behalf of Dr. Gill on 10 October 1995, to the intent that each party should pay his or her own costs of that motion.

So far as concerns the plaintiff's motions, they having been discontinued, there was little if anything that could be said against an order that costs should follow the event. Those motions having been filed, the defendant was put in the position of having to prepare to meet them. The defendant took considerable steps to do so, including repeated requests for particulars which, as the bundle of correspondence annexed to Mr. Geddes' affidavits demonstrates, were not responded to over several years. As early as 2 December , Dr. Gill's solicitor indicated readiness to allow the plaintiff to discontinue what was suggested was a hopeless action without any order for costs provided the matter was brought to finality in the very near future; and on 15 April 1994, offered to have the matter disposed of on the same basis provided the plaintiff discontinue prior to 20 May 1994. That offer was renewed on 13 June 1995 and the time for acceptance extended until 30 June
At that stage, the matter of Malouf v. Gill had been heard before
Sully, J. but judgment had been reserved. It must have been obvious to the parties at that time that any plaintiff (including Mrs. Sansom) could anticipate considerable difficulty in seeking to proceed against Dr. Gill on the basis of a statement of claim in the form upon which the plaintiff Sansom proposed to proceed.

For whatever reason, the solicitors for the plaintiff failed to reply to letters from Dr. Gill's solicitor dated 2 December 1993, 15 April 1994, 13
June 1995, 7 September 1995, 10 October 1995, 13 October 1995, 17 October 1995 and 28 November 1995. On 5 December 1995 Mr. Geddes noted in a letter to
Messrs. Falvey Associates that, "the last letter from your office was dated
September 1993". When this matter came before me on 16 February 1996, Mr.
Geddes tendered further correspondence from which it appears that only on 14
February, and following two further letters from Dr. Gill's solicitors, did the plaintiff's solicitor inform the defendant's solicitor of the intention not to proceed further against his client. The apparent total failure on the part of those representing the plaintiff to pay any attention to this matter over a series of years is quite unexplained. I do not propose to enquire into it further.

It was clearly the case that Dr. Gill had to take the steps which were taken on his behalf as set out in Mr. Geddes' affidavits. Substantial costs were obviously incurred and I see no basis at all upon which the plaintiff (or perhaps the plaintiff's solicitor - that is a matter between them) should be relieved of the obligation to pay those costs.

I have indicated a view that it was unnecessary for Dr. Gill to file a separate motion. I note additionally, however, that there does not appear to be any suggestion that the plaintiff incurred any additional costs by reason of that step having been taken. The affidavits of Mr. Geddes of 17 October and December 1995 seem to have been prepared with a view to pressing the motion for dismissal of the plaintiff's proceedings, but they were equally admissible in evidence and necessary to the defendant's case in answer to the plaintiff's motion seeking to join him as a defendant in the proceedings. In those circumstances, I am of the view that the costs of preparing and swearing those two affidavits should be regarded as costs incurred not in support of the defendant's motion but in answer to the plaintiff's motions and payable by the plaintiff as such.

I make the following orders:-
The motion filed by Dr. Gill on 10 October 1995 is dismissed. Each party is to pay his or her own costs of that motion.
I order that the defendant's costs of the plaintiff's motions, which on 16
February 1996 were ordered to be paid by the plaintiff, be taken to include the costs of preparation, swearing and service of the affidavits of D.A.G.
Geddes sworn 17 October 1995 and 12 December 1995.
 * * * 
