

Terry Zisti and Anor versus Ryde Joinery P/L and Ors [1996] NSWSC 191 (12 June )

TERRY ZISTI & ANOR versus RYDE JOINERY PTY LTD & ORS /96 
THURSDAY 2 MAY 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This case originally commenced in the Local Court. It was transferred to the District Court and more recently transferred to this court. Although I may have shown some exasperation with Mr Nicholls during the course of the argument, I do pay tribute to him for thinking of every possibly conceivable point that might have assisted his client in resisting the claim of the plaintiffs. However, with great respect, many of the points were complete red herrings, for reasons which I will shortly develop.

The plaintiffs are the present registered proprietors of the subject property.
The first defendant is the alleged lessee. The second and third defendants are guarantors of the lessee, which is a private company. For simplicity I will refer to these three defendants simply as "the defendants". The fourth to ninth defendants, who have been represented before me by Mr Colefax of counsel, are solicitors who acted for the plaintiffs on the purchase of the property and I will simply refer to them as "the solicitors".

In the first half of 1990 the registered proprietors of the land in folio identifier 5/15740 were Chris Vournazos, Julia Vournazos and Amalia Alexatos.
Somewhere in March 1990 they reached an understanding with the defendants that the defendants would lease from them the subject premises, which are factory premises at 9-11 Sheffield Street, Kingsgrove, for three years from 1 June together with a five year option for renewal. Pursuant to this understanding a lease was signed by the then registered proprietors and sent to the solicitors acting for the proposed lessee on 21 March 1990 under cover of a letter, which is Ex AX12. That letter contains the following paragraphs: "Please note that the Lease must be executed by your client before they move into the premises and that despite the fact that the Lease commences on 1st
June, 1990 and that your client is entitled to possession of the premises rent free until that date, the terms and condition of this Lease (except for payment of any rent and outgoings) apply immediately from your client taking possession of the premises. Please confirm this is your client's understanding.

Please have your client execute the Lease and return same with a cheque in payment of our costs and a cheque in payment to our client for the one (1) month's bond.

In order to expedite this matter, these documents have been forwarded to you without our client's final approval and we reserve our client's rights in this regard." 
The letter appears to have been signed by Mrs Sally Tuckfield, a solicitor employed by Heidtman & Co on that firm's letterhead.

Somewhere about the end of March 1990 the defendants went into possession of -11 Sheffield Street, Kingsgrove.

On 23 April 1990 Mr Hetherington of C P White & Sons, the solicitors for the defendants, replied to the letter of 21 March. His letter then continued: "We now return the Lease in duplicate duly signed by our client. Would you please note that neither the submission nor signing of the document by our client at this stage implies acceptance of all the terms and conditions of the
Lease. In particular acceptance of the Lease offer is subject to your client's agreement to the following:- ...
 ...
 ...
 Acceptance of the final Lease in this matter is expressly subject to repair of major leaks in the building roof." 
On 27 April Mr Hetherington again wrote and asked that Heidtman & Co seek instructions as to whether in lieu of a cash deposit or bank guarantee the proposed lessors would accept either a personal guarantee or security over stock. They said that they would appreciate a reply on that matter and the matters raised in their previous letter as soon as possible.

On the same day Mrs Tuckfield faxed a letter back referring to the letter of April and saying in respect of point 4: "We understand that our client is negotiating direct with your client regarding repair of the leaks in the building roof." 
There was then further correspondence about costs and about a possible deed of charge over stock rather than a cash deposit. The lessee's cheque, payable to
Heidtman & Co, was furnished on 3 May 1990 and on 15 May 1990 Mr
Hetherington wrote about the deed of charge and then said: "We note otherwise that the matters would appear to be in order in relation to the terms of the lease. Would you please return the lease document to us with amendments duly made to enable the amendments to be initialled by our client." 
The property was auctioned by the then proprietors and it having been passed in at auction it was sold by private treaty to the present plaintiffs, who were the highest bidders. A contract was signed on 24 May 1990 in the 1988 edition of the standard form. It annexed a photocopy of the lease which had been executed by the defendants apparently on about 23 April 1990. Special condition 29 indicated that liquidated damages would be payable if completion did not take place before 13 June 1990 for any reason not solely attributable to the vendor. Special condition 30 then provided as follows: "The parties agree that the lease annexed hereto and marked annexure "A" (the "Lease") is required to be registered. If the Lease has not been lodged for registration by the date appointed or fixed for settlement and completion of this Agreement the Purchaser shall on settlement and completion accept such
Lease in registrable form together with the amount of registration fees and will lodge the same for registration in the Land Titles Office prior to the lodgement of the Transfer in favour of the Purchaser." 
Settlement took place on 22 June 1990. The lease had not been registered by that time. It would seem that there had been a notice to complete and that the plaintiffs' solicitors were concerned that if there was not completion the vendors might claim liquidated damages. The settlement was effected, so far as the purchasers' solicitors were concerned, by their settlement clerk. The settlement clerk had instructions to receive, amongst other things, the memorandum of lease in duplicate. However, that did not happen. Instead
Heidtman & Co gave an undertaking in the following form: "We, Heidtman & Co, undertake to have the Lease between Chris Vournazos,
Julia Vournazos and Amalia Alexatos (lessors) and Ryde Joinery Pty Ltd resealed and return to Owen Hodge & Son and answer any requisitions from the Land Titles Office." 
Owen Hodge & Son were the solicitors for the purchasers.

The problem would appear to be that the seal of the lessee had been affixed in red ink. The regulations made under the [Real Property
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/) in force at that time (although those regulations have been repealed a corresponding regulation is in force at present) required that documents to be presented for registration bearing a seal had to be sealed in clear legible dense black ink or dense dark blue ink.

The purchasers were also given an undertaking on settlement that a deed of charge between themselves and Ryde Joinery Pty Ltd, being a substitute security deposit, would be procured and delivered to the purchasers. However, apart from that matter there is no evidence that either of the plaintiffs or their solicitors had any knowledge that there was any problem about the validity of the lease.

Heidtman & Co were not able to fulfil their undertaking. The reason for this was that the first defendant whom I will simply call "the lessee" would not reseal the lease. The lessee took the view that until it considered that the roof was fixed it did not intend to do anything. This attitude became apparent to the purchasers and their solicitors after they had paid their money and obtained a registrable transfer and the certificate of title, but before 15 November 1990 when, as the narrative will show, the lease between the plaintiffs and the lessee was registered.

The initial registered proprietors appear to have negotiated with the defendants and made some promises in respect of repairing the roof and there would seem to be no doubt at all that the roof did leak. After the completion of the sale the fact that there was a leaking roof problem was made apparent to the plaintiffs and they made contact with a builder who was apparently skilled in this type of work, Maintenance Applicants NSW Pty Ltd, who boasted, inter alia, of having a specialty in waterproofing. That company gave advice that there were different approaches to the problem and that they hoped that a particular method could well solve the problem cheaply. That company put its first proposal into effect in October 1990. There do not appear to have been any complaints about leaks between October 1990 and March 1991. Whether that is because there were no leaks, or because it was a time of drought or because the principal of the defendants was too busy with other matters, it is not necessary to resolve. However, on 13 March 1991 the second defendant, Mr
Patane, the controller of the first defendant, wrote to the plaintiffs regretting to advise that there were continued roof leaks. The lessee threatened to seek alternative accommodation. The plaintiffs then asked their builder to do further work and this further work was done in April 1991.
Evidence has been given on behalf of the plaintiffs that this work completely cured the problem. Mr Durrant, the managing director of the builder that did the work, and Mr Zavelsky, an independent building expert, gave evidence to that effect.

Mr Patane, however, produced some photographs which he said had shown water damage in June 1991. There was strong dispute about that matter. The plaintiffs say that although 11 June 1991 is stamped on the back of the photographs, when they last saw the photographs there was no such brand upon them. Mr Nicholls for the first to third defendants, however, points to an almost contemporaneous letter written by Mr Patane to his solicitors during the same month which mentions that there was a water problem in June 1991.

No matter what the truth of the matter, there does not appear to have been any complaint made to the plaintiffs. The reason for this would appear to be that the letter from Mr Patane to his solicitors drew a reply from the solicitors to the effect that Mr Patane had better make up his mind whether he was saying that there was a lease or was not a lease and should not make any formal statements until he had made that decision. Evidently he never did make up his mind until he gave notice late in 1991 that because of the state of the premises the first defendant was vacating. It vacated the premises on or about January 1992.

It is relevant to note that the defendants not only leased the present premises in Kingsgrove, but also leased another factory nearby from a different lessor. This other factory was in Forrester Street. It would seem that the main part of the first defendant's business was carried on at
Forrester Street and that the Sheffield Street premises in question in the instant case were used mainly for storing work in progress or material before or after the material had been processed. The defendants were also having disputes with the landlord of the Forrester Street property, again it would appear over water penetration and the defendants vacated the Forrester Street building at the same time as they vacated the present building.

Mr Patane gave evidence that it was just impossible for the first defendant to have part of its works in Kingsgrove and another part of its works somewhere else so it was necessary to vacate both buildings. Mr Newlinds, for the plaintiffs, puts that the truth of the matter was that there were very real problems with the Forrester Street building and that the first defendant may have had to vacate that building and it needed an excuse to vacate the
Sheffield Street building as well without penalty. Mr Patane would not agree to that proposition.

Various submissions are made by Mr Nicholls on behalf of the first, second and third defendants as to why there is no liability under the lease. Basically the solicitors are sued as a backup claim in case any of the defences of the first, second and third defendants should succeed. However, the solicitors are also sued for damages because the settlement by taking the undertaking of
Heidtman & Co was negligent and caused loss, in that instead of having recourse to $10,000 straight away the plaintiffs needed to pursue that $10,000 through the courts with resultant expenses and delay.

I will now focus on the case between the plaintiffs and the defendants.

The defendants say that they are not liable to pay rent to the plaintiffs after 2 January 1992 as claimed because (1) the lease was subject to a condition precedent which was never fulfilled and so never came into existence; (2) the rule in Pigot's case <case>; Co Rep 266; [77 ER 1177] or some derivative of that rule absolves them from liability; or (3) the plaintiffs did not mitigate their damage. I should make it clear that mitigation does come into this case because cl 15.6 of the lease provides, apart from the proviso: "In the event of the Lessee vacating the Demised Premises whether with or without the consent of the Lessor the Lessor shall take reasonable steps to mitigate its loss and to attempt to re-lease the Demised Premises at a reasonable rent and on reasonable terms." 
The first argument is put in a variety of ways. All these ways, however, are based on the proposition that the letter of Mr Hetherington of 23 April 1990, when he returned the lease, made it clear that the lease was not to operate until major leaks in the building roof were fixed.

Mr Nicholls' written submissions commence with the proposition that the lease agreement sued upon prior to its registration was subject to (a) a condition precedent for the repair of major leaks to the roof of the leased premises such that there was no binding agreement entered into until that condition was satisfied; (b) a condition subsequent to the same effect or (c) a collateral agreement. The submission then proceeds that the lease agreement was delivered as an escrow by the previous proprietors, that the condition precedent was never satisfied or, alternatively, was never satisfied before June 1990 or a reasonable time, and that were it not for the registration, which was dealt with later in the argument, there was no lease. It is conceded, however, that in taking possession pursuant to a void lease at least a tenancy at will came into operation, if not a tenancy under <case> of the Conveyancing Act.

This concession must be the legal situation at the very least. Although the law governing leases and contracts has been merged into a single set of principles in recent years, it is still of the essence of being a lessee that one actually enters onto the premises. Entry onto the premises, which the first defendant undoubtedly did at the end of March 1990, would at law have made its interest some sort of lease.

I have doubts as to whether one can have a lease subject to a condition precedent. I recognise that one can have an assignment of a lease subject to a condition precedent that the landlord will agree to the assignee and this may be an analogous situation, but it does seem to me that with an initial lease one has to look at entry and it is extremely difficult to have an entry which is subject to a condition. I can understand a lease subject to a condition precedent which exists as a mere agreement before entry, but not after there has been an actual entry, as there is in this case. However, it is not necessary to pursue this.

The argument insofar as it relates to the law of escrow, I think, with respect, is entirely misconceived. Escrow is an ancient doctrine related to deeds. At law a deed is required to be signed, sealed and delivered. It can be delivered conditionally, in which case it is an escrow. However, the doctrine has no application to non-deeds because non-deeds do not require delivery. If the document in question in the instant case was a deed then it would seem unarguable that it was delivered out of the hands of Ryde Joinery Pty Ltd to its solicitors and as soon as a deed is delivered out of the hands of the client to the solicitors it becomes operative. Unless the client actually makes a power of attorney by deed imposing the conditions, a solicitor cannot deliver a deed in escrow. This is quite clear from what Joyce J said in Re
Seymour [[1913] 1 Ch 475] at 481 and the whole futility of the present argument is exposed by Prof Farrand in the fourth edition of his Contracts and
Conveyance at p 325 and following. The document could not by any stretch of the imagination as a matter of law in the instant case be an escrow.

However, there are two other possibilities. One is that there is an equity operating to prevent a deed coming into effect until a certain condition has occurred. One can have a situation with a series of guarantors that until all guarantors sign the deed the guarantee is not binding against any of them because each signed on the basis that all the rest would sign. This has nothing to do with the doctrine of escrow; it is a completely different equitable doctrine. The other is that, under the law of contract, a contract can be made in such a way that it does not come into existence until a certain event happens. See as an example a case that was cited in argument, Perri v
Coolangatta Investments Pty Ltd <case>; [(1982) 149 CLR 537] at 547, where it was agreed that: "This Contract is entered into subject to the Purchasers completing a sale of their property No 9 Korokan Road, Lilli Pilli." 
As the High Court pointed out, that is not a promissory condition, that is the purchaser does not promise that he will sell his property, its effect merely is that the main contract does not come into existence until a reasonable time has elapsed for the sale of the Lilli Pilli property. Accordingly, if something is a condition precedent one cannot get damages if it is not fulfilled. The only consequence is that some other contract does not come into existence until it is fulfilled.

It is difficult, to my mind, to analyse Mr Hetherington's letter of 23 April as imposing a non-promissory condition. This is for a series of reasons.
First, the letter says that "acceptance of the Lease offer" is subject to the matter of repair of the leaks. Literally this is a conditional acceptance of an offer and so is no acceptance at all, and as a matter of law it is merely beating the wind. It is difficult to see how a person can, by an acceptance, compel the other party to treat something as a condition precedent. There is also, of course, the unfortunate problem that the grantors are the lessors and it is very difficult for a lessee/grantee to impose a condition precedent on the grantor.

If the letter of 23 April is a counter-offer then one has got to see what sort of counter-offer it is. The words "condition precedent" are not used at all in the letter. It merely states that acceptance of the lease is subject not to fixing the roof, but "your client's agreement". Now that is a little inconsistent with para 4, but one has got to give meaning to all of the document.

Even if one just concentrates on para 4, "Acceptance of the final Lease" whatever that may mean, "is expressly subject to repair of major leaks in the building roof". That is not saying that the lease which was returned was subject to a condition precedent, but that the terms and conditions of the document that was to incorporate the matters 1, 2, 3 and 4 would be considered and executed subject to these repairs. Probably the best view of it is that the initial lease was to operate provisionally, but the parties contemplated that there would be a further document which would embody the amendment and that further document would come into being after the matter of the major leaks was dealt with.

I must confess I cannot see how one can sensibly construe the letter of 23
April 1990 as imposing a condition precedent. Commercially speaking, I also cannot see why the parties would have intended it. The lessee and the lessors each wanted the lessee to go into possession and to be bound by the terms of the lease. The lessors also wanted to generate income from 1 June 1990. They each wished to attend to the major leaks in the building, but they intended life to go on in the meantime. It seems to me extremely difficult to mangle their intention in the light of what has happened to say that there was a condition precedent.

However, even if the letter could be construed in some other way, it would seem that it was sufficient for Mr Hetherington to be told by Mrs Tuckfield that she understood that her client was negotiating directly with the lessors because the letter that was received from Mr Hetherington in due course noted a month later that matters would appear to be in order.

There would seem to have been problems with the roof in the winter of 1990.
There is some gap in the evidence as to whether these were the problems which were referred to in the letter of 23 April 1990 or not, but I think by applying some principle of continuity one can assume they probably were. Work was done by the plaintiffs in October 1990 and that would appear to have solved most of the problems. Whether that was because there was then a dry spell or otherwise, we do not know but the absence of complaint tends to suggest that that is so. What did the tenant do at this stage? It continued to pay the rent. It continued to use the premises for its business and had there been any condition precedent I would be of the view that the condition precedent had been fulfilled or, alternatively, by continuing to remain in the premises after a reasonable time for fulfilment of the condition precedent or after October 1990 and paying the rent and getting commercial benefit from the premises the condition precedent had been waived. If this is not so, then it is a fortiori the case when the work was done in April 1991 that thereafter the condition precedent was waived. There is no doubt at all that it is competent for a person to waive a condition precedent in his favour and after the waiver then the lease comes into being without any impediment.

Mr Nicholls puts that once the condition precedent had not been fulfilled by
June 1990 that it was too late to fulfil it, thereafter his client remained in possession of the premises as a tenant at will or a tenant under <case> of the
Conveyancing Act and it then was able to vacate on a month's notice or less whenever it felt like it.

I do not consider that the conduct of the parties bears this out. In March the defendants insisted that the work be done to stop the roof leaks. It is true that Mr Patane says in his letter of 13 March 1991: "the conditions under which the lease documents were returned to the previous solicitors have not been satisfied ..." but the demand is to fix the roof, the roof had further work done to it in
April and the tenant remained in possession for the remainder of the year.

Accordingly, I do not consider that the tenant escapes its prima facie liability because of some condition precedent or non-fulfilment of it.

The next matter raised is that the rule in Pigot's case means that the tenant can treat the lease as a nullity. I need to state some further facts.
The normal course of the conveyancing transaction would have been that the lease from the registered proprietors to the first defendants would have been registered before completion of the purchase. Where one has, as is the present case, a purchase and sale of a commercial building for investment purposes then the lease is not a liability or an encumbrance in any sense of the word at all, it is (and particularly so in the economic climate prevailing in /1992, as deposed to by Mr Thomas) a valuable asset for the registered proprietor. Without an assurance of rent coming in the property would be worth so much the less. Accordingly, it is in everybody's interest that the lease be registered. Mr Zisti's evidence makes it clear that he realised this and, indeed, it would have been obvious to anybody.

The reason why the lease was not registered would seem to be because the tenant refused to reseal it because it was applying that pressure on the landlords in order to fix the roof. Because the lease had not been registered the solicitors for the purchasers held back from registering their transfer for a few weeks, but it was obvious that they would have to register their transfer and the discharge of mortgage from a former mortgagee and a new mortgage to the State Bank in order to protect the purchasers and the new mortgagee. The solicitors also acted for the new mortgagee.

Accordingly, the discharge of mortgage, transfer and new mortgage were lodged for registration and duly registered with the lease still unregistered.

This then posed a problem. There is some feeling that once a person has ceased to be the registered proprietor then any dealings signed by that person cease to have effect; a feeling that is reinforced by what the Court of Appeal said in McVey versus Dennis [(1988) 55 ALR 201.] Of course, a party could have approached this court for an order that the leasehold interest be registered, but approaching this court is an expensive matter.

When it appeared that the lessee would not re-execute the lease the solicitors made enquiries of the Registrar General to see whether the lease could be registered. It would appear that they were informed (though the status of the person informing them is not clear) that provided that the lease was re- executed by the new registered proprietors and certain other alterations made then the lease would be registered. These alterations were then made to the lease and it was registered on 15 November 1990. The alterations would appear to be deleting the names of the three former registered proprietors and inserting the names of the present plaintiffs; crossing out the signatures of the earlier registered proprietors, substituting the signatures of the present registered proprietors; crossing out the reference to the previous mortgage and substituting the reference to the new mortgage to the State Bank. The clause with respect to the security deposit was not altered.

Mr Nicholls says that this was a material alteration. He says in particular that special condition 30 of the contract required the lease to be registered first. Further he says that the reference to the mortgage to the State Bank means that that mortgage had priority over the lessee's interest, but that had the documents been registered in their proper order the lease would have had priority over the bank. Thirdly, he says that the rights in contract were affected because the privity of contract purportedly created was between the new registered proprietors and the lessee and not with respect to the old registered proprietors.

The rule in Pigot's case was most recently considered by the Court of
Appeal in Warburton versus National Westminster Finance Australia Ltd (1988) 15
NSWLR 238. In that case Hope JA particularly considered the rule in great depth. In doing so, he referred with approval to the decision of the South
Australian Supreme Court in Armor Coating (Marketing) Pty Ltd versus General
Credits (Finance) Pty Ltd [(1978) 17 SASR 259.] His consideration led his Honour to the view, though he did not need to decide all of this for the purpose of the case before him, that the rule in Pigot's case did not apply to non-fraudulent alterations. He also said, in accordance with previous authority, that where the alterations were for the purpose of completing blanks in an executed document the rule did not apply. Further this was so, even if completion of the blanks was performed mistakenly so that it did not give effect to what the parties meant to do. In this regard one should also refer to Keysen versus Gregg (1932) 32 SR 288 and Amalgamated Television
Services Pty Ltd versus Television Corporation Ltd [[1970] 3 NSWR 85.] 
The rule in Pigot's case was a technical rule of the common law that if one materially altered a deed after it had been delivered then the deed was considered to be completely void. In the late 18th and early 19th centuries the principle was extended to non-deeds, though it is not particularly clear why or whether those who made that decision fully appreciated what they were doing, and indeed Bray CJ in the Armor case thought that they were wrong, but nonetheless, as Bray CJ says, we are probably now bound by those decisions. However, it is a mistake to think that the rule about a deed being automatically completely void if it was altered applied to non-deeds. As Prof
Williston says in his article Discharge of Contracts by Alteration [(1904) Harvard Law Review 105] at 114 the rule operates differently with respect to non- deeds. The rule so far as non-deeds are concerned appears to be that one merely disregards any alteration and that secondary evidence is allowed to prove the original terms of the obligation and if valid in that form it would be enforced (see p 116). The only authority quoted for that proposition is
Gunter versus Addy [36 SE 553] (1900) (South Carolina), which is an example of its operation rather than a case which actually states any principles.

Mr Nicholls argues that the instant document is a deed even before its registration. He referred to my decision in Manton versus Parabolic Pty Ltd [(1985) 2 NSWLR 361] at 369. I cannot see how this document before registration could have been a deed. The mere fact that it is sealed with the first defendant's seal is insufficient. The document is nowhere called a deed. The granting parties never purported to seal or deliver it as a deed and the normal course under <case> of the [Real Property
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/) is that a document is only deemed to be a deed on registration.

Accordingly, one applies what is left of the rule in Pigot's case to the case of a non-deed. With a non-deed the worst that can happen to one is that one disregards the alterations and looks at the document in accordance with its original tenor. That would not be sufficient to enable the defendants to avoid the lease.

Had the rule applied with full vigour, one would have had to consider whether the alteration was material. Various tests have been put forward as to what is a material alteration, but the test of recent days is probably less stringent to what it was in earlier times. Davidson J quoting from the second edition of
Norton on Deeds said at p 292 of Keysen's case: "An alteration which if made before execution would have affected the position rights or obligations of any person claiming under the deed is material: possibly other alterations may be material." 
However, more recent authority seems to accept the proposition that if all that one is doing by the alteration is to further the purpose of the deed and not to make any change in the substantive rights of the parties then no material alteration is involved at all. This, I think, most clearly is specified in the decision of the South Australian court in the Armor
Coating case.

Mr Nicholls says that the present alteration must be material because it affects his clients in three ways, which I have mentioned above. I cannot see this. First, the contractual rights as against the original registered proprietors would be unaffected by any alteration made by a stranger to them even under the strictest application of the rule in Pigot's case.
Secondly, special condition 30 of the contract between vendor and purchaser has absolutely nothing to do with the rights of the lessee. The lessee was not a party to that contract and had no rights to enforce that contract. All that special condition 30 did, in my view, was to make it plain that whilst the vendors' obligation was to provide a registered lease, that obligation could be commuted to doing something less as proposed by special condition 30.
Thirdly, so far as the mortgage to the State Bank is concerned, the mere fact that the mortgage was listed in the encumbrances would not affect the rights of the parties one whit.

I examined the question of priorities between prior registered mortgage and subsequent lease in AMEV Finance Ltd versus Canagon Engineering Pty Ltd (1987) BPR 13899. It is not necessary to repeat what I said there except that one must look to the conduct of the parties. The bare fact of prior registration is not of itself sufficient if there has been, as here, consent to as well as awareness of, the lease.

Realistically speaking, a commercial lease is of value to both the proprietor and the mortgagee. The bank documents and the solicitors' documents show that it was always at the heart of the transaction that there would be a mortgage given over commercial property which was let to a tenant under a lease and the tenant's rights being those recognised by the mortgagee would prevail against it. Appeal to cases, such as United Starr-Bowkett Co-Operative Building
Society (Number 11) Pty Ltd versus Clyne [(1967) 68 SR 331], to my mind completely miss the real point.

Accordingly, I do not consider that the rule in Pigot's case or any derivation of that rule affects the situation.

I now must turn to the circumstances of the registration of the lease. Mr
Nicholls concedes that subject to any fraud the registration of the lease cured any "voidness". This, I think, must be so.

At some stage of the argument counsel toyed with <case> of the [Real Property
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/). This section for the purpose of protection against notice deems a legal estate to be accelerated to the time when a purchaser pays its money and obtains the deeds.
I really do think this is just another red herring, because notice is not relevant in the present case.

Section 43A exists because under the general law the equity court will not enforce an equity against a bona fide purchaser for value of the legal estate without notice. What is awkward for the person with the legal estate is to have notice of an equitable estate. The purpose of <case> is to advance the time when the putative registered proprietor is deemed to have a legal estate, the time when he pays his money and gets his transfer, not the time of registration. What it does is protect against notice of an equitable estate.
It does not deal with notice of something like a condition precedent or anything of that ilk. Accordingly, to my mind, <case> has nothing to do with this case.

It is also to be noted that <case> only advances protection against notice where the person who seeks protection takes an interest under a "dealing registrable". There is no doubt at all that the transfer by which the plaintiffs got their legal estate was a registrable dealing. There may be some doubt as to whether the lease was a registrable dealing. In my view it was such because, although it did not comply with the regulations, the discretion of the Registrar General under <case> of the [Real Property
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/) was sufficiently wide to allow it to be registered as demonstrated by the fact that it was registered when the Registrar General's officers were told the situation.

A registrable dealing must include, to my mind, a dealing which is possibly technically defective or is written in the wrong colour ink, but which is within the Registrar General's discretion to register and is otherwise registrable. However, as I say, this is really a red herring and I only make these remarks in deference to the arguments that are put to me.

In registering the document the Registrar General was just doing what the parties originally had intended but might otherwise have been frustrated by the chance event of the transfer being registered before the lease. It may be that the effect of McVey versus Dennis is that the lease in its original form lost its potency to be able to operate as a command to the Registrar General to change the register. I doubt this, but even if it is so, the only way of effecting the parties' original intention, that is that there should be a lease, was this particular way. Once one disposes of the condition precedent and the Pigot case argument, then it was the parties' intention that there should be a registered lease over the property on those terms and conditions.

Then Mr Nicholls says that there was fraud involved because the document was not put forward to the Registrar General in good faith. He relies on the words of Tadgell J in Australian Guarantee Corporation versus De Jager <case>; [[1984] VR 483] at 497. However, I do not really consider his Honour intended the present sort of case to come within his words at all. He was pointing out that people who inform the Registrar General that they have witnessed a person's signature, which signature has been made in their presence, who know that is not so, are committing a fraud on the Registrar General by presenting a document with that statement. That view has been followed on many occasions since in this court, the latest, I think, being Westpac Banking Corporation v Sansom (1994) 6 BPR 13790, which was recently affirmed by the Court of
Appeal on 28 November 1995.

I do not consider that there was any fraud involved within the meaning of ss or 43 of the [Real Property
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/) in the solicitors seeking to carry out the original intention of the parties, even though the way they did it may be rather unorthodox.

Mr Nicholls also says that his clients have a personal equity which entitles them to have the lease removed from the register. Mr Nicholls relies on the decision of the Court of Appeal in Mercantile Mutual Life Insurance Co v
Gosper [(1991) 25 NSWLR 32], 45. There
Mahoney JA said that the existence of a personal equity is to be decided upon considerations of substance and refers: "simply to the fact that the person involved may invoke the assistance of the equity court or equity principles to achieve relevant relief." 
I cannot see how a lessee which takes possession of premises and then vacates them because it is convenient to do so has any "right" which is cognisable in a court of equity to obtain an order that it be relieved from the lease.

This, I think, means that the defendants' defence wholly fails.

I must now turn to the question of mitigation. This arises in view of the clause of the lease to which I referred earlier. However, as in all questions of mitigation, the onus of proof lies upon the person who alleges that there has not been mitigation.

The rent and outgoings from January 1992 to May 1993 inclusive (together with interest under the [Supreme Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/)) would amount to $138,694.49. Because one would have to factor in estate agent's commission the total had the property been let for $45,000 per annum in April 1993 would have been in fact less than this sum. On the figures shown in Mr Newlinds' calculation (MI130) it is only if the property were re-let at January 1993 that there would be a significant reduction below the figure I have mentioned.
The figures show that if there were a re-letting from January 1993 for $35,000 per annum the plaintiffs would be entitled to a verdict for $127,630.61, including interest. Accordingly, there is not much at stake on the decision of this point.

Two valuers gave evidence, Mr Thomas for the defendants and Mr Hepworth for the plaintiffs. Mr Thomas accepted that in the property market of 1992 a landlord would be fortunate to find a tenant within twelve months, which twelve month period included a time when the tenant might be in occupation under a lease but enjoying a rent holiday. He put the range as extending for fifteen months.

There was very little evidence given on the fault of the plaintiffs in not promoting the property better than they did. It was faintly suggested that they had not promoted the property enough and had not advertised. I am not convinced that these suggestions discharge the onus of proof that lies on the defendants. It seems to me that even on the evidence of their own valuer fifteen months was not an unreasonable period of time for the property to be vacant following the defendants' quitting of it. Accordingly, the figure of $138,694.49 is the damages which the plaintiffs are entitled to receive.

I turn now to the case against the solicitors. As damages are an integral part of the element of the tort of negligence, if there are no damages suffered then no matter how careless a person may have been he or she will escape liability.

It is, I believe, a waste of time to make any finding as to whether the solicitors generally were careless. I have received the evidence of two expert solicitors, Mr Moses and Mr Bluth and also have taken into account the normal incidents of a conveyancing transaction. It must be remembered that solicitors do not perform in a vacuum. The circumstances that may exist in any transaction may well be bizarre and may call for unorthodox methods. It must also be remembered that what had happened was that in order to ensure that there was no risk of having to pay liquidated damages settlement had taken place leaving the solicitors with a discharge of mortgage, an unregistered transfer and an unregistered mortgage to the State Bank. These could not be held unregistered for ever.

It seems to me that it was reasonable that the solicitors, as they did, wait a few weeks before lodging these documents for registration. The problems that then followed were a consequence of the transfer having been registered before the lease.

As I have said earlier, the method chosen by the solicitors was unorthodox, but I do not consider it wise to go further than that. As neither the condition precedent nor the Pigot's case point has succeeded, no damage flowed from any act of the solicitors, with one exception.

The one exception is that the solicitors settled on an undertaking from the vendors' solicitors, which was really given by the wrong party. Any undertaking as to the deed of charge, etcetera, needed to have been given by the lessee, not the vendors. This was not the personal fault of the solicitor who was a partner of the firm, but had he given the matter the degree of supervision that it called for, and had his employed solicitor done the same, the settlement clerk would not have made the error of accepting the undertaking from the wrong person. I realise that the settlement clerk was under a bit of pressure, but the solicitor should have known the pressure was more apparent than real. It is hard to see how the vendors' claim for liquidated damages could have succeeded. However, doubtless the solicitor did not want to take the risk and the settlement clerk knowing the matter had to be settled was prepared to cut corners. In the circumstances it does seem to me that the solicitors failed in their duty to protect their clients in getting a deed of charge or at least a binding undertaking from the proper person.

Had the solicitors done this, they would have put the plaintiffs in the situation where they could have appropriated to themselves cash moneys up to $10,000 or put in a receiver. They would have then had the money at an earlier point of time than they will get under the judgment I have just given them against the defendants.

If, of course, the defendants are able to pay the judgment then the plaintiffs will suffer no loss against the solicitors. However, there must be a very real chance from what is known about the defendants in the instant case that at least the first defendant will not be sufficiently financial to meet the judgment.

Accordingly, a sum should be found against the solicitors, being the loss of a sure chance of having the $10,000. Doing the best I can, I will discount $10,000 by three-eighths, so that there should be a verdict against the solicitors for $6,250 plus interest from 17 January 1992, which appears to be the date when the solicitors were added as parties when this matter was before the District Court. On the basis of an average rate of eleven per cent for four and a quarter years, I would allow $2,821 interest, which would make a verdict for the plaintiffs against the solicitors of $9,071.

I understand that there may well have been an offer of compromise by either or both "the defendants" or "the solicitors". Accordingly, all I need do is to publish these reasons and leave it to the plaintiffs to draw up short minutes of order. I will list the matter at 9.50am on 12 June 1996.
 * * * 
