

Hawker Noyes Equipment P/L versus Dueeasy P/L [1996] NSWSC 281 (18 July 1996) 
HAWKER NOYES EQUIPMENT PTY LTD versus DUEEASY PTY LIMITED /94; DC 6754/93 July 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
MEAGHER, SHELLER, COLE JJA 
CATCHWORDS: PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE - application for summary judgment - District Court Rules Pt 9 r17, Pt 11A r2 - power to order summary judgment not to be exercised unless no real question to be tried;
Fancourt versus Mercantile Credits Limited <case>; [(1983) 154 CLR 87] at 99; Singh versus VarinderKaur [(1985) 61 ALR 720] at 722 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Allowed 
The respondent sued the appellant for breach of an agreement to carry out repair work to an excavating machine, and, in the alternative, claimed that the appellant was negligent in carrying out the repairs. In its notice of defence, the respondent did not admit any of the allegations made against it.
The respondent applied by notice of motion for orders pursuant to Pt 9 r17 and
Pt 11A r2 of the District Court Rules.

Judge Kennedy-Smith heard the application, and found that it was `overwhelmingly obvious' that the appellant had agreed to repair the machine and had failed properly to do so, and that it appeared to have dismantled and replaced parts of it thereby causing the machine to suffer damage in operation. His Honour found that this amounted to negligence, and entered summary judgment for the respondent pursuant to Pt 11A r2.

HELD: . The power to order summary judgment is one that should be exercised with great care and should never be exercised unless it was clear that there is, without doubt, on the whole of the material, no real question to be tried.

Fancourt versus Mercantile Credits Limited <case>; [(1983) 154 CLR 87] at 99; Singh versus Varinder Kaur [(1985) 61 ALR 720] at 722 per
Samuels JA.
If a repairer undertakes to repair a machine and it fails to operate within a short time, an inference may be drawn that the repairs were not done properly. However, the case pleaded put the nature of the breach differently, and was not made out in the respondent's evidence. Part 11A r 2 requires evidence to support the actual claim made, not some different claim.
 (per Cole JA dissenting) Rule 2(1)(a) will be satisfied if there is evidence of facts on which the claim or part of the claim is based, and then the court exercising a judicial discretion could give summary judgment if it found there was `no real question to be tried'. The plaintiff's claim was ill pleaded, but its substance was tolerably clear. Two of the particulars of the alleged breach were established by the evidence, and this was sufficient evidence to justify the entry of summary judgment in favour of the respondent, with the issue of damages reserved for later argument.
It was not open for Judge Kennedy-Smith to find that there was `without doubt' no question to be tried in the circumstances of this case.

ORDERS . Appeal allowed;
Set aside the orders of 7 September 1994;
In lieu thereof, dismiss the notice of motion of 18 August 1994;
The respondent to pay the appellant's costs of the notice of motion and of this appeal but to have a certificate under the [Suitors Fund Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/).
 
JUDGMENT 
MEAGHER JA: I agree with Sheller JA.
 
SHELLER JA: By a statement of claim in the District Court issued on 24 December 1993 and apparently amended in May 1994 the respondent, Dueeasy Pty Limited, sued the appellant, Hawker Noyes Equipment Pty Limited, for breach of an agreement made in late 1989 for the carrying out of repair work to a Kobelco 912 excavation machine and for negligence. The term of the agreement and the breach the respondent relied upon were pleaded as follows: "38. It was an implied term of the agreement to engage the Defendant to carry out the said repair work that the Defendant would carry out the work with all due care, skill and diligence and in a good and workmanlike manner and with good and proper materials.
In breach of the said agreement to repair the Machine the Defendant did not carry out the work or complete the repair of the Machine with all due care, skill and diligence and in a good and workmanlike manner and with good and proper materials.

PARTICULARS 
Failed to fit at all or properly or correctly a split pin or locking nut when reassembling the hydraulic pump; 
Failed to ensure that when reassembling the hydraulic pump the retaining nuts locked so that they could not rotate and or become loose within the hydraulic pump; 
Failed to retain experienced, competent or properly trained staff to carry out repair work; 
Failed to supervise or adequately supervise or provide experienced or competent staff to supervise the work of repair staff, mechanics and fitters; 
Dismantled the hydraulic pump without the Plaintiff's authorisation or consent; 
Dismantled the hydraulic pump when it knew or ought to have known it was not necessary and did not require inspection or repair; 
Failed to flush the hydraulic system to remove any metal fragments and to install new filters after flushing." 
In the alternative the respondent alleged that the appellant was negligent in carrying out the repair work and furnished particulars which mirrored those for the alleged breach of contract. The amount claimed was $128,357.

On 1 July 1994 the appellant filed a defence admitting one of the forty-one paragraphs in the statement of claim, namely, that at all material times it was carrying on the business as a supplier and repairer of, among other things, heavy mechanical equipment and as a heavy equipment engineer, and saying, as to the rest of the paragraphs, that it did not admit the allegations made therein or any of them. This provoked an application by way of notice of motion filed on 18 August 1994 for an order that pursuant to [Pt ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/index.html#p9) r17 of the District Court Rules the grounds of defence be struck out and for an order that judgment be given pursuant to Pt 11A r2 for the respondent against the appellant for damages to be assessed. Part 9 r17 (1), so far as presently material, provides that where a pleading discloses no reasonable defence, or has a tendency to cause prejudice, embarrassment or delay in the proceedings, or is otherwise an abuse of the process of the Court, the Court may at any stage of the proceedings, on terms, order that the whole or any part of the pleading be struck out. Part 11A r2 (1) provides: "Where, on application by the plaintiff in relation to any claim for relief or any part of any claim for relief of the plaintiff - there is evidence of the facts on which the claim or part is based; and there is evidence given by the plaintiff or by some responsible person that, in the belief of the person giving the evidence, the defendant has no defence to the claim or part, or no defence except as to the amount of any damages claimed, the Court may, at any time, give such judgment for the plaintiff on that claim or part as the nature of the case requires." 
His Honour Judge Kennedy-Smith heard the notice of motion and on 7 September entered summary judgment for the respondent. The appellant appeals from this decision. Although the respondent put submissions based on Pt 9 r17, the application for an order under that rule was not pressed. His Honour expressly made his orders under Pt 11A r2 (1). He said: "I am inclined however to allow the application of the Plaintiff for summary judgment pursuant to rule 2 (1) (a (b) on the basis of the detailed evidence in support of the application by the several witness who attended at the excavation site and at the Defendant's premises, which seems to me to be overwhelmingly obvious that the Defendant had (a) agreed to repair the machine, (b) failed to repair it properly, and in addition appeared to have dismantled and replaced other parts of the machine, thereby causing the machine to suffer damage in operation. And that seems to me to be glaringly obvious in the material presented by the Plaintiff.

I am reinforced in coming to that conclusion by the fact that the Defendant has apparently not taken any further steps to attend to this matter since 17
February 1994 when there was a conversation with Phillipa Moon as set forth in her affidavit referred to above. And that the person who could and should be available to put on evidence or to be in a position to confirm or deny or supply some material facts on the part of the defence as to the Plaintiff's claim, Mr Kevin McKay [sic], cannot comment on any of the paragraphs in the statement of claim." 
In answer to a submission on behalf of the appellant that there had been no evidence of an expert to demonstrate that the events which occurred must have occurred as a result of fault on the part of the appellant, his Honour reiterated his opinion that the conclusion to be drawn from the series of events as deposed to in the respondent's witnesses' affidavits, was that it was "blindingly obvious" it could only have arisen as a result of the activities of the appellant and those activities were not proper and workmanlike, and in fact, negligent.

The evidence before Judge Kennedy-Smith consisted of affidavits filed on the respondent's behalf by its solicitor, Mr Roth, who said that having read and considered the grounds of defence it was his belief that it disclosed no reasonable defence and was otherwise an abuse of process of the Court, and Mr
Daly, the respondent's manager, and Mr King, a director of the respondent, who narrated events said to make good the respondent's claim. There was also an affidavit filed on behalf of the appellant by its solicitor, Ms Moon, on 2
September 1994 in which she said that the appellant's file relating to the repair of the machine could not be located and that without it, at least until discovery, it was not possible to respond to the statement of claim with any greater particularity than that found in the defence. She also deposed to the conversation on 17 February 1994 with Mr Kay, the appellant's representative referred to in the statement of claim, who said that he could not remember a single thing about the matter, even the names of the mechanics.

The narrative which emerged from the respondent's affidavits was that on 16
August 1989 the excavator broke down. At the respondent's request the appellant's mechanic inspected it on 21 August 1989. The respondent's complaint about the machine to Mr Kay was that there was a fault either in the hydraulic pump or in the gear box, and that the excavator's bucket arm, bucket and traction were not operational and the excavator vibrated during operation.
The appellant's mechanic opined that it was a major problem and probably the gear box. He removed the pump and the gear box and said that he would need to take the gear box away to be checked and repaired. Mr King suggested that he take both the pump and the gear box, which he did. On 24 August 1989 Mr Kay advised that new gears were required, which the plaintiff supplied in October, and that the gear box housing needed modification. After some further conversations on 14 October 1989 a mechanic from the respondent attended the site and said words to the following effect: "The gear box has been repaired, the pump did not need anything to be done to it, it is in very good condition. We have installed the gear box and pump, checked everything and it is working fine." 
When asked how he knew the pump was in good condition and whether he checked it the mechanic said: "I stripped it down, I've never seen one before." 
On 16 October 1989, when next the excavator was operated, after about ten minutes, it began to shudder vigorously and was shut down. On that date, two mechanics from the appellant arrived at the site, inspected the excavator and said to the respondent's representative: "The problem is in the pump. We can't understand how it could have happened." They took the pump back to the appellant's workshop. Mr Kay informed Mr Daly that the pump needed to be rebuilt and that the appellant could not get hold of a second hand one. Just before Christmas 1989 two mechanics from the appellant came to the respondent's site and fitted a new replacement pump to the excavator. Shortly afterwards the excavator was started and the bucket arm continually either crept or became stuck and was difficult to control and could not be used. A few days later the same two mechanics came to the site, dismantled the valve housing and carried out certain work. Either before or after this the mechanics took part of the valve bank away to repair. Thereafter for a period of about five or six weeks the excavator was said to have found "the going tough, was sluggish and the hydraulic mechanism was difficult to control."
Between February 1990 and June 1990, the excavator was operational for a total of approximately eighty hours. On 12 June 1990, while being operated, it suddenly shuddered to a halt. Neither the bucket arm nor the excavator would work. Subsequent attempts to have the appellant repair it were met with the response that no repairs would be carried out until the outstanding account had been paid.

Mr King deposed to the following conversation with the two appellant's representatives attending the site after dismantling the valve housing and carrying out certain work but not changing the oil. Mr King said: "You didn't flush the oil and some metal fragments will still be there." One of the mechanics said: "Don't worry the filter will pick up any metal fragments, you don't need to flush it." Mr King insisted on the oil being replaced and provided about 350 litres of oil for that purpose.

Mr Daly deposed to a conversation with the appellant's Mr Kay on 14 October informing him of the problems the respondent was having with the excavator. Mr Kay said: "I will make arrangements through our Sydney office to have the excavator repaired because we have nobody here with experience in such pumps." 
I think the respondent presented Judge Kennedy-Smith with a difficult task.
The respondent did not press its strike out application before his Honour or before us. Accordingly we should not express any opinion about the sufficiency of the defence filed. The respondent's statement of claim, as his Honour, observed set out in "perhaps excessive detail" all the facts and circumstances relating to the agreement, the problems with the machine, what the appellant did and what was said from time to time. Most importantly it precisely stated the term of the agreement relied upon and the breach relied upon with particulars. Unfortunately the plaintiff led evidence which was not so precise. There was no evidence about a split pin or locking nut or retaining nuts referred to in paras (a) and (b) of the particulars. There was no evidence to support the claim that the pump was dismantled without the respondent's authorisation or consent or to support the conclusion that the respondent dismantled the hydraulic pump when it knew or ought to have known it was not necessary and did not require inspection or repair; paras (e) and . The failure to flush the hydraulic system to remove any metal fragments and to install new filters after flushing led to Mr King's insistance that this be done, which it was; para (g). There is some evidence from Mr Daly that the mechanic who stripped down the pump had never seen one before and that in
June 1990 Mr Kay, in the workshop he was referring to, had nobody with experience in the relevant pumps.

Viewed as a whole, the evidence seems to be that the excavator broke down in
August 1989, that the appellant diagnosed the problem as being one with the gears, which were repaired and that on return the excavator immediately broke down again. This time the appellant diagnosed the problem as being with the pump which was replaced in December. Thereafter there were problems with the valves which were never effectively repaired. The respondent's approach was to say that in October 1989 the appellant agreed to repair the excavator which it failed to do as was manifested by its breakdown in October and then in
December or January and thereafter by its poor performance. His Honour accepted this approach by saying that it was overwhelmingly obvious that the appellant had agreed to repair the machine, had failed to repair it properly and appeared to have dismantled and replaced parts of it thereby causing the machine to suffer damage in operation.

In Clarke versus The Union Bank of Australia Limited <case>; [(1917) 23 CLR 5], Barton ACJ, speaking for the High Court, quoted Lord
Halsbury in Jones versus Stone [[1894] AC 122] at 124 who said that an analagous proceeding for summary judgment was peculiar, "intended only to apply to cases where there can be no reasonable doubt that a plaintiff is entitled to judgment, and where, therefore, it is inexpedient to allow a defendant to defend for mere purposes of delay." In Fancourt versus Mercantile
Credits Limited <case>; [(1983) 154 CLR 87] at 99 the High Court said that the power to order summary or final judgment was one that should be exercised with great care and should never be exercised unless it was clear that there was no real question to be tried. In that case their Honours said that it was not possible to say "without doubt, on the whole of the material, that there is no question to be tried ......" In Singh versus Varinder Kaur [(1985) 61 ALR 720] at 722
Samuels JA, with whom Kirby P and Glass JA agreed, after referring to
Fancourt said: "That language suggests to me that the burden lies on the plaintiff seeking summary judgment of persuading the tribunal that there is no real question to be tried. It is not consistent with the reverse proposition - that the defendant resisting judgment must show that there is a real question to be tried." 
Part 11A r2 (1) makes plain that for relief by way of summary judgment there must be evidence of the facts on which the claim is based. It is true that if a repairer undertakes to repair a machine and a short period after the machine is returned it fails, an inference may be open that the repairer has not done the repair work properly. But in this case the particulars put the nature of the breach differently and suggested the problems were more complicated. The case so particularised was not made out in the respondent's evidence on the application which it should have been if it was to succeed. The rule requires evidence to support the claim made not some different claim. The power to order summary judgment must be exercised with great care. I do not think it was open to Judge Kennedy-Smith to say "without doubt" there was no question to be tried. In the language of Samuels JA I do not think the respondent discharged the onus necessary to persuade the tribunal that there was no real question to be tried.

I propose the following orders:
Appeal allowed;
Set aside the orders of 7 September 1994;
In lieu thereof, dismiss the notice of motion of 18 August 1994;
The respondent to pay the appellant's costs of the notice of motion and of this appeal but to have a certificate under the [Suitors Fund Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/).
 
COLE JA: Kennedy-Smith ADCJ entered summary judgment on liability in favour of the respondent pursuant to [Part 11A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/index.html#p11a), [rule 2(1)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/s2.html) and (b). That rule provides that: "2(1) Where, on application by the plaintiff in relation to any claim for relief or any part of any claim for relief of the plaintiff- there is evidence of the facts on which the claim is based; and there is evidence given by the plaintiff or by some responsible person that, in the belief of the person giving the evidence, the defendant has no defence to the claim or part, or no defence except as to the amount of any damages claimed, the Court may, at any time, give such judgment for the plaintiff on that claim or part as the nature of the case requires." 
The issue of damages was reserved for later hearing.

As Samuels JA said in Singh & Anor versus Varinder Kaur[1]: "These (rules) thus enable a prima facie case to be made in favour of summary judgment, but they do not explicitly deal with the considerations to be observed where there is evidence offered by a defendant which is capable of rebutting the statutory belief, or with where the onus lies in the resolution of any evidentiary dispute." 
His Honour determined that the burden lies with the plaintiff seeking summary judgment to "persuade the tribunal that there is no real question to be tried". His Honour also noted that the High Court in Fancourt versus Mercantile
Credits Limited[2] had stated that: "The power to order summary or final judgment is one that should be exercised with great care and should never be exercised unless it is clear that there is no real question to be tried." 
In the present case the requirement that there be a stated belief by a responsible person that the defendant had no defence to the claim was satisfied. Further, as will appear, the defendant did not by its defence or by evidence plead or indicate that it had any defence to the claim pleaded. The former circumstance thus satisfied [rule (1)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/s2.html); and although the defendant bore no onus, the fact that it asserted no defence by pleading or evidence reinforced that satisfaction. Accordingly, provided there was evidence to satisfy [rule (1)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/s2.html), namely, of facts on which the claim or part of the claim is based, the court exercising a judicial discretion was entitled to make the order sought if it was satisfied there was no defence or no "real question to be tried." 
The plaintiff's claim was ill-pleaded. Nonetheless the substance of it was tolerably clear. In a discursive amended ordinary statement of claim the plaintiff asserted that it carried on the business of performing excavation work. It asserted that the appellant defendant carried on the business of supplier and repairer of heavy equipment. On 21 August 1989 there was a discussion between Mr Daly on behalf of the plaintiff and Mr Kay on behalf of the defendant with a request that the defendant attend a construction site "with a view to repairing" the plaintiff's excavator. That was said to be necessary because the "bucket arm, bucket and traction were not operational and the machine vibrated during operation". The defendant's mechanic inspected the excavator on site and performed certain tests, said there was no "contamination between the hydraulic pump and the gear box" but in the gear box found metal fragments which would require removal of the gear box and its transport to the defendant's workshop for repair. Mr Daly, for the plaintiff, "orally agreed to and did engage the defendant ... to remove the gear box and effect the repairs to it". To effect this removal it was also necessary to remove a pump. That was done. On 23 August Mr Kay confirmed to Mr Daly that "the problem with the machine was in the gear box. The estimated cost of repairs was $12,000 with gears required to come from Japan". On 24 August Mr
Daly and Mr Kay inspected the gear box and pump at the defendant's works where
Mr Kay indicated the damaged gear box and gear box housing and stated that "those defects were the cause of the problem".

To save time, it was agreed that Mr Daly would have the damaged gears re-cut locally and the housing delivered to a contractor for repairs. This was done.
On 14 October 1989 the defendant informed Mr Daly that the repairs to the gear box had been effected, that the pump had been stripped down and found to be in good condition not requiring repair, that the gear box and pump had been reinstalled and that the machine was "operational and in working order". The charge for the work was $9,019.27, with $7,000 being paid on account by cheque.

After operating for 10 minutes on 16 October 1989 the machine again started to shudder vigorously and was shut down. The plaintiff stopped payment of the cheque and contacted Mr Kay who said "he would arrange for the machine to be attended to". On that day the defendant's mechanics reinspected the machine and said the problem was in the pump and removed it to their workshop.

On 23 October 1989 Mr Daly advised Mr Kay that a replacement excavator had been hired as the machine was urgently required. Mr Kay said the pump needed to be rebuilt and there was no second hand pump available. Thereafter throughout October, November and early December the plaintiff pressed the defendant to repair the machine but it was not until shortly before Christmas that the defendant installed a replacement pump. In so doing they fitted new filters. When the excavator was started, in the presence of the defendant's mechanics, the slew motor was constantly engaged, the machine kept rotating and the excavator could not be used. The mechanics opened the valve bank and found a fragment of metal. They took away a damaged control valve for repair. A few days later the same defendant's mechanics returned, dismantled the valve housing and found metal shavings in the valve housings and controls.
The plaintiff insisted, on that occasion, that the oil be replaced to remove any further metal fragments. Thereafter the machine worked but more slowly than previously and the bucket arm continually dropped. Throughout January the machine worked, but inefficiently with the "hydraulic mechanism being difficult to control". Between February and June 1990 the machine operated only for approximately for 80 hours. Throughout this period regular calls were made by the plaintiff's representatives to the defendant to seek to have the machine "put into proper working order". The defendant did not respond to those calls.

On 12 June 1990 the machine "suddenly shuddered to a halt and neither the bucket arm nor the machine could be made to operate". Mr Daly contacted Mr Kay who said arrangements would be made to have the machine repaired but subsequently advised that no repairs would be effected until the outstanding account had been paid.

Alternative arrangements were made for repair.

Upon the basis of these facts, all of which were pleaded and established on the summary judgment application by unchallenged affidavit evidence, the plaintiff pleaded: "38. It was an implied term of the agreement to engage the defendant to carry out the said repair work that the defendant would carry out the work with all due care, skill and diligence and in a good and workmanlike manner and with good and proper materials.
In breach of the said agreement to repair the machine the defendant did not carry out the work or complete the repair of the machine with all due care, skill and diligence and in a good and workmanlike manner and with good and proper materials.
Further and in the alternative as a consequence of the matters aforesaid the defendant was negligent in carrying out the said repair work." 
In my view it is adequately clear that the primary claim asserted in paragraphs 38 and 39 is a claim for breach of contract, alleging want of care in performing repair works resulting in the required repairs not being effected. The alternative claim pleaded in paragraph 40 is in non contractual negligence.

Absent any response by the appellant defendant by pleading or evidence, in my opinion the establishing of the facts which I have recited which were both alleged and proved by affidavit evidence, satisfied the requirements of [Part
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/index.html#p11a) [rule (1)(a).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/s2.html)
They established a contract to repair, a purported performance of the work, a rendering of charges therefore, and the failure of the work to render the machine operative. By its pleading the defendant admitted that it carried on the business of a repairer of heavy equipment such as excavators.
Notwithstanding performance of repair work to the gears, the pump and associated hydraulics, the defendant did not repair the excavator so that it was properly operable.

It is true that the plaintiff asserted seven detailed particulars of the alleged breach. The first two alleged failure to fit when reassembling the pump appropriate split pins and locking nuts. There was no evidence to establish those particulars. However the third and fourth particulars relate to the inadequacy of staff and supervision in performing the works. In my opinion those particulars are established by showing, as was shown, that the work performed by the defendant's staff was insufficiently competent to effect the repairs so as to make the machine operable.

In those circumstances, there was evidence to justify the entry of summary judgment in favour of the plaintiff, with the issue of damages reserved for later argument.

That position is reinforced by the stance taken by the defendant. On the application for summary judgment the defendant filed only one affidavit being that of its solicitor. Miss Moon deposed that her client, the defendant appellant, had lost its file. Further the solicitors had been in touch with Mr
Kay who had said "Unfortunately I can't remember a single thing about it, even the names of the mechanics referred to in it". He had read the statement of claim but that did not jog his memory. No doubt that explained the statement of defence filed by the defendant which, apart from admitting that it carried on the business of a repairer of heavy equipment, simply pleaded that it did "not admit the allegations ... in the statement of claim of any of them". Such a pleading ought to have been struck out for it did not crystallise any issue for trial. Whilst it was argued that a defendant is entitled to put the plaintiff to proof, [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/index.html#p9), rule 17 makes clear that where a pleading discloses no reasonable defence or had a tendency to cause "prejudice, embarrassment or delay in the proceedings" or was otherwise an abuse of process, the court was empowered to strike it out. The defence was just such a pleading in a case such as this.

The reality is that in 1994, and now 1996, the defendant has no recollection and can advance no evidence concerning events established by affidavit on behalf of the plaintiff, those events occurring in 1989. It is extremely unlikely that position will change. In circumstances where the jurisdictional basis for entry of summary judgment has been established, I can see no basis for setting aside the trial judge's decision to exercise the conferred power.
No error in that exercise has been demonstrated.

It becomes unnecessary to consider the alternative claim in negligence pleaded in paragraph 40. No endeavour was made by evidence to prove that case on the summary judgment application.

It was contended that there may be difficulties in determining damages. That may be so but such difficulties are not insuperable. Difficulties may arise from the absence of precision in the manner in which the plaintiff's claim has been pleaded, but that will be a matter for determination by the trial judge when damages are being assessed.

In my opinion the appeal should be dismissed with costs.
 <case>; [(1983) 48 ALR 1] at 10.
 * * * 
