

Leslaighter versus Beck and Ors [2002] NSWSC 1017 (24 October 2002) 
Last Updated: 15 November 2002 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: Leslaighter versus Beck & Ors <case>  
CURRENT JURISDICTION: Common Law  
FILE NUMBER(S): 12860/02  
HEARING DATE{S): 24 October 2002  
JUDGMENT DATE: 24/10/2002  
PARTIES: 
Mark Leslaighter (Plaintiff) 
David Beck (First Defendant, First Cross-Defendant) 
Bill Abraham Concretor Pty Limited (Second Defendant, Cross-Claimant) 
John Reeves (Second Cross-Defendant)  
JUDGMENT OF: Sperling J  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
Mr D Dickinson for the Plaintiff 
Mr R Cavanagh for the First Defendant 
Mr S Kettle for the Second Defendant 
Mr A Hewitt SC for the Second Cross-Defendant  
SOLICITORS: 
Griffiths Tierney Solicitors for the Plaintiff  
CATCHWORDS: 
Costs  no question of principle  
ACTS CITED:  
DECISION: 
See paragraphs 1 and 9.  
JUDGMENT:  - 3 - 
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
COMMON LAW DIVISION  
Sperling J  
Thursday, 24 October 2002  /02 Mark Leslaighter versus David Beck & Anor  
Judgment  His Honour: On the evidence tendered there is a serious possibility, and
I need make no further finding, that the plaintiff will recover a verdict in excess of $750,000. That being so, I make order 1 in the summons filed on 18
October 2002.  The plaintiff seeks an order that the costs of the summons should be costs in the cause. The defendants and the second cross-defendant seek orders that the plaintiff pay their respective costs of the summons.  The proceedings were instituted by the plaintiff in the District Court. I have already found that there is a prospect that the plaintiff might recover in excess of the effective jurisdiction of the District Court, at least in the case of one of the defendants and, accordingly, that the plaintiff had at all relevant times a proper basis upon which to move to transfer the proceedings into the Supreme Court.  Prior to the summons being filed, it seems tolerably clear that each of the defendants and the cross-defendant was requested by the plaintiff to agree to an extension of the jurisdiction of the District Court, and none of them did.
Accordingly, the plaintiff was then in a position where steps had to be taken to secure a jurisdiction in which the problem to which I have referred would not arise. That was done by filing a summons in this Court on 18 October 2002 which was brought on for hearing at short notice today.  The summons, however, sought not only removal of the proceedings into this
Court, but also a transfer back to the District Court. The position adopted by the defendants and the second cross-defendant in response to the summons was that they would neither consent nor oppose the transfer of the proceedings into the Supreme Court, but would oppose a transfer back to the District Court as an abuse of process.  On the hearing of the summons, the plaintiff's legal representatives, on consideration, did not press such a transfer back to the District Court.  The result is that the plaintiff has achieved, by order of this Court, what would have been achieved if the defendants and the second cross-defendant had acceded to an enlargement of the jurisdiction of the District Court, as they were requested to do before the present proceedings were instituted.  If transfer to this Court were all that had been sought, the plaintiff would plainly have been entitled to recover the costs of the summons in the circumstances to which I have referred. The situation is, however, complicated by the plaintiff having sought the further order for the matter to be transferred back to the District Court, which it is now conceded the Court would not have ordered.  The Court is informed, and I accept it without evidence because it is so obviously what one would expect, that counsel appearing on the summons would not have been briefed if all that had been sought was a transfer into the
Supreme Court, without the application for the further order of transfer back to the District Court. Accordingly, in that respect, the costs incurred in briefing counsel on the summons have been unnecessarily incurred as a result of a course taken on behalf of the plaintiff.  Nothing I have said should be construed as a criticism of the plaintiff's legal advisers. Decisions are made conscientiously and when seen to be decisions which should not be maintained, it is proper to do what the plaintiff's legal advisers have done, and that is to refrain from pressing the point. It is an every day occurrence that things are seen differently on further consideration. Nonetheless, the matters I have mentioned are practical considerations which go to where the burden of the costs of this summons should fall.  Weighing up those considerations, I propose to make no order as to costs with the intent each side will bear their own costs.  -oOo-  
LAST UPDATED: 31/10/2002 * * * 
