

Minister for Mineral Resources versus Newcastle Newspapers Pty Ltd Matter No /97 [1997] NSWSC 339 (27 August 1997) 
Last Updated: 27 February 1998 
Minister for Mineral Resources versus Newcastle Newspapers Pty Ltd /97 August 1997 
Young J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division /97 - MINISTER FOR MINERAL RESOURCES V 
NEWCASTLE NEWSPAPERS PTY LTD 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: Last Friday at about 3:30pm, the plaintiff sought an interim injunction to prevent the defendant from publishing certain allegedly confidential information in the defendant's newspaper the following day. Although the matter was well and succinctly argued, I did not consider it appropriate to decide a relatively important case on such short consideration. I thus granted a temporary injunction until today and indicated that I would give judgment today. I invited further submissions in writing. The defendant took advantage of that invitation and I have read those submissions though, essentially, they were merely a rehash of what was put orally. The plaintiff also sought to adduce further evidence. This was presented earlier today. I will deal with its significance in due course. 
I am trying an application for an interlocutory injunction. However, as the effect of an order will closely approximate the grant of a final injunction, I must be particularly careful to make sure that there are substantial grounds for making the order.

The information in dispute is contained in the Minute I will refer to shortly.
That Minute relates to mine subsidence problems in the Chain Valley Bay district near Newcastle. In 1995, a Mrs Margaret Christensen of Wyong asked the plaintiff's Department for some information about those problems. Mr
Hawke, a senior executive of the Department prepared a Minute and a suggested response to Mrs Christensen. The Minute was regarded by Mr Hawke and other officers of the Department as confidential and was placed upon a confidential file. Only three or four copies of the Minute were made and each has been accounted for. However, on 19 August, 1997, a reporter employed by the defendant was in possession of a copy of the Minute. Unless restrained, the defendant proposes to publish part of the Minute and to summarize other parts.

It would appear that the plaintiff Minister had made claims against certain persons who were mining in the area and that these claims were compromised in a deed which contained a covenant as to confidentiality. It would also seem that Mrs Christensen and others in the area were interested to see whether they might have a claim for compensation over the same activities or at least have a public inquiry into the issues. There also seems to be some litigation between some of the parties concerned in the Chain Valley Bay mining problems listed for hearing before the District Court this week. Mrs Christensen evidently was given a copy of the Minute by someone who stole it from the government. No further background information need be considered for the purpose of these reasons.

The article which the defendant proposes to publish is Exhibit DX 01. I have marked the alleged offending passages in blue. Immediately before the blue passages, the following appears:- " Mrs Christensen drew a bureaucratic blank at every turn...She finally got a breakthough. She received a copy of an internal minute written by a senior bureaucrat in the Department of Mineral Resources advising another on the legal grounds for refusing Mrs Christensen information...." 
Mr S Finch for the plaintiff presses for an injunction on four bases,viz:- [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ma199281/s365.html) of the [Mining Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ma199281/);
The contractual duty of confidence owed to the miners;
Inherent confidentiality;
Breach of copyright.

Mr Cobden for the defendant says that none of these heads supports the injunction sought. I will deal with each of these heads in due course, but it is first necessary to consider some preliminary matters including how courts deal with claims by a Minister of the Crown to restrain publication of information held in confidential files.

Dean on Trade Secrets (LBC, Sydney, 1990) truly says at p 528, "Actions to obtain redress for the theft of secrets has in the main been restricted to the equitable doctrines of breach of fiduciary duty and breach of confidence....There is considerable uncertainty surrounding the question whether civil remedies extend to situations where trade secrets are stolen. The most blatant abuse of another's trade secret arises in the absence of equitable obligation where a stranger steals the information." 
However, equity is not powerless. If a person knows or ought to know that information of which he or she is in possession is stolen, then it may well be against the conscience to make use of that information to the detriment of the owner. Again, if a person knows when he or she receives information that it has been obtained in breach of a contractual duty of confidence, the same will apply. These are just illustrations in modern conditions of the rule in de
Mattos versus Gibson [(1859) 4 De G & J 276],
That is certainly the case when the person who acquires the information knows or ought to know that the information was stolen at the time of its acquisition. The position where the information was obtained innocently by the person seeking to publish it, but is later discovered to be stolen is the same, except where the possessor was a bona fide purchaser for value without notice.

An illustration of this principle is provided by Green versus Folgham <case>; [(1823) 1 Sim & St 398] In that case, the secret recipe for an eye medicine was to be held on trust for Selina
Folgham for life and then was to be sold and the proceeds distributed to the settlor's grandchildren. Selina Folgham told the recipe to one of her sons, the defendant, and then destroyed the recipe. Another of the grandchildren sought an account of profits. The defendant protested that when he acquired the secret, he had no notice of any trust affecting it. Later, he agreed to hold the secret on trust for his siblings and himself, but said that, having acquired the secret from his mother unconditionally, a later trust could not affect him. Notwithstanding this argument, the defendant was ordered to account for the profits. He had acquired trust property otherwise than as a bona fide purchaser for value.

There is a vital difference between a secret which is communicated to a person in confidence and one which is stolen by another or obtained by that other clandestinely. Equity will be far more likely to give relief in the latter case, see Yovatt versus Winyard <case>; [(1820) 1 Jac & W 394]
However, even in the former case, the court may intervene. As Lord Denning, MR said in Seager versus Copydex Ltd [[1967] 1 WLR 923], 931, there is "the broad principle of equity that he who has received information in confidence shall not take unfair advantage of it." See too, Goff &
Jones, The law of Restitution, 4th ed (Sweet & Maxwell, London, 1993) pp 683-9.

A theoretical problem arises in the case where the person who seeks to profit out of stolen information does not owe any fiduciary duty to the owner of the information. This problem can sometimes be addressed by the old common law action of money had and received. It may these days be solved by resort to the idea that there is a unified concept of restitution. Under this theory, if a person steals my guitar and uses it to produce income, I can claim damages, or, if this remedy is inadequate, an account of profits. If somebody steals my rare books and sells them in his or her shop, thus increasing the goodwill value of the shop, I can sue for an account of profits. If someone steals my formulae for calculating the result of horse races, I can get an account of profits. If someone uses their position as my servant to make a personal profit, I can recover, Reading versus AG <case>; [[1951] AC .]
Essentially the principle is the same. There had been an unjust enrichment and there must be restitution. This may be by way of an account of profits in equity or an award at law under a claim for money had and received. An injunction will lie to support the restitutionary action and to minimise the unjust enrichment. In AG versus Observer Ltd [1990] 1 AC 109, 262 (the
English Spycatcher case), Lord Keith held that where a profit is made by a newspaper publishing confidential information, an account of profits should be ordered. In an appropriate case an injunction may be granted to prevent the unjust enrichment arising, as frequently occurs in the case of an employee who seeks to use his or her former employer's secrets in a rival business.

Although some cases deal with secrets as if they were property, those cases mainly deal with secret recipes. The present confidential information is not within that category. Furthermore, one has to be careful to distinguish between the information itself and the record of the information. The latter can be protected by copyright, the former not.

Whatever be the law as regards private secrets, the law as to secrets held by governments is different. It is not different in substance so much as different in the way in which forensically the court approaches the issue.
With a private secret, "it may be a sufficient detriment to the citizen that disclosure of information relating to his affairs will expose his actions to public discussion and criticism" per Mason, J, Commonwealth versus John Fairfax & Sons Ltd <case>; [(1980) 147 CLR 39], 52. But, as Mason J says at the same page, in a democratic society that cannot be a material detriment to a government.

In the same case, Mason, J laid down the principles to be applied as follows: "...the court will determine the government's claim to confidentiality by reference to the public interest. Unless disclosure is likely to injure the public interest, it will not be protected.

The court will not prevent the publication of information which merely throws light on the past workings of government, even if it be not public property, so long as it does not prejudice the community in other respects. Then disclosure will itself serve the public interest in keeping the community informed and in promoting discussion of public affairs. If, however, it appears that disclosure will be inimical to the public interest because national security, relations with foreign countries or the ordinary business of government will be prejudiced, disclosure will be restrained. There will be cases in which the conflicting considerations will be finely balanced, where it is difficult to decide whether the public's interest in knowing and in expressing its opinion, outweighs the need to protect confidentiality." 
His Honour went on to say that support for this approach is to be found in
Attorney-General versus Jonathan Cape Ltd [[1976] QB 752], 770-1, where the
Court refused to grant an injunction to restrain publication of the diaries of
Richard Crossman. Lord Widgery LCJ. said : "The Attorney-General must show (a) that such publication would be a breach of confidence; (b) that the public interest requires that the publication be restrained, and (c) that there are no other facts of the public interest contradictory of and more compelling than that relied upon. Moreover, the court, when asked to restrain such a publication, must closely examine the extent to which relief is necessary to ensure that restrictions are not imposed beyond the strict requirement of public need." 
Mason CJ repeated this rule in Esso Resources Ltd versus Plowman (1995) 183
CLR 10, 32.

The only part of the principle laid down in the Fairfax case that could apply in the present case is that "the ordinary business of government will be prejudiced". What is the scope of this part of the rule? 
First, it must be appreciated that "there cannot be a single rule governing the publication" because there may be such a variety of circumstances or matters, per Lord Widgery, CJ, AG versus Jonathan Cape Ltd at p 770.

The matters which fall within this head could be very numerous. However, I agree with Mr Dean in his Trade Secrets at pp174-6 that whilst there is support in the English cases for protecting departmental communications so that public servants can advise their superiors candidly, the priority given to such protection is not as strong in Australia. In this country, probable prejudice to the workings of government by the disclosure must be shown.

The only decision which I have discovered anywhere near the present case is
Director-General of Education versus Public Service Association of NSW [(1985) 79 FLR 15.] As far as my researches go, this case has never been judicially considered since. In that case, McLelland, J had to deal with the situation where the relevant minister had sent three copies of a report on employment conditions to union representatives with a request to respect confidentiality. The annual conference of the union resolved that copies be supplied to a considerable number of members. The plaintiff applied for and obtained an injunction. McLelland, J said at p 20: "It seems to me to be quite legitimate that a Department of State, contemplating the introduction of widespread changes in some aspect of its organisation, should wish to consult with officers of the trade union whose members would be most affected, in advance of disclosure of the contemplated changes to those members generally, with a view to avoiding industrial unrest of a precipitate and possibly uninformed nature and that, in such circumstances, the Department, in order to facilitate the proper management of its enterprise, would have a legitimate interest in preventing such premature disclosure. Whether continuation of a restraint on general disclosure will have the effect desired by the Department or will be counter-productive is a matter that I cannot determine. Responsible officers of the Department assert that premature general disclosure is likely to have a number of substantial deleterious consequences to the proper and efficient administration of the
Department of Education, as set out in the affidavit ...and I am not in any position to find that those assertions are unfounded." 
That case, which is clearly correct, leads me to the view that if there is a sensitive matter involving government policy, the courts will be likely to recognise prejudice to government by disclosure. I think too that Mr Dean is correct at p 176 when he says that the category also covers cases where the government has collected communications voluntarily supplied between government and private citizens or corporations. I also consider that when a government department is involved with claims for compensation being made against it, there is also unacceptable prejudice if information relevant to its case is disclosed otherwise than in the course of discovery or other authorized process. I have to add "or otherwise than by questions in
Parliament". Unfortunately, it is often the lot of counsel appearing for a government body to be faced with an attempt to undermine his or her case by a parliamentarian friendly to the opposing party asking a question during
Question Time in Parliament. However, this exception is necessary in a democratic society and, in any event, the minister usually does not need to disclose relevant information.

Any impression that the principles in the Fairfax case may be used to encourage disloyalty on the part of employees of the government or others must be dispelled. The law does not encourage such disloyalty, not does it encourage the leaking of confidential government material to the press or encourage the press to disseminate it. Governments and Ministers of the Crown have as much right to privacy and confidentiality as anyone else. The true meaning of the principles is that there are often overriding public interests which mean that the court will not give its aid by injunction to prevent public discussion of public issues.

I now turn to the four specific issues with this background.
[Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ma199281/s365.html) of the [Mining Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ma199281/) provides in essence that "A person must not disclose any information obtained in connection with the administration or execution of this Act, unless the disclosure is made" under five specified permitted ways.

This type of section commonly appears in legislation. Its primary purpose is to protect public servants from the obligation of disclosure. If someone decides to make disclosure, his or her evidence is receivable and [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s138.html) of the [Evidence Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) has no relevance, see Canadian Pacific Tobacco Co Ltd versus Stapleton <case>; [(1952) 86 CLR 1.] It has been held that the section does not operate to protect copies of documents which might be affected in the hands of an officer, if such copies are in the hands of non-officers, Oudman versus Warren  <case>; <case> I cannot see how this section can be utilized by the plaintiff to add to the protection that he might otherwise have under the general law.
A duty of confidentiality may be imposed by contract. Such contractual obligations will often give way to the public interest, see eg Parry-Jones v Law Society [[1969] 1 Ch 1]; Brayley versus Wilton [[1976] 2 NSWLR 495.] However, unless forced by law to disclose material, or unless the public interest provides an overriding obligation, the contractual duty of confidence will be a good reason not to compel disclosure at the instance of a stranger.

The deed in the instant case did provide for confidentiality. Such a clause may mean different things in different contexts. One often sees on the agenda of a meeting, "These documents are to be kept confidential." That expression is really only a warning; it does not have any legal operation.

A member of a board to whom "confidential" papers are delivered does not breach his or her fiduciary or contractual duty of confidence to the company merely by disclosing a paper to a third party in order to obtain that party's advice. Of course, if the document itself was obviously sensitive or the third party had some interest adverse to the company or its board, things would be different. However, the mere disclosure of a document marked "confidential" would ordinarily not be a breach.

In commercial cases, confidentiality is dealt with by Megarry, J in Coco v
A N Clark (Engineers) Ltd [(1968) 1A IPR 587], 590. His
Lordship there said that to pass the test of being confidential, the plaintiff must establish that the information or document must (1) have the necessary quality of confidence about it; (2) must have been received in circumstances importing an obligation of confidence; and (3) its unauthorised use must cause some detriment to the plaintiff.

This test has constantly been applied since then.

Whilst the mere fact that some piece of paper is marked "confidential" or put into a confidential file is insufficient to prove that it contains confidential information, it is some evidence of that matter. As Kirby, P said in Wright versus Gasweld Pty Ltd [(1991) 22 NSWLR 317], 333, "Merely because a person says that something is to be regarded as confidential or a `trade secret' does not make it so....Courts should, nevertheless, exercise a modest disinclination to hold that information is not confidential when parties have taken the trouble to say that it is." 
In public law, without being exhaustive of the classes of confidentiality, a document is confidential if it was obtained by a government agency on a pledge of confidentiality: Luzaich versus United States [435 F Supp 31], 35 (1997);
Department of Health versus Jephcott <case>; [(1985) 8 FCR 85], 89. Thus the fact that a document is subject to contractual confidentiality has some relevance.

However, the Minute itself was not supplied to the Department in confidence.
It is an internal advice. It may contain some material which is confidential in the sense just mentioned, but the parts which are intended to be quoted are not in this category.
Inherent confidentiality.

The main thrust of Mr Cobden's submission is merely that there is no inherent confidentiality in the Minute or the information it contains. However, this is really the whole point of the case. As I have noted earlier, if the government agency can show that disclosure of the information would cause prejudice, then disclosure is protected. This is akin to Megarry, J's principles on commercial documents dealing with detriment. In a case where a report is obtained within a department in the context of claims for compensation or litigation, then, ordinarily, prejudice will be suffered. Where the only background is that people are pressing for a public inquiry, things may be different. The instant case appears to me to be in the former category.

The minor part of Mr Cobden's submission was that the court does not know the issues in the relevant pieces of litigation and has no way of knowing whether the information in the Minute will prejudice the government in that litigation or not. Mr Cobden says that the plaintiff could have informed the court of these matters, but chose not to do so. It was doubtless this submission that moved the plaintiff to put more evidence before the court earlier today.

This further evidence was by the manager of one of the miners. It showed that the miner could sue the plaintiff if there was a breach of confidentiality obligations. This really did not advance the case any further as there is not a jot of evidence to show that the leaking of the material was actually or vicariously the act of the plaintiff or that he was negligent in his keeping of it. It is equally open to find that some well wisher of the residents or some misguided whistleblower copied or stole the document or that the plaintiff has been a victim of industrial espionage.

Mr Cobden made much of the point that it appeared from the documents that information of the type involved in the present case is released routinely.
This may in some cases go to the issue as to whether the material is actually confidential. However, when an authority which routinely releases information withholds it in a particular case, the court is more likely to find that there is a good reason for its non-release. This is because the government agency is not acting capriciously or in a bureaucratic obscurant way, but is assessing each case according to its merits.

The point that really concerns me is that the information would appear only to be prejudicial to the government because Mrs Christensen and her associates might be able to make use of it in litigation with the government. However, it would seem that Mrs Christensen already has the information because the newspaper article in the piece I quoted earlier says that she received a copy of the Minute already. She is not a party to the proceedings and may have already disseminated the Minute to her associates or anyone who might have a close interest in the matter. What purpose could be served then in restraining a regional newspaper from broadcasting part of the Minute more widely? 
I consider that this point has been unanswered. In view of the High Court's strictures against too-ready acceptance of the government's assertion of prejudice, it tells strongly against the grant of an injunction.

I have not overlooked the fact that the prime thrust of Mr Hawke's affidavit is not directed to problems with litigation, but rather to the problem of people losing faith in the ability of the government to maintain the confidentiality of compensation arrangements. This attitude confirms what I have said in the previous paragraph. If what Mr Hawke states were the only problem, it would not seem to me to be sufficient to show the appropriate degree of prejudice.
The fourth matter concerns breach of copyright.

It is common ground that the plaintiff or those under him have copyright in the Minute. The dispute is whether the proposed publication is of a "substantial part" of the Minute.

Whether an extract is a "substantial part" must be considered not only with respect to the quantity of what is reproduced, but also, and more importantly, with respect to the quality of what is taken, Ladbroke (Football) Ltd v
William Hill (Football) Ltd [[1964] 1 WLR 273], 276. In each case, one must look at the original and decide what are its essential characteristics and then look at the reproduction. Of course, in a case such as the present, a few sentences out of context may be taken for reproduction, so one does not limit oneself to the vital or core parts of the document in question.

Mr Cobden's submissions merely go to the amount of material that has been used in the proposed newspaper article. He says, rightly, that whilst there is some paraphrasing, only five lines plus a few extra words are actually quoted. The whole Minute occupies less than two pages.

The question is one of fact and degree. Having looked at the Minute, it is strongly arguable that the parts quoted are substantial. Some of the Minute is directed to historical and procedural matters and what reply should be given to Mrs Christensen. However, the key analysis is as to the assessment of the problem and a substantial part of this is intended to be reproduced.

The problem for the plaintiff is that if his only relief is in respect of breach of copyright, the defendant can relatively easily reframe the material in such a way that the underlying information in the Minute can be reported without breaching the copyright in the manner in which the information is stated in the Minute.

I now turn to discretionary considerations. Does the balance of convenience or the balance of justice warrant the grant of an injunction in this case? 
As a general rule, courts should not restrain any publication. Australia is a free country and, subject to the payment of damages, Australians can publish what they like. There are exceptions. Publication of material in breach of copyright will normally be restrained because damages are not an adequate remedy. Publication of trade secrets falls into the same category.

The words of members of the High Court in the cases I have cited also tend against awarding an injunction if the only purpose served would be the prevention of proper discussion of government information, even government secrets.

Mr Cobden put that there was insufficient evidence as to the issues raised in the various proceedings for me to be able to frame any injunction to protect the interest of confidentiality that might prejudice the Minister in litigation. I have already dealt with this point earlier in another connection. The order sought in paragraph 1 of the summons would appear to me to be appropriate.

However, the damage has really already been done by the publication to Mrs
Christensen. The further publication is not likely to increase the damage. It is also probably idle to grant an injunction with respect to any breach of copyright as, in practical terms, it would not prevent the same damage flowing from a restating of the underlying information. An injunction in the form granted in the Fairfax case really does not give practical assistance at all and its grant is only relevant on costs.

Accordingly, although I left the bench last Friday thinking that the present case was one where information had been stolen and was being disseminated to the prejudice of its owner, after further consideration, I cannot see how any injunction is justified.

The interim injunction I granted last Friday while I considered my decision will expire at midnight tonight. I decline to grant any continuation. The proceedings, if they are to continue, should do so by way of pleadings with the statement of claim to be filed within 28 days of today.

As to costs, although the plaintiff has failed, the defendant's intended use of stolen information is the reason for the litigation. Furthermore, I could have granted an injunction in the Fairfax form, but decided against it according to practicalities. In my view this means that each party should pay their own costs of this application for interim relief.
 * * * 
