

Regina versus Robert Arnold Smith [1998] NSWSC 1046 (6 November 1998) 
REGINA versus ROBERT ARNOLD SMITH /95 
MONDAY 27 MAY 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, ALLEN J, SPERLING J 
CATCHWORDS: CRIMINAL LAW - sentencing - duty of trial judge to make clear and complete findings of fact.

RESULT:Appeal allowed 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: In this matter I will ask Sperling J to give the first judgment.

SPERLING J: In November 1994, the applicant was tried before a judge and jury in the District Court at Campbelltown. The charge was aggravated assault pursuant to [s 61J(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s61j.html) of the [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) .

The applicant pleaded not guilty. He was convicted.

On 12 December 1994, the applicant was sentenced by the trial Judge to a minimum term of four years imprisonment commencing on 7 November 1994 and an additional term of two years.

On 15 September 1995, the applicant filed a notice of appeal against conviction and an application for leave to appeal against sentence. That is well out of time. However, an explanation is given in the notice and no point is taken by the Crown. Subsequently the applicant filed a notice abandoning the appeal against conviction.

In a sentencing appeal, this Court will interfere where there has been an error of principle causing the sentencing discretion of the trial judge to miscarry: Visconti [(1982) 2 NSWLR 104.] The Court will be slow to impute error to an experienced District Court Judge: Salameh [(1991) 55 A Crim R 384] at approved in Majors [(1991) 54 A Crim R 334.] 
In this case, there has been a clear error on the part of the trial judge which requires this Court's intervention. The trial judge was under the mistaken impression that the case of Hickey (CCA, 27 September 1994, unreported) prescribed a lower limit for the minimum term of imprisonment to be imposed for an offence of this kind. It was said in Hickey (supra) that the appropriate range for a minimum term in that case was four years to seven years. That was for that case, not for all cases, involving the same offence or cognate offences, irrespective of objective and subjective factors. His
Honour believed that he was imposing the shortest minimum term that he was permitted to impose. That was an error. The error appears to have led his
Honour to impose a sentence which, for the reasons I will presently give, I would have to regard as excessive in the circumstances. The sentence must, accordingly, in my opinion, be set aside and this Court must substitute a sentence which is appropriate.

The victim, who was a woman of sixty-three years of age, gave evidence at the trial. She said that she visited the applicant's home, having been tricked into thinking she was going to his daughter's place for a barbecue. She found herself locked into the house. She declined a sexual advance and the applicant then smacked her across the face and squeezed her face causing pain. He then threatened her with a large carving knife. He threw the knife down breaking it, that he then picked up a second knife with which he also threatened her, that he put his hands between her legs and put her hand on his penis, that he then forced her upstairs, that she passed urine involuntarily, that he required her to undress and that he undressed, that he demanded that she suck his penis, which she refused to do, that he kissed her on the mouth and that he kissed and fondled her breasts. He then put his finger in her vagina which, she said, hurt because his nails were sharp. He then endeavoured to have vaginal sexual intercourse with her but failed in that endeavour due to the effect of alcohol on him.

The digital penetration was the intercourse with which he was charged and the aggravation was the threat to injure with an offensive weapon, namely the knife or knives. All the facts asserted by the victim in her evidence would be relevant on sentence if found to be true: De Simoni <case>; [(1981) 147 CLR 383] and Vella (CCA, 15 December 1995, unreported).
However, all those facts cannot be assumed for the present purpose merely because the victim asserted them to be true in her evidence at the trial.

In Gebrail (CCA, 18 November 1994, unreported), Mahoney JA referred to the difficulty in which this Court may be placed if the sentencing judge does not make clear and complete findings of fact concerning events constituting and surrounding the offence. Mahoney JA cited Smith [(1993) 69 A Crim R ] and Martin [(1981) 2 NSWLR 640.] 
Unfortunately, no such findings were made in this case. The only facts found by his Honour were the digital penetration and the threat with a knife or knives. By using the phrase "knife or knives", his Honour made clear that he did not even find whether there was a threat with one knife or with two knives, as the victim had said.

Sometimes, as in Gebrail (supra), there are other aspects of the remarks on sentence which give an indication of what facts the sentencing judge found to be proved. That is not so in this case. Nor is there any such indication apparent from his Honour's summing-up.

In his record of interview, tendered at the trial, the applicant denied he had threatened the victim with a knife. He said there had been an unsuccessful attempt at sexual intercourse, to which the victim was a consenting party, and that was all. His unsworn statement was to the same effect. All the detail of the applicant's allegedly violent and otherwise offensive conduct towards the victim was, therefore, in issue at the trial. The fact that the jury found the digital penetration, without consent, and the threat with a knife or knives, is no indication of what else, if anything, they found concerning the victim's detailed account of events.

The sentencing judge is obliged to form his own view of the facts, within the constraints of the jury's findings, if there are such constraints apparent from the jury's verdict. I refer to Gebrail (supra) and Harris <case>; [[1961] VR 236.] This Court now has that responsibility. However, it does not have the advantage of seeing and hearing the witnesses, in particular, in this case, the victim.

In these circumstances, unsatisfactory though the situation obviously is, I would not find the facts concerning the offence of this case to be higher against the applicant than the facts which must have been found by the jury; that is, digital penetration without consent and a threat with a knife.

Subjective considerations may be taken as found by the trial Judge. Neither side criticises his findings in that regard. The applicant was fifty-four years of age at the time of the offence. A psychological assessment showed him to be in the low to low-average range of intellectual functioning. That has only slight, if any, relevance in minimising the weight to be given to general deterrence in sentencing in this case.

The applicant's prior character was unblemished. He was regarded by people who knew him as a decent sort of person. The applicant had been drinking on the night which had apparently led to what was, for him, uncharacteristic behaviour. The applicant had protested his innocence throughout, so there was no finding of contrition by his Honour. Nor did the applicant earn a discount by pleading guilty to the charge.

This is not as serious a case as Hickey (supra). That was a successful Crown appeal. The victim was seventeen years of age. There were two incidents of fellatio procured by violence and there was the threat of further violence, although no actual injury was done. The offender's criminal record is a notable feature of that decision. It included conviction on three counts of rape, a conviction for inflicting grievous bodily harm with intent to have sexual intercourse and a conviction on four counts of assault occasioning actual bodily harm. Additionally, the offence which gave rise to the sentence under review was committed while the applicant was on parole in relation to earlier offences of a similar kind. The sentence imposed by the Court of
Criminal Appeal was a four-year minimum term plus a two-year additional term.
Under the relevant principles, that was less than the Court would have considered appropriate at first instance.

The applicant in these proceedings relies on two other cases as being closer to the mark than Hickey (supra). One is the case of Gerges (CCA, 8
March 1994, unreported). An appeal against severity of sentence was dismissed in that case. The case involved digital penetration. The aggravation arose from the age of the victim who was fifteen years and eleven months old at the time of the offence, just one month within the relevant category for aggravation. There was no injury or overt threat of injury. The offender was of previously good character. The sentence substituted was a minimum term of two years and six months and an additional term of ten months.

I would regard the present case as worse than Gerges (supra) because of the threat with the knife.

The case of Gebrail (supra) is the other case relied upon by the applicant. A Crown appeal was allowed in that case, as in Hickey (supra).
This was also a case of digital penetration. The victim was seventeen years of age. The aggravation consisted of punches to the face through a pillow. The victim suffered an adverse psychological response to the episode which persisted. There was no relevant criminal history. The chances of re-offending were slight. The Court substituted a minimum term of two years and three months and an additional term of nine months. As in the case of Hickey that was intended to be lenient because of the principles relating to
Crown appeals.

Gebrail (supra) involved actual injury to the victim and the adverse psychological response suffered by her. Those factors may make it a somewhat more serious case.

I stress that in Hickey (supra) and Gebrail (supra) the sentences were less than the Court considered would be appropriate at first instance. The present case is not a Crown appeal and must be decided in accordance with the same principles as apply at first instance.

As has been said many times this class of case represents a very serious offence, for which a term of imprisonment is mandatory. A sexual offence committed at knife point is a very serious matter.

I would impose a sentence of a minimum term of three years penal servitude, commencing on 7 November 1994 and expiring on 6 November 1997, on which date the applicant would be eligible to be released on parole, and an additional term of one year penal servitude commencing on 7 November 1997 and expiring on November 1998.

The orders that I propose would be that leave to appeal be granted, that the appeal be allowed, that the sentence be set aside, and that the applicant be re-sentenced in the terms I have delineated.

GLEESON CJ: I agree.

ALLEN J: I also agree.

GLEESON CJ: The orders of the Court will be: leave to appeal is granted; the appeal is allowed; the sentence imposed by the learned sentencing Judge is quashed and in lieu thereof the applicant will be sentenced in accordance with the orders proposed by Sperling J.
 * * * 
