

Woodson (Sales) P/L versus Woodson (Australia) P/L [1996] NSWSC 269 (12 July )
 * THE PRESENT PROCEEDINGS.
* ELABORATION OF FACTUAL BACKGROUND * The Original Business Association between the Woods and Carsons; 1955 to 30 August 1983 * The 1983 Agreement and Reconstruction * The 1986 Agreement of 12 May 1986 * Events post the 1986 Agreement (12 May 1986) Litigation and other.
* Patterns and Dies * 1990 Proceedings before McLelland J * Orders by Court of Appeal made on 20 July 1994 the Declaration of a Constructive Trust.
* The 1994 Proceedings before McLelland CJ in Eq.
* Contentions of the Parties * Res Judicata and Damages for Breach of Contract.
* Issue Estoppel and Damages for Breach of Contract.
* Anshun Estoppel and Damages for Breach of Contract.
* LEGAL QUESTIONS * APPLICATION OF LEGAL PRINCIPLES TO THE LEGAL QUESTIONS * Question 1(a) * Question 1(b) * The Plaintiffs case against an order under s66G.
* Principles and Developments affecting Fiduciary Duty * The Remedial Constructive Trust and Unconscionability * Unjust Enrichment * Common Law Remedies and Equitable Relief in a Commercial Context * Summing Up * Do the present circumstances give rise to a fiduciary duty? * Conclusion re Fiduciary Duty * Unconscionability * Implications of the 1986 Agreement for Unconscionability * Unconscionability and s66G * Conclusion re Unconscionability * Possible Orders Foreshadowed * Equitable Estoppel * Conclusion re Equitable Estoppel.
* Relevance of alleged breaches of the 1986 Agreement by the Defendant in proceedings No. 2907/94 to s66G Discretion.
* Question 2 * Estoppel by Record The Principles * What are Conflicting Decisions in this context? * Application of the Estoppel Principles to the present case.
* Conclusion re Res Judicata and Issue Estoppel * Anshun Estoppel * Anshun Estoppel and the Possibility of Conflicting Decisions.
* Conclusion re Estoppel * Question 3 * CONCLUSIONS * ORDERS * * * 
Woodson (Sales) Pty Limited versus Woodson (Australia) Pty Limited 
Woodson Pty Limited versus Woodson (Sales) Pty Limited 
Woodson (Sales) Pty Limited - Cross-Claimant 
Woodson Pty Limited - Cross-Defendant /94 4611/94 July 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES IN EQUITY 
SANTOW J 
CATCHWORDS: 
Intellectual Property - Trade-marks - Companies run by two families have joint equal ownership of whole interest in trade-marks - One family seeks that 100 per cent interest in trade-marks be vested in trust for sale pursuant to <case> of [Conveyancing Act 1919](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) - Whether party is entitled to such relief as of right or whether court has discretion in the matter - Scope of discretion.

Equity - Fiduciary obligations - Family companies enter into agreement regarding joint use and ownership of trade-marks - As part of agreement further user agreement is entered into between parties in relation to trademarks - Whether sale under [s 66G](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s66g.html) of [Conveyancing Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) should not be allowed on basis that a fiduciary obligation is owed in respect of the trademarks - Discussion of principles and developments affecting fiduciary duties in a commercial context - Fiduciary duty held not to exist - 
Equity - Unconscionable conduct - Whether notion of unconscionability can found remedy of constructive trust in the circumstances- Whether, if so, this is by analogy to the failure of a joint consensual relationship without attributable blame by one party or on principles of unconscionability more generally expressed- Discussion of such equitable remedies in Australia and the UK - Sufficient basis for establishing unconscionable conduct in circumstances - Sale of whole interest would give one party benefit of half the sale proceeds attributable to advantage of selling the whole of the trademarks rather than selling a partitioned half-interest - Fair market value excluding special value to purchaser if party - Appropriate orders foreshadowed.

Equity - Equitable estoppel - Discussion of principles - Whether relevant shared assumption - Estoppel based on this shared assumption found to exist as conduct sought to be estopped represents an unconscionable departure from the shared assumption - Alternative basis for foreshadowed orders.

Estoppel - Earlier proceedings successfully appealed - Whether party estopped from adding proceedings for damages in cross-claim for breach of agreement on basis of res judicata, issue estoppel or Anshun estoppel - Discussion of what constitutes conflicting decisions - Res judicata and issue estoppel held to be no barrier to claim for damages - Anshun estoppel held to preclude claim for damages as it was unreasonable not to raise claim for damages in earlier proceedings - Anshun estoppel and cross-claims.

Austotel Pty Limited versus Franklins Selfserve Pty Limited [(1989) 16 NSWLR ](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281989%29%2016%20NSWLR%20582 "View LawCiteRecord" )

Barnes versus Addy [(1874) L.R. 9 Ch.App. 244](/cgi- bin/LawCite?cit=%281874%29%20LR%209%20LRCh%20App%20244 "View LawCiteRecord" )

Baumgartner versus Baumgartner <case>; <case>; <case>; <case>; [(1994) 123 ALR 642] 
Bryson versus Bryant [(1992) 29 NSWLR 188] 
Cachia versus Isaacs [(1983) 3 NSWLR 366] 
Carson versus Wood (McLelland J 21 September 1990, unreported 3970/89) 
Carson versus Wood <case>; [(1984) 154 CLR 178] 
Chase Manhattan Bank N.A. versus Israel-British Bank (London) Ltd [[1981] Ch ]

Codelfa Construction Pty Ltd versus State Rail Authority of NSW [(1982) 149 CLR ]

Commonwealth of Australia versus Verwayen (1990) 170 CLR 394 
Crawford Fitting Co versus Sydney Valve & Fittings Pty Ltd [(1988) 14
NSWLR 438] 
Currabubula Holdings Pty Limited versus Mita Copiers Australia Pty Limited (Federal Court, Burchett J, 5 May 1995, unreported) 
Dillon versus MacDonald (1902) 21 NZLR 375CA 
In re Diplock; Diplock versus Wintle <case>; <case>; <case>; [[1982] AC ]

Kelly versus C A & Bell Commodities Corporation Pty Ltd <case>; [(1983) 152 CLR 406] 
Mabo & Ors versus State of Queensland [(1992) 107 ALR 1] 
Re McNamara and the [Conveyancing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) (1961) 78 
Macquarie Bank Limited versus the persons trading as Westgarth Middleton (1995) 8
ANZ Insurance Cases at |P61-261 
Martin-Baker Aircraft Co Ltd versus Canadian Flight Equipment Ltd [[1955] 2 QB ]

Metall und Rohstoff A.G. v. Donaldson Lufkin & Jenrette Inc. [[1990] 1
Q.B. 391](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1990%5d%201%20QB%20391 "View LawCiteRecord" )

J C Millett Co versus Park & Tilford Distillers Corp [123 F Supp 484] 
Murray's Meats Pty Ltd versus Bevillesta Pty Ltd (McLelland CJ in Eq., 28 October Unreported) 
Muschinski versus Dodds, and Baumgartner versus Baumgartner <case>; [(1987) 164 CLR 137] 
Neil Pearson & Co Pty Ltd versus Comptroller-General of Customs [(1995) 38
NSWLR 443] 
Neylan versus Dickens [(1987) 1 NZLR 402CA)] 
Ngatoa versus Ford [(1990) 19 NSWLR 72] 
Noranda Australia Ltd versus Lachlan Resources NL [(1988) 14 NSWLR 1] 
Opus Productions Pty Ltd versus Popwing Pty Ltd t/a Kevin Jacobsen Productions (Santow J, 28 February 1995, unreported) 
Pacific Coal Pty Ltd versus Idemitsu (Qld) Pty Ltd (Ryan J, Supreme Court of
Queensland, 21 February 1992, unreported) 
Penrith District Rugby League Football Club Limited versus Fittler & Anor (Santow J, 8 February 1996, unreported) 
Port of Melbourne Authority versus Anshun <case>; <case>; [(1991) 105 ALR 593] 
Rogers versus The Queen [(1994) 181 CLR 251] 
Scandinavian Trading Tanker co. A.B. versus Flota Petrolera Ecuatoriana [[1983] A.C. 694] 
Scott versus Beneficial Finance Corporation (Federal Court of Australia, 17
December 1993, unreported) 
Scott versus Beneficial Finance Corporation Ltd (Wilcox J, Einfeld and Beazley
JJ, 31 May 1994, unreported) 
Serras versus Noel <case>; <case>; [[1995] 3
WLR 352](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1995%5d%203%20WLR%20352 "View LawCiteRecord" )

United Dominions Corporation Ltd versus Brian Pty Ltd <case>; <case>; <case>; <case>; [[1996] 2 WLR 802] 
Williams versus Legg [(1993) 29 NSWLR 687] [Conveyancing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) , [s66G](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s66g.html) [Federal Court of Australia Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fcoaa1976249/), [s22](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fcoaa1976249/s22.html) [Supreme Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) , s78, s[63](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s63.html) 
Supreme Court Act 1981 (UK), s49(2) 
Trade Practices Act (1974) (Cth), s52 
PARTIES: 
Woodson (Sales) Pty Limited 
Plaintiff 
Woodson (Australia) Pty Limited) 
Defendant 
Woodson Pty Limited 
Plaintiff 
Woodson (Sales) Pty Limited 
Defendant 
Woodson (Sales) Pty Limited 
Cross-Claimant 
Woodson Pty Limited 
Cross-Defendant 
JUDGMENT # THE PRESENT PROCEEDINGS.
 
The Carson and Wood families have had a long and evolving business association from 1955, manufacturing and selling a range of industrial kitchen appliances and equipment. It was reflected in two agreements, called the 1983 Agreement (whereby the Wood interests transferred certain trade-marks, and the selling organisation into joint ownership) and the 01986 Agreement (whereby, inter alia, detailed provision was made for the 50/50 ownership of the trade-marks, dies and patterns and providing for a joint distributorship giving limited exclusive rights to the Wood family).

The 1986 Agreement was subsequently repudiated by the Carsons leading to its termination by the Woods on 23 December 1988. This produced litigation culminating in a successful appeal by the Carsons to the Court of Appeal whereby the Carsons, by constructive trust, were confirmed in equal ownership of the trade-marks (and patterns and dies) with the Woods. That left a continuing association essentially limited to this joint ownership, whereby each independently exploited the trade-marks, patterns and dies.

In the present proceedings (No. 4611/94 commenced on 25 November 1994), the
Carsons through Woodson Pty Limited, seek relief by way of Further Amended
Summons. This in essence seeks that the trade-marks currently held by Woodson
Pty Limited be vested in a trust for sale pursuant to [s66G](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s66g.html) of the [Conveyancing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) ("the Act"). It should be emphasised that such trust for sale is not to effect a partition of the respective interests of the Wood family and Carson family by permitting the Carson family only to sell its half interest. Rather it is to effect a sale of the whole interest in those trade-marks owned beneficially by the Wood family and Carson family respectively. The Wood interests oppose such trust for sale on a number of grounds based on breach of fiduciary duty, unconscionability, conventional estoppel and alleged breaches of the 1986 Agreement. Alternatively they seek that any order permitting a trust for sale be on particular terms.

For convenience, I quote the relevant orders sought by the Carson interests in the Further Amended Summons before me: "1. An order that John Edward Star of Star Dean-Willcocks, Chartered
Accountants, be appointed as trustee of the trade-marks registered in
Australia and being A120147, A127512 and B221491.
Order that the said registered trade-marks be vested in such trustee free from encumbrances, if any, affecting any individual share thereon to be held by the said trustee upon the Statutory Trust for Sale under Division 6 of Part
IV of the [Conveyancing Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/).
That the Plaintiff and/or the First Defendant be at liberty to seek to purchase all or any of the said registered trade-marks at auction or otherwise and in the event that either is the purchaser, its share in the nett proceeds may be off set against the purchase money.
An order that an account be taken of the profits made by the Defendants by reason of the use of the abovementioned trademarks from December, 1988 and that the Defendants pay to the Plaintiff one-half of the amount of profits so ascertained." 
In the parallel proceedings No. 2907/94, the Wood interests through Woodson
Pty Limited seek damages for breach of the 1986 Agreement and in particular clause 7.

The Carson interests oppose the award of any damages, dispute breach and claim a defence by way of res judicata, issue estoppel or Anshun estoppel.
 # ELABORATION OF FACTUAL BACKGROUND 
The Original Business Association between the Woods and Carsons; 1955 to August 1983 
In 1955 a business association commenced between Mr A M Wood and Mr S L J Carson and their respective families, carried out through various associated entities. This embraced the manufacture and marketing of commercial catering equipment under the brand name "Woodson". Their association is referred to as "a joint enterprise" in the litigation which later ensued; Court of Appeal Judgment Carson versus Wood [(1994) 34 NSWLR 9] at 11 per Clarke JA, on appeal from McLelland J in Carson versus Wood (McLelland J 21 September 1990, unreported 3970/89). As the precise nature of their evolving relationship acquires some importance in the present case, I use the broad term "joint enterprise" without pre-empting its ultimate characterisation.

I shall refer for convenience to the two interests individually as respectively "the Woods" (or Wood interests) and "the Carsons" (or Carson interests), noting that their interests were held in more complicated fashion through various family companies and trading came to take place via various family unit trusts.

By 1983 the corporate structure which had developed in relation to the business included the equally-owned (50/50) Woodson Pty Ltd as the manufacturing company as well as the wholly-owned Wood sales company, A M Wood
Pty Ltd as the marketing company. There was also the wholly- owned Wood company, A M Wood and Sons Pty Ltd which had carried on the marketing activities at an earlier time. It was then the registered proprietor of the three Australian trade-marks comprising the word "Woodson", as well as of two non-Australian trade-marks comprising the word "Woodson"; the first was registered in New Zealand and the second in the Philippines.

The shares in Woodson Pty Limited were held as to one half by A A Wood and C C
Wood as trustees of the estate of A M Wood (deceased) and the other half were held by Mr S L J Carson. It can be inferred that patterns and dies used in manufacture were in the possession of the 50/50 owned Woodson Pty Limited, rather than the sole ownership and possession of the Woods. The shares in the other companies were beneficially held on behalf of the Wood family.

The end result was that up to 30 August 1983, manufacturing (including patterns and dies) was owned and carried out 50/50 between the Woods and
Carsons (via Woodson Pty Limited). Whereas the Woods at that time owned 100 per cent of both sales and of the relevant Woodson trade-marks (via the marketing company Woodson (Sales) Pty Limited).

The 1983 Agreement and Reconstruction 
On 30 August 1983 the corporate structure and ownership of the Australian trade-marks were re-arranged by a short handwritten, informal agreement between the Woods and the Carsons ("the 1983 Agreement"). I quote it below: "It has been agreed that the Carson family pays the Wood family the sum of $110,000 for the fifty per cent of goodwill, trade marks, patents and the like as well as the sales organisation presently conducted by the Wood family trust. An amount to be decided for stock to be contributed by both families to a company to be formed trading as a unit trust to then carry on the sales of
Woodson and other products by agreement. The date of commencement to be
November 1st 1983. The spirit of this agreement to be couched in legal terms if necessary.

Dated at Sydney this 30th day of August 1983." 
The end result of this was that in consideration of a payment of $110,000 by the Carson family to the Wood family, the Carsons and the Woods became 50 per cent shareholders in Woodson (Sales) Pty Limited which thus put the marketing activity into their joint ownership. To this 50/50 company Woodson (Sales) Pty
Limited was also transferred for the same consideration the three Australian trade-marks (but not the New Zealand or Philippines trade-marks). It was transferred by the Wood family via a transfer from A M Wood and Sons Pty
Limited on 20 December 1983 for that same consideration. I infer from the evidence below, that the payment of $110,000 paid for both trade-marks and the per cent interest in sales and marketing (including goodwill) involved a concessional element though there is no apportionment of consideration between the two. The extent of that concession has not been quantified, though there is evidence of the substantial level of gross sales achieved by Woodson
Pty Limited in 1985 to 1989. This went from $1,962,913 to $2,794,794; see paragraph 12 of the affidavit of Mr Anthony Wood sworn 9 February 1990.

Mr Anthony Wood, a principal and director of the relevant Wood companies gave evidence. In cross-examination (Transcript 3 June 1996 at 39-40) he was essentially uncontradicted when he said: "Q. Mr Wood, it was not trust that there were two agreements - 1983 and 1986 - which you have told us reflected the basis of your understanding of the arrangements, is that not the case? 
A. The - can I just explain? The 1983 [scil Agreement] was to give the
Carsons a portion of the sales because we were half in with the manufacturing and we had the complete sales, so for a nominal figure we gave them half the sales and that was all done to keep the families together and to keep everything for our mutual benefit. It's as simple as that." 
And then (at 40) he elaborated about the price and terms: "RICH: Q. In 1983 there was a payment of $110,000 for the trademarks, was there not? 
A. And the business.

Q. The trademarks and the like? 
A. Yes. It wasn't an accounting figure. It was a very nominal figure because we wanted to keep things so that there wouldn't be any bad feeling or problem.
We were all together then which we had been up to that date for 20-25 years.
So it was just a figure to keep us all together.

Q. Was the intention that that $110,000, they would get a share of all the intellectual property, all the trademarks and the like? 
A. The Australian trademarks and the sales organisations." 
By "nominal figure", I do not understand his evidence to be that the $110,000 was literally nominal. Rather that it fell well short of the true value of what was assigned.

The 1986 Agreement of 12 May 1986 
By 1986, the two families had decided to re-organise the manner in which the business was conducted. To that end an agreement was drawn up, evidently by the Carson interests but with the Wood interests having legal advice. Instead of the then 50/50 manufacturing arrangements between the Carsons and the Woods, the Carsons were to take over the whole of the manufacturing or production company such that Woodson Pty Limited would then become 100 per cent Carson owned. So far as sales were concerned, the Woods were to acquire 100 per cent of the selling company and thus the Carson interests were to transfer their 50 per cent interest in Woodson (Sales) Pty Limited to the Woods making it wholly-owned by the Woods. By clause 7, the production company, Woodson Pty Limited, appointed Woodson (Sales) Pty Limited joint distributor with the production company in Australia, Fiji, Papua New Guinea and Noumea. But this was subject to a restraint on the production company. The restraint was for the production company not to approach present customers of Woodson (Sales) Pty Limited without special agreement with Woodson (Sales) (save for the supply of special equipment) and not to appoint other distributors without such consent.

This necessitated a specific arrangement, firstly as to ownership and use of the Australian trade-marks, patterns and dies (clause 2), and second, as to the overall trading arrangements between the Woods and Carsons family interests (clause 7). Other clauses dealt with consequential matters, including necessary transfer of shares and units to give effect to these arrangements. These, clearly enough, did not involve continuing obligations once completed.

As to the first matter, it was agreed in clause 2 of the 1986 Agreement that a company should be incorporated or acquired (Carwood Pty Limited, subsequently to become Lifpark Pty Limited). This was to be owned 50/50 between each family and to which the Australian trade-marks, the patterns (associated with the casting of a standard toaster) and the dies (for the casting of the single milkshake mixer) were to be transferred, though subject, in the case of the trade-marks, to approval by the Registrar of Trade Marks. There was to be a user agreement for the trade-marks back to the now Carson wholly-owned production company, Woodson Pty Limited. No user agreement was evidently deemed necessary for the benefit of the Wood interests. This suggested that the user agreement was merely facilitative (to assist the Carson interests and protect the marks while so used) rather than fundamental to the agreement (as would have been suggested if the user agreement were to be in favour of both
Wood and Carson interests). The Wood interests evidently felt that they would have sufficient access without such an agreement - and indeed in the events that happened, the trade-marks remained in the legal ownership of the Woods.
Clause 2 went on to provide that if the Registrar failed to give such approval, to the transfer, then the existing owner of the trade-marks, Woodson
Pty Limited (now to be wholly-owned by the Wood's interests), would execute a declaration of trust whereby it agreed to hold the trade-marks, patterns and dies in trust for the Wood and Carson family interests in equal shares. Again, the user agreement was merely to be in favour of Woodson Pty
Limited, yet with no detraction from the joint beneficial ownership of the trade-marks.

I quote below clause 2 (from which it will be noted that only the Australian trade-marks were dealt with): "2. The A M Wood Trust and the Carson Family Trust shall cause to be incorporated or shall acquire a company to be named (by way of change) Carwood
Pty Limited and the Articles of Association of such company shall be those set forth in Table A of Schedule 3 of the NSW Companies Code with the qualification that such articles shall be varied to provide that both at general meetings of the Company and at directors meetings the chairman shall not have a casting vote. The parties hereto agree that there shall be transferred to that company for a nominal consideration the registered trade marks `WOODSON' numbered A120, 147, A127, 512, B221, 491 respectively the patterns associated with the casting of the standard toaster and the dies for the casting of the single milkshake mixer currently manufactured by the production company. Carwood Pty Limited shall prior to the completion of this agreement execute the trade mark user agreement hereunto annexed and marked with the letter `A'. The A M Wood Trust and the Carson Trust Company hereby agree that they will pay to Carwood Pty Ltd from time to time and in equal proportions all such moneys as are reasonably required by Carwood Pty Limited to: preserve and protect the abovementioned registered trade marks in respect of the class of goods for which they are now respectively registered; maintain, repair or replace the patterns associated with the casting of the standard toaster currently manufactured by the production company; maintain, repair or replace the dies for the casting of the single milkshake mixer currently manufactured by the production company.

It is hereby agreed that in the event of the Registrar of Trade Marks refusing to permit the transfer of the trade marks hereinbefore referred to
Carwood Pty Limited then the Trade Mark User Agreement as set out in annexure `A' aforesaid shall be entered into between Woodson (Sales) Pty Limited and
Woodson Pty Limited. Simultaneously with the execution of the lastmentioned agreement Woodson (Sales) Pty Limited shall execute a Declaration of Trust whereby it shall agree to hold the said trade marks patterns and dies as aforesaid in trust for the A M Wood Trust and the Carson Family Trust in equal shares." 
I should add that I do not attach any significance to the holding back of the non-Australian trade-marks. The evidence is insufficient to establish any kind of bad faith in so doing on the part of the Woods, or legitimate expectation on the part of the Carsons that they should have any interest in those trade-marks, and given the concessional acquisition they were already making.

Clause 2 needs to be read alongside the provision in clause 7 for the future commercial relationship envisaged between the Wood and Carson family interests, following this re-arrangement.

Clause 7 of the Agreement was expressed in the following terms: "The production company agrees to appoint Woodson Sales Unit Trust as a joint distributor with the production company of the Woodson range of appliances and equipment in Australia and the appointment shall extend to the export of that range of appliances and equipment to Fiji, Papua New Guinea and Noumea. The export of goods to other countries will be handled by the production company.
The production company further agrees that it will not approach the present customers of Woodson Sales Unit Trust for the sale of such appliances and equipment unless by special agreement with Woodson Sales Unit Trust or in a case of the supply of special equipment. All goods to be supplied by the production company to Woodson Sales Unit Trust shall be supplied on the basis of a normal 30 day trading account." 
There was an addendum to clause 7 comprising a typed portion and a handwritten portion. The typewritten portion was as follows: "Clause 7. Specific covenant for production company not to appoint other distributors without consent of Woodson Sales unit trust." 
Immediately under this was the handwritten portion which said: "and Woodson Aust. P/L." 
McLelland J (as he then was) in Carson versus Wood (supra) at 4, concluded (and such conclusion was not contested before me) that: "The reason for the handwritten portion is that by the time the agreement came to be executed the Carson interests for reasons internal to their family had decided to substitute a new company, Woodson (Australia) Pty Ltd (Woodson ) for Woodson Pty Ltd as the manufacturing company. It is common ground that Woodson (Australia) assumed the rights and obligations of `the production company' under the agreement, to which it became a party, and that references to Woodson Pty Ltd should be regarded as extending to Woodson ." 
It thus emerged that the wholly-owned Carson production company (originally
Woodson Pty Limited and subsequently Woodson (Australia) Pty Limited) appointed the Wood family's wholly-owned "Woodson Sales Unit Trust" (Woodson
Pty Limited) in effect as the primary distributor for sales purposes (but not sales agent) for the Woodson range of appliances and equipment in
Australia and its export to Fiji, Papua New Guinea and Noumea. I describe it as the primary distributor as, although Woodson Pty Limited (or Woodson
Pty Limited subsequently) was a joint distributor, it was subject to the restraint earlier described. There is no evidence of any joint sharing of profits or joint production between the Carsons and the Woods after the Agreement, though clearly the Carson production company was supplying product to Woodson (Sales) and was itself a co-distributor.

The 1986 Agreement annexed the form of trade-mark user agreement in favour of the production company Woodson Pty Limited. This provided, in clause 2, for the grant by Carwood Pty Ltd (assuming the transfer to it were not refused by the Registrar of Trade Marks) to Woodson Pty Limited of the right to use the
Australian trade-marks for a period of eighteen months from the date thereof "and thereafter from year to year unless or until determined forthwith by either of the parties giving notice in writing to the other". If the transfer were refused, then the user agreement would be from Woodson (Sales) Pty
Limited to Woodson Pty Limited.

I should also note that the 1986 Agreement itself contained no express provision for its termination.

Mr Anthony Wood gave evidence (paragraphs 47-49 of his affidavit of 25 May ) as follows: "47. It was my belief at the time of entering the May 1986 Agreement that the business relationship between the Wood family and the Carson family would continue upon the terms contained in that agreement indefinitely, unless the parties to the 1986 Agreement varied its terms by further agreement. I did not ever contemplate at the time of entering the 1986 Agreement that the Wood family could be deprived of their interest in the Woodson trademarks and products or their right to sell the Woodson products, unless agreed to by the
Wood family. In particular, I did not ever contemplate that a breach of the Agreement by the Carson family interests could possibly result in the forced sale of the Woodson trademarks as sought by the Plaintiff in these proceedings.
I would have not entered into the 1986 Agreement or allowed the Wood family companies or Woodson (Sales) Pty. Limited to do so, if I had been aware at the time of the possibility of any of the matters referred to in paragraph above occurring, that is, that the Wood family and, in particular, Woodson
Pty. Limited might be forced to sell the Woodson trademarks without the agreement of the Wood family and, in particular, myself.
It was also my belief at the time of entering into the 1983 Agreement that the business relationship between the Wood family and the Carson family would continue upon the terms contained in that agreement indefinitely, unless the parties to the 1983 Agreement varied its terms by further agreement. Such a variation did occur when the Wood family and the Carson family entered the Agreement. I did not ever contemplate at the time of entering the 1983
Agreement that the Wood family could be deprived of their interest in the
Woodson trademarks and products, or their right to sell Woodson products unless it was agreed to by the Wood family. I would have not entered into the Agreement if I had been aware at the time of the possibility that the
Wood family could be deprived of their interest in the Woodson trademarks and products, or their right to sell Woodson products without the agreement of the
Wood family and, in particular, myself." 
Similar evidence was given by Mr Anthony Wood in cross-examination, where he denied that terminability of the user agreement affected the expectation of the Wood interests that the arrangements would continue indefinitely; see
Transcript 3 June 1996 at 27, 28, 29, 31, 32, 39, 40, 41, 46 and 52. However, it is important to note that the Wood interests did acknowledge an expectation (Mr Anthony Wood, transcript 3 June 1996 at 31-2) that the trade-marks were "the joint property until the breaches. "We did not realise there were going to be breaches." This was in the context of questions concerning the 1990 litigation unsuccessfully brought by the Wood interests on the basis that they wholly-owned the trade-marks, the Court of Appeal in 1994 deciding otherwise (see below).

Indeed the Court of Appeal, by so deciding that the trade-marks were held equally on behalf of the Wood and Carson interests notwithstanding termination of the 1986 Agreement in the events I later describe, established that the expectation of permanence so far as the joint property was concerned was not qualified by the fate of the 1986 Agreement or its breach. However, the very terms of clause 2, in requiring a transfer of the trade-marks to a jointly owned company, or if not approved by the Registrar of Trade Marks, then a declaration of trust in favour of the two interests, strongly pointed to the permanency of those arrangements, irrespective of the terminability or indeed termination of the user agreement or indeed of the 1986 Agreement itself.

It is clear enough that evidence of one party's subjective intent (the Wood interests) cannot affect the construction of the relevant agreements. This is in the absence of evidence to similar effect pointing to it being shared by the Carson interests, so as to establish a mutual subjective intent; Codelfa
Construction Pty Ltd versus State Rail Authority of NSW [(1982) 149 CLR 348] at 352 per
Mason J. The Carson interests gave no evidence in refutation of the Wood evidence to the effect that they had a different expectation but clearly they did not contemplate breach of the 1986 Agreement or its termination as terminating the joint property in the trade-marks - and in that, they were upheld by the Court of Appeal.

I should add that such evidence goes also to whether there was a common purpose in determining whether a fiduciary relationship existed with respect to the trade-marks as claimed by the Wood interests. It also goes to whether the parties shared a common assumption basing a conventional estoppel. I return to those issues under "Application of Legal Principles to the Legal
Questions", below.

Events post the 1986 Agreement (12 May 1986) Litigation and other.
 
McLelland J in findings made on 21 September 1990 which were not disturbed by the Court of Appeal and which are not disputed in the present proceedings, describes what happened subsequently (Carson versus Wood at 6): "Subsequently [to May 1986] the shares in Woodson Pty Ltd held by the Wood family were transferred to the Carson family and the shares in Woodson (Sales) held by the Carson family were transferred to the Wood family. Woodson was in fact substituted for Woodson Pty Ltd as the manufacturing company and commenced selling its products (with the brand "Woodson") to
Woodson (Sales). A shelf company called Lifpark Pty Ltd (Lifpark) was acquired jointly by the Wood and Carson families for the purpose of cl 2 of the agreement. The name "Carwood Pty Ltd" was found to be unavailable and it was contemplated that the name of Lifpark would be changed to "Woodson Associates
Pty Ltd" instead, although this change was apparently never formally effected.
The transfer of the trade marks, patterns and dies to this company as contemplated by cl 2 of the 1986 agreement has never taken place.

Woodson (Sales) remains the registered proprietor of the Australian trade marks and A M Wood & Sons remains the registered proprietor of the New
Zealand trade marks and of the Philippines trade mark. Woodson Pty Ltd (or
Woodson (Australia)) remains the legal owner of the patterns and dies referred to in cl 2 of the 1986 agreement." 
In the Court of Appeal (Carson versus Wood at 12-13 Clarke JA elaborates on what then occurred (again this is not in dispute): "Following the execution of the agreement a company, which came to be called
Lifpark Pty Ltd, was acquired (the name Carwood was unavailable but the trade marks were not transferred to it). We are told that this was an oversight. The parties continued making and selling the equipment and clearly did so on the basis that the trade marks were available to be used by both the manufacturing and the distributing companies. Their operations continued until 1988 when the
Carson interests committed a number of breaches of cl 7 of the agreement which concerned trading after the agreement. The Woods contended that the breaches by the Carsons constituted a repudiation of the agreement and terminated it in
December 1988. On 15 June 1989, the Woods, by their solicitors, wrote to the
Carsons claiming sole ownership of the Woodson trade marks in Australia and
New Zealand and threatening infringement proceedings.

Upon receipt of this letter the Carsons commenced proceedings seeking, in broad terms, declarations that Woodson (Sales) Pty Ltd held all the trade marks in trust for Lifpark Pty Ltd. They sought alternatively a number of other orders including a decree of specific performance in respect of the
Australian trade marks. The proceedings were heard by McLelland J who found that the Carsons had repudiated their obligations under the 1986 agreement and that the Woods had accepted that repudiation and lawfully terminated the contract. He then dismissed the application brought by the Carsons.

In the appeal his Honour's conclusions concerning the termination of the agreement were not challenged but the Carsons' submitted that nonetheless they were entitled to the relief sought." 
Termination of the 1986 Agreement took place on 23 December 1988, when the
Wood interests (via Mr A A Wood) accepted the Carson interests' repudiation.
 # Patterns and Dies 
As to the co-ownership of the patterns and dies, the following is common ground (taken from Defendant's Supplementary Submissions of 5 June 1996).
 "1. The patterns and dies have never been in the possession of the Wood interests: see para 18, affidavit of A A Wood sworn 2 February 1990.
The order of the Court of Appeal dated 20 July 1994 declared that a beneficial interest as to one half in the patterns and dies held by Woodson
Associates Pty Limited at 23 December 1988 is held in trust for Woodson
Pty Limited: see PX1.
It may be inferred from the judgment of McLelland J dated 21 September (at page 6M-O) that Woodson Associates Pty Limited is a reference to the company initially incorporated as Lifpark Pty Limited which was jointly owned by the Wood and Carson families for the purposes of clause 2 of the May 1986
Agreement.
It may be inferred from the judgment of the Court of Appeal per Clarke JA ((1994) [34 NSWLR 9](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=34%20NSWLR%209 "View LawCiteRecord" ) at 20B-C) that Lifpark Pty Limited became the owner of the patterns and dies.
On the basis that Lifpark Pty Limited, now known as Woodson Associates
Pty Limited, is the legal owner of the patterns and dies, the joint beneficial owners of the patterns and dies are the Carson Family trust i.e. Woodson Pty
Limited and the A M Wood trust i.e. Woodson (Sales) Pty Limited: see clause 2 of the May 1986 Agreement and the orders of the Court of Appeal: PX1." 
It also may be inferred from the evidence of Mr Wood concerning continuation of the manufacture and distribution of Woodson products by Woodson (Australia) after December 1988 (see evidence of Mr Anthony Wood, Transcript, 35.20 and .15-20 of 3 June 1996) that the Carson interests have continued to use the patterns and dies whilst the Wood interests have incurred expense in starting afresh in relation to the manufacturing process; see paragraph 33 affidavit of
Mr Anthony Wood of 25 May 1995.
 # 1990 Proceedings before McLelland J 
I should at this point refer to proceedings before McLelland J culminating in his Judgment of 21 September 1990. They were commenced by the Carsons seeking various declarations including in particular that the relevant Australian trade-marks were held in trust as to an equal share for Woodson Pty Limited (representing the Carson interests). Woodson (Sales) Pty Limited, now a wholly-owned Wood family company, filed both a defence and cross-claim. The defence successfully alleged breaches of the 1986 Agreement by the Carson interests held by McLelland J to constitute repudiation of that agreement, which repudiation was accepted by the Wood interests. That was held by McLelland J to terminate the 1986 Agreement and with it, any entitlement by the Carson interests to the trade-marks under clause 2 thereof or otherwise.

Those breaches were based on substantially the same factual allegations as ground the claim for damages for breach of that Agreement now sought to be brought in the present proceedings. Those breaches are also included amongst the grounds relied upon by the Wood interests in the present proceedings to resist any order for sale altogether under s66G of the Act or alternatively as a basis for such order being on terms that such damages be offset against any money to be paid to the Carson interests from the sale of the trade-marks if permitted.

The cross-claim in the original proceedings alleged infringement of trade- marks, passing off and contravention of s52 of the Trade Practices Act (Cth) by Woodson (Australia) Pty Limited representing the Carson interests. It is important to emphasise that while damages were claimed in those proceedings, they were only claimed with (in the alternative an account of profits) for infringement of the trade-marks. Thus they were not claimed for the alleged breaches of the 1986 Agreement relied upon by way of defence.

On 22 June 1990 McLelland J ordered that this cross-claim be tried separately and after the Plaintiff's claim. However, his order would not have precluded the trial of such cross-claim before the appeal from his Judgment of 21
September 1990 was heard by the Court of Appeal. It will be appreciated that the Court of Appeal did not deal with the matter till its hearing commencing some three years later and gave its judgment some four years later, in accordance with the usual time span for such appeals.

McLelland J in his Judgment on 21 September 1990 had reached conclusions on the whole adverse to the Carson interests as to breach of clause 7 of the 1986
Agreement as I need now to elaborate. There were two categories of breach. The first concerned breaches of the prohibition against approaching customers of
Woodson (Sales) Pty Limited for the sale of appliances and equipment (unless by special agreement with Woodson (Sales) or in a case of supply of special equipment). The second concerned breach of the prohibition against appointing other distributors of the products.

Certain of the alleged dealings by the Carson interests were not held to be in breach. However, an arrangement between Woodson (Australia) Pty Limited with
Withers & Bell of Perth was held in breach insofar as Withers & Bell was appointed to represent Woodson (Australia) in Western Australia and to procure orders for Woodson products to be filled from stock either held on consignment from Woodson (Australia) or to be supplied by Woodson (Australia).
McLelland J held that Withers & Bell on behalf of Woodson (Australia) approached potential purchasers of Woodson products and made some sales and thus was in breach. He also held that an approach was made in breach by
Withers & Bell to a company called Caterlink (WA) Pty Ltd, an existing customer of Woodson (Sales) Pty Limited and a distributor.

Also held to be a breach, was an arrangement between Woodson (Australia) and a
Queensland company Wood Enterprises whereby the latter was appointed a distributor (contrary to the exclusivity arrangement in clause 7).

A further breach was held to have occurred when Woodson (Australia) approached
ACE Catering Equipment Pty Limited to purchase Woodson products direct from
Woodson (Australia).

These breaches were held to be "serious and substantial breaches which together evinced an intention on the part of Woodson (Australia) not to be further bound by its obligations under clause 7 of the 1986 Agreement". It was held that the repudiation was accepted, leading to termination of the contract on 23 December 1988, discharging both parties from further performance, save for accrued rights and obligations at that date.

However, these determinations were made in a context where no claim for damages were brought for these breaches of contract, and although no challenge was made by them in the Appeal, "that may have been ... influenced by a view taken by those advising the Carsons that a challenge to these findings would not be significant for the result", as indeed the Court of Appeal held; per
McLelland CJ in Eq. In his judgment of 21 October 1994 he denied the Wood interests the opportunity to amend their cross-claim to claim relief for damages for breach of contract in the original proceedings.

The Wood interests contended in the alternative that either these findings gave rise to a res judicata, but one irrelevant to any damages claim for breach of contract as no such claim was brought before McLelland J, or, alternatively, that those findings give rise to no res judicata or issue estoppel given the way they arose solely in a defence or given that his judgment was not followed by the Court of Appeal. Either alternative required the Wood interests again to establish such breaches in the present proceedings, in the event that, contrary to the Carsons' submissions, I permit now a claim for damages for breach of contract or at least treat such findings as relevant to exercise of my discretion under s66G of the Act.

The Wood interests did put evidence afresh for there being breaches of clause of the 1986 Agreement; evidence which substantially overlaps with the evidence before McLelland J as to breaches. That evidence is referred to in annexure A to the Wood interests' written submission of 4 June 1996, setting out the breaches claimed and the basis for them. To these submissions the
Carson interests respond in their written submissions of 9 June 1996 (in the second section at 6), and the Wood' interests respond in turn in their written submissions of 11 June 1996. I observe that at least in relation to Withers & Bell, there are no written submissions disputing the breach of clause 7 of the 1986 Agreement by reason of the appointment of Withers & Bell as
Western Australian distributor. However, I deliberately make no findings of fact on these alleged breaches. This is because I later conclude that even if such breaches were established, this could not affect whether to make any order under s66G of the Act, or its terms, and that it is not now open to claim any relief by way of damages for breach of contract, as I am satisfied that Anshun estoppel now precludes the Wood interests from doing so. I deal with these matters under "Application of Legal Principles to the Legal
Questions" below.
 # Orders by Court of Appeal made on 20 July 1994 the Declaration of a
Constructive Trust.
 
The Carsons were in fact successful in the Court of Appeal (Carson versus Wood (supra)) on appeal from McLelland J's decision of 20 September 1990 when on 27 June 1994 it determined to make a declaration (subsequently ordered on 20 July 1994) in the following terms: "THE COURT DECLARES that:-
Woodson (Sales) Pty Limited holds a one half interest in the Trademarks, registered in Australia and being A120147, A127512 and B221491 in trust for the Carson Family Trust.
A beneficial interest as to one half in the patterns and dies held by
Woodson Associates Pty Limited as at 23 December, 1988 is held in trust for
Woodson (Sales) Pty Limited." 
That decision was based on it being unconscionable and (by Kirby P and
Clarke JA) a subversion of the intention of the 1986 Agreement and share transfer, for the Woods to deny the interest of the appellants. The appropriate relief was to declare the Wood sales company, still registered as the holder of the trade-marks, constructive trustee of the trade-marks for both parties in equal shares; see above. In so concluding the Court of Appeal considered that rights had accrued under clause 2 in favour of the Carson interests so far as the trade-marks were concerned and on the basis that compliance with clause 7 provided no part of the consideration for the obligation of the Woods to be performed under clause 2. Thus the repudiatory conduct of the Carsons did not prevent them securing relief in respect of the trade-marks.

A reciprocal declaration for the benefit of the Wood interests in relation to patterns and dies was also made; see above.
 # The 1994 Proceedings before McLelland CJ in Eq.
 
On 21 October 1994 the application of Woodson (Sales) Pty Limited was heard by McLelland CJ in Eq. in the proceedings No. 3970/89 for leave to amend the cross-claim. This was to claim damages against Woodson (Australia) Pty Limited for breach of contract in respect of the 1986 Agreement. This was, with respect, correctly described by His Honour as "an entirely different cause of action" from the action for infringement of the trade-marks. Such leave was refused by McLelland CJ in Eq on 21 October 1994. The cross-claim was also dismissed on that date.

His Honour noted that in the Court of Appeal there was no challenge to the findings below concerning the repudiation and termination of the 1986
Agreement. The contention successfully put to the Court of Appeal was that, despite those findings, the Carsons were entitled to the relief sought, namely a declaration that a half interest in the trade-marks was held in trust for them, being by way of constructive trust. This was on the basis that to deny their interest would be unconscionable. Kirby P and Clarke JA also held that to deny this also would be a subvention of the 1986 Agreement and share transfer (whereby the Carson interests transferred their half of the shares in the trade-mark owning company, Woodson (Sales) Pty Limited to the Wood interests).

Woodson (Sales) Pty Limited had earlier commenced the present proceedings (No.
/94) on 30 June 1994 claiming damages against Woodson (Australia) Pty
Limited for breach of contract in respect of the 1986 Agreement. This too was noted by McLelland CJ in Eq. who was informed that this was to protect the
Woods' position under the [Limitation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/). His
Honour then concluded: "If a cross-claim for damages for breach of contract were now allowed to be brought, the trial of that cross-claim would, of necessity, be entirely separate from the trial of the original proceedings, the latter having concluded. No findings made in the original trial would be binding in a future trial of a cross-claim, except so far as the principles of issue estoppel might operate, and those principles would operate regardless of whether the future trial was a trial of a cross-claim in the present proceedings or a trial in the new proceedings.

Counsel for the Woods has proposed that orders might be made that the evidence taken in the original trial be treated as evidence in the future trial of the cross-claim, perhaps with a right to either party to adduce further evidence if desired. If such an order were possible without the consent of all parties, which I doubt, if might, in theory, be made whether or not the future trial were of a cross-claim in the present proceedings or in the new proceedings, but in either event such an order would be procedurally unjust to the Woods [for "Woods" read "Carsons" it can be assumed]. As the decision of the Court of Appeal has shown, the question of alleged breaches of contract by the Carsons have no ultimate significance to the result of the original proceedings. Although the findings, at first instance, on that subject were not the subject of challenge in the appeal, that may have been, for all anyone knows, influenced by a view taken by those advising the Carsons that a challenge to those findings would not be significant for the result, as indeed the Court of Appeal held. In the new claim for damages the question of those breaches would be of central importance, quite possibly requiring a much more precise and detailed treatment in an evidentiary sense than they may have been perceived to have warranted in the original proceedings. It would be quite unjust to require the Carsons to be bound by the way this matter had been dealt with in the first trial, in the changed circumstances and with the altered significance of the fresh claim for damages, even if there was a right to adduce further evidence.

Apart from all this, even if I, as the Judge who heard the first trial, were to deal with the new trial, four years having already elapsed since the earlier trial, it would in practical terms, be impossible now to adequately revive impressions of witnesses from that original trial.

It is said that in a trial of fresh proceedings the Woods may be faced with a defence based on the principles discussed in Port of Melbourne Authority v
Anshun [115 CLR 589.] I would have thought that any such defence would have been equally available in a future trial of the new proposed cross-claim, but if that is not right I see no reason why the Carsons should be deprived of the benefit of any such defence if it is legitimately available. The whole purpose of the facility of cross-claims provided for by [s78](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s78.html) of the Supreme Court Act 1970 is to save time and expense by permitting the
Court to deal simultaneously with sufficiently connected matters. Generally speaking, it would be a distortion of that procedure to allow a fresh cross- claim to be made after the principal proceedings have been concluded. Nothing put before the Court in the present application persuades me that the position would be any different in this case." 
I quote this, because His Honour's Reasons importantly bear on Anshun estoppel as potentially applicable to the present damages' proceedings in /94 and because such damages claim, if permitted to be brought, may, according to the Wood interests, affect whether an order for sale should be made at all, or at least affect its terms. This is in requiring any damages awarded to the Woods first to be set off the proceeds of such sale before the
Carsons received their share. Those contentions are opposed by the Wood interests.

Contentions of the Parties 
I have earlier described the essential features of the present proceedings.

In those proceedings, the Wood interests dispute the Carsons' entitlement to relief under s66G of the Act on discretionary grounds and contend that the trust for sale should not be ordered at all. Alternatively they contend that such relief should be on terms or deferred until all issues of damages and any accounting between the parties is determined on terms requiring offset from the proceeds going to the Carson interests of any amount thus determined to be owing to the Woods. The discretionary grounds relied on by the Wood interests are that relief by way of sale of the whole interest in the trade-marks under s66G is inconsistent with the terms of the agreements between the Wood and
Carson families made on 30 August 1983 and 12 May 1986; involves a breach of fiduciary duty or unconscionability; is precluded by reason of conventional estoppel; or is precluded by the Carsons' breach of the 1986 Agreement (the latter being the same claim as now sought to be raised by the Woods in the damages proceedings for breach of contract in No. 2907/94 referred to above).
I deal with these issues under "Application of Legal Principles to the Legal
Questions" below.
 # Res Judicata and Damages for Breach of Contract.
 
The primary defence against the claim for damages made by the Carson interests for breach of clause 7 of the 1986 Agreement, is based on res judicata, issue estoppel and its sub-species Anshun estoppel. The extended doctrine of res judicata, based on abuse of process, was not independantly argued. First, the Carson interests claim that there is res judicata in relation to the cause of action in proceedings No. 2907/94 for damages for breach of contract. In response the Wood interests claim primarily that there can be no res judicata as there was no such cause of action merging in any judgment in the earlier proceedings. This is first because that judgment was overruled and second, because there was no damages claim for breach of contract ever brought as such until after the Court of Appeal judgment on 27 June 1994. They contend in the alternative that to the extent the Court of Appeal left the breach of contract findings undisturbed, those were in favour of the Woods. # Issue Estoppel and Damages for Breach of Contract.
 
On similar reasoning, the Wood interests contend that there is no issue estoppel arising from either the decision of McLelland J or the Court of Appeal. The former decision and its orders were discharged by the successful appeal to the Court of Appeal, whilst the successful appeal did not depend on any findings of breach of the 1986 Agreement. However, they contend that if there were any issue estoppel, such issue estoppel would in fact operate against the Carson interests insofar as the determination of McLelland J as to breach of the 1986 Agreement was not, as such, disturbed by the Court of Appeal. Essentially, the Wood interests submit that the resolution of the issue of breach of the 1986 Agreement was not legally necessary or indeed relevant to establish the cause of action by the Carson interests, as determined by the Court of Appeal. # Anshun Estoppel and Damages for Breach of Contract.
 
Third, on Anshun estoppel, the Carsons contend that the failure to bring a cross-claim in the 1989 proceedings gives rise to an Anshun defence. This is on the basis that it was unreasonable of the Wood interests to fail in the original proceedings to claim the relief of damages for breach of contract, when already relying on breach of contract by way of defence based on essentially the same factual grounds.

The Wood interests contend that the authorities recognise that Anshun estoppel will rarely apply to the failure to bring a cross-claim, and that the better view is that it will only do so if there is a possibility of inconsistent judgments. The Wood interests claim that there is no such possibility here.
Woodson (Sales) Pty Limited did attempt to bring a cross-claim for damages for breach of contract in the 1989 proceedings (by its unsuccessful application though only on 17 October 1994 for leave to amend the cross-claim). Such leave to amend was however refused. They contend that it cannot thus be said that it failed to raise the cross-claim in the earlier proceedings, having attempted so to do.

To this the Carsons respond by pointing out, first, that such application was made too late, namely after the Court of Appeal Judgment in 1994. Further, it was distinguishable from the cases where no cross-claim at all was brought.
Here there had been from the outset both a defence and a cross-claim. Yet the Wood interests elected to omit from the cross-claim any claim for damages save for the quite distinct action for infringement of trade-marks.

The reason why the Wood interests claim that there is no possibility of inconsistent or conflicting judgments is again, first, that the orders of
McLelland J were discharged by the subsequent decision and orders of the Court of Appeal. Second, the Court of Appeal did not have to decide the issue of breach of contract. Thus a judgment of McLelland J as trial judge recording either success or failure of a damages claim for breach of clause 7 of the contract, had it been made, could never have conflicted with, or have been inconsistent with, the judgment of the Court of Appeal declaring that the trade-marks were held on trust for the two family trusts.

The Wood interests cite the definition formulated by Dixon J in Blair v
Curran <case>; [(1939) 62 CLR 464] at 531-2) differentiating res judicata and issue estoppel as demonstrating that the application of those doctrines precludes a conflicting judgment. This is because the earlier determination of the cause of action or issue forecloses its later reagitation, so there never can be a second inconsistent judgment.
 "The distinction between res judicata and issue-estoppel is that in the first the very right or cause of action claimed or put in suit has in the former proceedings passed into judgment, so that it is merged and has no longer an independent existence, while in the second, for the purpose of some other claim or cause of action, a state of fact or law is alleged or denied the existence of which is a matter necessarily decided by the prior judgment, decree or order.

Nothing but what is legally indispensable to the conclusion is thus finally closed or precluded. In matters of fact the issue-estoppel is confined to those ultimate facts which form the ingredients in the cause of action, that is, the title to the right established." 
I return to the question of conflicting judgments in this context, when dealing with Question 2, below.

The Wood interests then claim that it in any event cannot be said that it was unreasonable in the Anshun sense for Woodson (Sales) Pty Limited not to have raised the claim for damages for breach of contract in the 1989 proceedings.
This is because the primary issue in the 1989 was the ownership of the trade- marks. Hence the cross-claim for alleged infringement of trade-marks, passing off and [s52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the [Trade Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth) involved breach of contract by Woodson (Australia) Pty Limited only being raised as a discretionary defence to the Carsons' claim. At that time not all the evidence of the extent of such breaches was available to Woodson (Sales)
Pty Limited at the time of the hearing in August 1990; see cross-examination of Mr A Wood (Transcript, 45-46). Further, there was the earlier mentioned attempt to amend the Cross-claim in October 1994 for which leave was refused.

I return to those contentions when dealing with Question 2, below.
 # LEGAL QUESTIONS 
The legal questions agreed between the parties as requiring answer, refined following argument, are set out below.

Question 1 
Whether the Plaintiff (Woodson Pty Limited representing the Carson interests) in proceedings No. 4611/94 is entitled to relief by way of trust for sale over the whole of the Australian trade-marks pursuant to s66G of the [Conveyancing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) 1919 ("the Act") as of right, or whether the Court has a discretion in the matter and the scope for that discretion, 
Having regard to the scope of the Court's discretion in the matter, whether such relief should not be granted or, if granted, should be granted only on appropriate terms because of: a fiduciary obligation in relation to the trade-marks, or by reason of principles of unconscionability affecting such trust for sale or the proceeds thereof, contravention of, or any estoppel arising from, the terms of the 1983 and 1986 agreements between the parties; alleged breaches of the 1986 Agreement by the Defendant in proceedings
No. 2907/94.
 
Question 2 
Whether the Plaintiff (Woodson (Sales) Pty Limited representing the Wood interests) in proceedings No. 2907/94 is entitled to damages as a result of alleged breaches of the 1986 agreement or whether: the Plaintiff is estopped from maintaining these proceedings by reason of res judicata, issue estoppel or that extended species of estoppel known as
Anshun estoppel, the Plaintiff is precluded in whole or part in any claim for damages as a consequence of the [Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/) 1969.
 
Question 3 
Whether the Defendants in proceedings No. 4611/94 (Woodson Sales
Pty Limited and Woodson (Sales) Pty Limited) are required to account for profits to the Plaintiff (Woodson Pty Limited) in relation to the continued usage by them of the trade-marks since 23 December 1988 and if so whether a defence exists by way of an estoppel or by reason of laches, acquiescence and delay, and 
Whether the Plaintiff (Woodson Pty Limited) in proceedings No. 4611/94 is required to account to the Defendants (Woodson Sales (International) Pty
Limited and Woodson (Sales) Pty Limited) for any use by it of such trade-mark since December 1988 and, if so, whether a defence exists by way of an estoppel or by reason of laches, acquiescence and delay.
 # APPLICATION OF LEGAL PRINCIPLES TO THE LEGAL QUESTIONS 
Question 1(a) 
Whether the Plaintiff (Woodson Pty Limited representing the Carson interests) in proceedings No. 4611/94 is entitled to relief by way of trust for sale over the whole of the Australian trade-marks pursuant to s66G of the [Conveyancing Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) 1919 ("the Act") as of right, or whether the Court has a discretion in the matter and the scope for that discretion, 
Section 66G of the Act was added in 1930 as part of a new Division 6 to Part
IV of that Act. It provides that where any property is held in co-ownership the Court may, on the application of one or more of the co-owners, appoint trustees of the property and vest the same in such trustees to be held by them on statutory trust for sale.

That sale may be of the whole, or by way of partition of the co-owners' previously undivided part. Past debate is now settled over whether the word "may" in s66G conferring the Court's jurisdiction is used facultatively or in a mandatory sense leaving the Court no discretion to deny a trust for sale when a party with a right to make an application does so. Needham J decided the former in Ngatoa versus Ford [(1990) 19 NSWLR 72.] He followed Stephens versus Debney [1960] SR 468 at 469-470, rather than Re
Fettell [(1952) 52 SR 221.]
Ngatoa versus Ford (supra) held that the ambit of the Court's discretion was at least wide enough to refuse an order for sale where the order would be inconsistent with some proprietary right, or some contractual or fiduciary obligation; per Myers J in Re McNamara and the [Conveyancing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) (1961) 78 . Myers J in Re McNamara (supra) reiterated his view that the
Court had however no general discretion which would enable it to refuse an application on such broad grounds as hardship or unfairness.

The Court of Appeal in Williams versus Legg [(1993) 29 NSWLR 687] followed
Ngatoa versus Ford (supra). In so doing, the Court reviewed the position in the
United Kingdom and New South Wales both before and after 1925. Division 6 was inserted "to bring our conveyancing law in line with the latest English law", see Ngatoa versus Ford at 75. It was noted that when in 1930, [s66G](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s66g.html) was added as part of the new Division 6 to [Part
IV](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/index.html#p4) of the Act, it, unlike the repealed Partition Act, made sale of the whole rather than partition the principal right.

It was thus hardly to be expected that there would be no discretion in the
Court to deny a trust for sale, particularly where a co-owner was seeking to override the rights of all other co-owners by the sale of the entirety of their co-owned property. That consideration may explain Re Fettell which involved by contrast the mere partition and sale of one co-owner's individual interest. McLelland J said in Re Fettell (supra) at 227: "... the Court is authorised to do a judicial act in a certain case, the case has arisen, its exercise has been duly applied for by a party interested who has the right to make the application. It is imperative, therefore, that I should exercise the authority and make the order." 
The later authority I have cited makes clear that the court has a discretion to give or withhold approval even in the case of a partition and sale of one co-owner's interest, though there may in practice be less likelihood of any impediment to its favourable exercise than in the case of a sale of the totality where a co-owner objects.

Indeed it was not in dispute between the parties that the Court has a discretion in the present circumstances. What was in dispute was whether there is in effect a presumption in favour of sale in these circumstances, such that the party opposing sale has the onus of dissuading the Court from ordering a trust for sale. I am satisfied that I should treat the onus as so falling. The fact that the sale opposed is of both co-owners' interest is a factor which may in practice lighten the onus though not remove it. This is compared to the onus in opposing partition and sale of only the applicant's individual interest.

Circumstances which would serve to defeat an application under the section clearly enough include those set forth by Myers J in Re McNamara and the [Conveyancing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) (supra).
Thus they at least embrace some proprietary right, or some contractual or fiduciary obligation with which in either case the order for sale would be inconsistent. It is clear that there is no general discretion which would enable the Court to refuse an application merely on broad grounds of hardship or unfairness as such.

However, to those earlier grounds for denial, I would add, where inconsistent with sale, established equitable grounds such as conventional estoppel against the party seeking to invoke the section or unconscionable conduct.
Conventional estoppel would so operate where there is shared between the applicant and others directly affected by the sale, a common assumption which is inconsistent with sale. Unconscionability operates as the basis for equitable relief, where it can be demonstrated that to bring about a trust for sale would involve taking unconscientious advantage of the party in the dominant position of the vulnerability of the other, or more broadly where it would involve one party asserting or retaining the benefit of relevant property where it would be unconscionable to do so. It does not operate merely on broad grounds of hardship or unfairness as such; see discussion later.

These equitable grounds may, in appropriate circumstances, suffice either to justify exercising the discretion to withhold approval, or affect the terms of any such approval if given. In the latter case, any terms imposed upon such a sale should represent no more than the minimum equity needed to remove the benefit obtained unconscionably, or in the case of conventional estoppel, needed to avoid the detriment occasioned by reliance on the relevant shared assumption. I elaborate in answering question 1(b) below on the basis for those propositions and the implications which flow from them.

Question 1(b) 
Having regard to the scope of the Court's discretion in the matter, whether such relief should not be granted or, if granted, should be granted only on appropriate terms because of: a fiduciary obligation in relation to the trade-marks, or by reason of principles of unconscionability affecting such trust for sale or the proceeds thereof, contravention of, or any estoppel arising from, the terms of the 1983 and 1986 agreements between the parties; alleged breaches of the 1986 Agreement by the Defendant in proceedings
No. 2907/94.

The Plaintiffs case against an order under s66G.
 
The Plaintiff did not advance any proprietary right as precluding an order in the present circumstances. I therefore turn first to the possibility of a fiduciary obligation potentially doing so.

The Plaintiff puts its case for asserting that fiduciary obligations both exist and survive termination of the 1986 Agreement as follows (Plaintiff's written submission dated 4 June 1996 at 5-6): "Fiduciary Obligations
During the period 1983 to 1986 Woodson products were manufactured and sold on the basis that the Woodson and Carson interests were the joint owners of the Australian trademarks, by reason of their equal shareholdings in
Woodson (Sales) (the registered proprietor of the trademarks), and their equal shareholdings in Woodson Pty Ltd the production company.
The clear intention of the May 1986 Agreement was that the Australian trademarks should remain jointly owned and used by the Carson and Wood interests: see clauses 2 and 7, and Annexure "A". Between May 1986 and
December 1988 the Carson interests manufactured the "Woodson" equipment; they sold this equipment to Woodson (Sales); and the Carson interests and the Wood interests acted on the basis that they were both entitled to use the trademark "Woodson", notwithstanding that no formal Trademark User Agreement was ever executed in favour of Woodson or Woodson (Australia).
After December 1988, and notwithstanding the subsequent litigation between the parties, the Carson interests and the Wood interests proceeded independently of, and in competition with each other, to manufacture and sell
Woodson products.
By reason of the terms of the August 1983 and May 1986 Agreements, the change in May 1986 from 50% owned "joint venture" companies to separate ownership of the production and sales companies, and the course of dealings between the parties up to May 1986, the commercial arrangements between the
Carson and Wood interests were such that there was mutual trust and confidence between them in relation to the use and holding of the benefit of the
Australian trademarks and the associated patterns and dies. This gave rise to fiduciary relationships and obligations in relation to the use and holding of the benefit of trademarks and also the associated patterns and dies.
The fiduciary obligation imposed jointly on both Woodson/Woodson , and Woodson (Sales) was to maintain the Woodson trademarks and the pattern and dies for the mutual benefit and use of both the Carson interests and the Wood interests. The relationship of co-ownership between the parties in relation to the trademarks, patterns and dies, and the post May separate ownership of the production and sales companies, was one which gave each a special opportunity to exercise their powers as co-owner to the detriment of the other (for example, such as an application under [s66G)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s66g.html) thereby making the other vulnerable to abuse by the former of its position.

Hospital Products Ltd versus United States Surgical Corporation <case>; [(1984) 156 CLR 41] at 97.
Contractual and fiduciary relationships may co-exist between the same parties.

Hospital Products Ltd versus United States Surgical Corporation (supra)
A person may be fiduciary in some activities by [sic] not in others.

Hospital Products Ltd versus United States Surgical Corporation at 98
The present case involves a joint venture in relation to the use and exploitation of the Australian trademarks, patterns and dies, which is close to the classic illustrations of a fiduciary relationship in which the fiduciary is under a duty not to act solely in his own interests, but jointly in the interests of another and himself e.g. a partner or joint venturers.

Hospital Products Ltd versus United States Surgical Corporation at 99
United Dominions Corporation Ltd versus Brian Pty Ltd <case>; <case>; [(1984) 154 CLR 178] at 596 and 605.
Further, the possibility of termination by Woodson Pty Ltd of the proposed arrangement pursuant to the Trademark User Agreement comprising
Annexure "A" to the May 1986 Agreement, does not terminate or limit the scope of the fiduciary obligations owed by Woodson (Australia) to Woodson (Sales).
Carwood was a 50% "joint venture" company. It could not unilaterally terminate the Trademark User Agreement without the consent of both the Carsons and the
Woods. On the other hand, even if Woodson Pty Limited lawfully terminated the
Trademark User Agreement, that would not of itself put an end to the fiduciary obligations owed by Woodson (Australia) to Woodson (Sales) in relation to the use and enjoyment of the trademarks. The trademarks were intended to be held by either Carwood Pty Limited the 50% joint venture company, or remain with
Woodson (Sales), but subject to a declaration of trust for the Carsons and the
Woods in equal shares. Hence a decision by Woodson Pty Limited to cease use of the trademarks, would not necessarily lead to an end of the 1986 Agreement, and certainly would not entitle Woodson/Woodson (Australia) to breach or lawfully terminate clause 7 of the 1986 Agreement.

Crawford Fitting Co versus Sydney Valve & Fittings Pty Ltd [(1988) 14 NSWLR 438.]
By seeking an order under [s66G](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s66g.html),
Woodson (Australia) is breaching its fiduciary duty to refrain from pursuing, obtaining or retaining for itself a collateral advantage in relation to the holding of the trademarks without the knowledge and the informed consent of
Woodson (Sales). It seeks to make a profit (by virtue of its 50% interest in the proceeds of sales) upon any sale by trustees under [s66G](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s66g.html) which would deny to Woodson (Sales) continued use of the trademarks.

United Dominion Corporation Ltd versus Brian Pty Ltd <case>; [(1985) 157 CLR 1] at 13 
Hospital Products Ltd versus USSC (supra) at 103,107.

Principles and Developments affecting Fiduciary Duty 
It is important in this case, as in so many others, correctly to identify fiduciary duties in the wider spectrum of equitable obligation and remedy.

Sir Anthony Mason, writing extra-judicially, in a paper given on 8 July 1993, "Contract and its Relationship with Equitable Standards and the Doctrine of
Good Faith", (the Cambridge Lectures 1993), attempted "an acceptable definition of the indefinable". This was to identify when a fiduciary's "fundamental duty" arises.
 "By way of contrast, the fiduciary's fundamental duty: not to use his or her own position to his or her own advantage or that of another party; and not to place himself or herself in a position in which his or her interest would conflict with his or her fiduciary duty arises when the relationship between the parties is such that, whether by reason of undertaking, vulnerability, dependence, the reposition of trust and confidence or otherwise, one person (the beneficiary) has a legitimate expectation that the other (the fiduciary) will act in the beneficiary's interest69. That is the definition favoured by Professor Finn 70. It comes closer than any other to an acceptable definition of the undefinable." The relationship extends to partnership cases and thus where a person is bound to act in the joint interests of himself or herself and another or others: see the discussion in Hospital Products (1984) 156 CLR, per Mason J at pp. 96-99.
 Finn, "The Fiduciary Principle", in Youdan (ed.), Equity, Fiduciaries and
Trusts, (1989), 1, at pp. 46-47.

That definition explicitly leaves a judicial discretion both to widen and narrow what is a class unclosed. That class starts with the traditional fiduciary relationships like trustee and beneficiary. It proceeds by analogy to embrace those relationships and dealings where the alleged fiduciary has "undertaken" to act in the interests of another or where such an undertaking arises by legitimate expectation.

This definition naturally requires some elaboration. Thus the description "fiduciary relationship" or perhaps more appositely "fiduciary duty" may indeed apply only to a limited aspect of the parties' total relationship, such that "in some respects the fiduciary is entitled to act by reference to his own interests"; as was recognised in Hospital Products <case>; [(1984) 156 CLR 41] at 99 per Mason J. (I say "more appositely" for this reason.
A relationship which is fiduciary in only one limited aspect involves the difficult notion that a relationship otherwise predominantly non-fiduciary can yet be fiduciary in a narrow aspect. It may be preferable to envisage fiduciary duties arising in that limited aspect, rather than envisage an overall relationship of so schizoid a character) Indeed, where there is a contract governing the relationship, the fiduciary duty "must ... accommodate itself to the relationship between the parties created by their contractual arrangements"; per Mason J op cit at 99. That contractual framework may pre- ordain a non-fiduciary character overall, yet still leave room for fiduciary duty in a limited area.

The 1993 definition uses as its discrimen the elastic concept of "legitimate expectation". It identifies as its essential characteristic and consequence, the obligation to act in the beneficiary's interest rather than the fiduciary's. That leaves room for the class to be widened to embrace analogous situations appropriately to be included, as do the words "or otherwise" at the end of the list of progenitors of the duty.

Nine years earlier, in Hospital Products at 69, Gibbs CJ in the majority, doubted "if it is fruitful to attempt to make a general statement of the circumstances in which a fiduciary relationship will be found to exist".
However, he allowed the Court of Appeal's test as "not inappropriate" (at 68), accepting that the categories of fiduciary relationship are not closed (at ). Mason J, at 96-7, in dissent, adopted a similar definition. It is a rather narrower test than earlier quoted from his paper of 1993. The
Hospital Products test as formulated by Mason J looks to whether the alleged fiduciary, acting in a representative capacity or character, has undertaken to act in the interests of another.
 "the fiduciary undertakes to act for and on behalf or in the interests of another person in the exercise of power or discretion which will affect the interests of that other person in the legal or practical sense. The relationship between the parties is therefore one which gives the fiduciary a special opportunity to exercise the power or discretion to the detriment of that other person who is accordingly vulnerable to abuse by the fiduciary of his position. The expression `for', `on behalf of' and `in the interests of' signify that the fiduciary acts in a `representative' character in the exercise of his responsibility ... ".

The 1993 paper by Sir Anthony Mason recognised the difficulty that in many instances the fiduciary's duty has arisen without any undertaking at all. It has arisen because the relationship between the parties and their circumstances, including the particular dealing, leads to a legitimate expectation that the fiduciary will act in the beneficiary's interest. And indeed as the definition recognises, there may be no representative character in the alleged fiduciaries' action, though that be the norm.

Toohey J in Mabo & Ors versus State of Queensland [(1992) 107 ALR 1] at 156 sought to widen the notion of "undertaking". He held that an undertaking so to act and the power to do so may arise as an "incident of ... office or position" or "by way of agreement between the parties, for example in the form of a contract, or from an outside source, for example a statute or trust instrument".

It is important to emphasise that Mason J, though essentially applying a similar test for fiduciary relationship as the majority, was in a minority in
Hospital Products in attributing a fiduciary obligation to the distributor.
It was a fiduciary obligation in an area limited to product goodwill in the distributor's exclusive territory. And only Toohey J in Mabo held the Crown was in a fiduciary relationship with respect to the lands of the Meriam people. The majority in Hospital Products declined to follow the trial judge and Court of Appeal, finding no fiduciary relationship at all, even limited.
The majority emphasised that this was an arrangement of a purely commercial kind where the parties dealt with each other at arm's length and on an equal footing. These were considerations which have "consistently been regarded by this Court as important, if not decisive, in indicating that no fiduciary duty arose ...", per Gibbs CJ at 70.

Subsequent cases make clear that the normal arm's length relationship characteristic of a commercial setting, while generally precluding a fiduciary relationship, does not inevitably do so. Thus, for example, a fiduciary relationship will arise in a commercial partnership, this being a traditional fiduciary relationship. And it may arise in analogous situations to partnership, such as a joint venture, even one which is still in negotiation or in process of termination; see, for example, United Dominions Corporation
Ltd versus Brian Pty Ltd <case>; [(1985) 157 CLR 1], Chan versus Zacharia <case>; [(1984) 154 CLR 178] at 198, and Ravinder Rohini Pty Ltd versus Krizaic <case>; [(1991) 105 ALR 593] at 596 and 605. More recently a fiduciary relationship was found in a non-traditional commercial situation, though in exceptional circumstances; this was a case of a director purchasing shares from a co- shareholder in a closely held company. There were in fact only those two shareholders. It was a case where the director/purchaser withheld critically relevant information from his vendor/co-shareholder which, if known, would have justified a higher price; Glavanics versus Brunninghausen [(1996) 19 ACSR ).](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281996%29%2019%20ACSR%20204 "View LawCiteRecord" ) A fiduciary duty is ordinarily owed by a director to the company, not to any particular shareholder as such. Yet here the exceptional circumstances dictated otherwise, notwithstanding the commercial setting and absence of a traditional fiduciary relationship.

Hence the reason why it will usually be very difficult to find a fiduciary element in commercial transactions is not because the two are inevitably incompatible. It is because, being at arm's length, each party will typically act, and be accepted as acting, for itself and not for the other party ("Essays in Equity", Law Book Company 1985 edited by P D Finn (now Finn J), Ch "Fiduciary in a Commercial Context" by J R F Lehane (now Lehane J), at ).

Though that may be typical, there may still be the expectation in commercial situations that a party in a superior position will not take advantage of another's known vulnerability to act to that party's detriment, in those circumstances in which equity would deem this unconscionable. That is not to invoke a fiduciary duty. Rather it is to invoke the equitable doctrine of unconscionability, where the consequent obligation, if applicable, is of a lesser standard, namely not to act to the detriment of the vulnerable party.
In contrast, fiduciary must act so as to prefer the interest of the other or, in the case of a partnership, must act in the joint interest.

There is a tendency to resort too readily to a finding of fiduciary duty, tempted by its amplitude of remedy. This is the reach me down a fiduciary syndrome, as Lord Browne-Wilkinson called it (in a paper Equity in a Fast
Changing World delivered at the New Zealand Law Conference on 10 April 1996).
Sir Anthony Mason in an article The Place of Equity and Equitable Remedies in the Contemporary Common Law World [1994 110 LQR 238] at 248 points to the origins of this tendency and to a more principled response: "Some of the more extreme examples of fiduciary relationships affirmed by the courts are unquestionably explained by the judicial perception that the circumstances call for the imposition of a constructive trust. More recently, we have discovered that there are other grounds, such as breach of duty of confidence and unconscionable conduct, which will attract the remedial constructive trust. That discovery has taken pressure off the fiduciary relationship as a passport to proprietary relief and has focused attention on other equitable doctrines." 
Greater resort to equitable estoppel or unconscionable conduct, recognising the flexibility of remedy they confer, should help remove this temptation though that resort must remain principled; see the illuminating article by P D
Finn, "The Fiduciary Principle" in Youdan (ed.) "Equity, Fiduciaries and
Trusts", (1989), 1 at 54-56, as well as Birks' "Restitutionary Damages for
Breaches of Contract: Snepp and the Fusion of law and Equity", [(1987)
Lloyd's Maritime and Commercial Law Quarterly 421] at 438-439.
 # The Remedial Constructive Trust and Unconscionability 
That English jurisprudence may develop in a similar direction to the Australian, permitting resort to the flexibility of a remedial constructive trust in a wider range of cases, based upon unconscionability, was recently foreshadowed by Lord Browne-Wilkinson in his New Zealand paper. He cites Muschinski versus Dodds, and Baumgartner versus Baumgartner <case>; [(1987) 164 CLR 137] with no evident disapproval. He notes that the remedial constructive trust, as a remedy imposed by the court, need only take effect from the date of its imposition. The court can thus avoid injury to the interests of intervening innocent third parties, such as creditors. He compares this to prejudice from an institutional constructive trust which takes effect from the time of the events which gave rise to it, though imposed by the court. Nor does a remedial constructive trust, as compared to a conventional trust, depend on any finding of common intention; (Baumgartner (supra)) and it may be ordered as an adjunct to unjust enrichment (see below).

Shortly after delivery of his paper, in Westdeutsche Landesbank Girozentrale v Islington London Borough Council <case>; [[1996] 2
WLR 802](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1996%5d%202%20WLR%20802 "View LawCiteRecord" ), the House of Lords rejected the Plaintiff bank's claim to a proprietary interest based on resulting trust in moneys made available under a void interest-swap transaction. Lord Browne-Wilkinson's judgment took up these themes. In doing so, he dealt with the analogous situation of money paid to a recipient by mistake where the recipient was ignorant of the mistake until 2 days after its initial receipt. He chose not to follow the reasoning of
Goulding J in that case (Chase Manhattan Bank N.A. versus Israel-British Bank
Ltd [[1981] Ch 105], though agreeing with the result. Goulding J concluded, in order to permit tracing, that the mere receipt of such money paid by mistake, constitutes the recipient a trustee, notwithstanding its ignorance of the mistake at the time of receipt. Lord Browne-Wilkinson preferred to reach the same result by applying a constructive trust only as from the time the recipient bank learned of the mistake, thus protecting intervening interests.
He thus saw no necessity to contrive a fiduciary relationship to permit tracing. This is a position which Australian law is able to reach unbound by
In re Diplock; Diplock versus Wintle [[1948] Ch 465], so that
Australian Courts, in permitting tracing, do not need to strain to find a fiduciary relationship in the circumstances; see, for example, Opus
Productions Pty Ltd versus Popwing Pty Ltd t/a Kevin Jacobsen Productions (Santow
J, 28 February 1995, unreported)).

At 837 Lord Browne-Wilkinson compared the treatment of constructive trusts under New York law: "... the New York law of constructive trusts has for a long time been influenced by the concept of a remedial constructive trust, whereas hitherto English law has for the most part only recognised an institutional constructive trust: see Metall und Rohstoff A.G. v. Donaldson Lufkin &
Jenrette Inc. [[1990] 1 Q.B. 391], 478-480. In the present context, that distinction is of fundamental importance. Under an institutional constructive trust, the trust arises by operation of law as from the date of the circumstances which give rise to it: the function of the court is merely to declare that such trust has arisen in the past. The consequences that flow from such trust having arisen (including the possibly unfair consequences to third parties who in the interim have received the trust property) are also determined by rules of law, not under a discretion. A remedial constructive trust, as I understand it, is different. It is a judicial remedy giving rise to an enforceable equitable obligation: the extent to which it operates retrospectively to the prejudice of third parties lies in the discretion of the court. Thus for the law of New York to hold that there is a remedial constructive trust where a payment has been made under a void contract gives rise to different consequences from holding that an institutional constructive trust arises in English law." 
And at 839, in dealing with the unsuitability of finding a resulting trust in the circumstances, he reiterated cautious support for a judicious use of the remedial constructive trust: "Although the resulting trust is an unsuitable basis for developing proprietary restitutionary remedies, the remedial constructive trust, if introduced into English law, may provide a more satisfactory road forward. The court by way of remedy might impose a constructive trust on a defendant who knowingly retains property of which the plaintiff has been unjustly deprived.
Since the remedy can be tailored to the circumstances of the particular case, innocent third parties would not be prejudiced and restitutionary defences, such as change of position, are capable of being given effect. However, whether English law should follow the United States and Canada by adopting the remedial constructive trust will have to be decided in some future case when the point is directly in issue." 
Earlier, the source of that caution is apparent. Resort to equitable principles must not produce such unpredictable results as undermine commercial certainty and speed. At 828 he says: "My Lords, wise judges have often warned against the wholesale importation into commercial law of equitable principles inconsistent with the certainty and speed which are essential requirements for the orderly conduct of business affairs: see Barnes versus Addy [(1874) L.R. 9 Ch.App. 244], and 255; Scandinavian Trading Tanker co. A.B. versus Flota Petrolera
Ecuatoriana [[1983] 2 A.C. 694], 703--704." 
The principled assertion of unconscionable conduct, assisted by the remedial constructive test and other relief, may thus in the common law world afford an alternative and flexible equitable basis of intervention, one which avoids unjustified resort to fiduciary duty. In Australia, as well in the United
States and Canada, it has already done so. However, Deane J in Muschinski v
Dodds at 621 warns against invoking unconscionability in an unprincipled manner, merely by reference to what is fair and just, relevant as those notions are: "Notions of what is fair and just are relevant but only in the confined context of determining whether conduct should, by reference to legitimate processes of legal reasoning, be characterized as unconscionable for the purposes of a specific principle of equity whose rationale and operation is to prevent wrongful and undue advantage being taken by one party of a benefit derived at the expense of the other party in the special circumstances of the unforseen and premature collapse of a joint relationship or endeavour." 
Earlier at 615-6 he emphasises: "Thus it is that there is no place in the law of this country for the notion of `a constructive trust of a new model' which, `by whatever name it is described, ... is ... imposed by law whenever justice and good conscience' (in the sense of `fairness' or what `was fair') `require it' ... Under the law of this country as, ... proprietary rights fall to be governed by principles of law and not by some mix of judicial discretion ..., subjective views about which party `ought to win' and `the formless void of individual moral opinion." 
Apart from the flexibility of relief afforded by a remedial constructive trust in appropriate circumstances, the concept of unconscionability allows for the relief to be moulded so that it affords no more than the minimum equity necessary in the circumstances. Thus in Vadasz versus Pioneer Concrete
Pty Ltd (1995) 130 ALR 570, the court in giving relief against the enforcement of a guarantee concerning past and future debts of a debtor was able to do so on condition that payment of the future debt must still be made.
Unconscionability principles were used rather to set aside the contract on condition that the complainant performed that part of the bargain which it could fairly have expected to fulfil.

In Legione versus Hateley <case>; <case>; [(1988) 165 CLR 489)], unconscionable conduct was also employed as a ground in relieving a purchaser from forfeiture of his equitable interest. This was under a contract of sale pursuant to a notice making time of the essence of the contract leading to rescission of the contract.

Equitable damages may also be allowed by way of relief in unconscionable dealing. This has happened in Canada; see Dusik versus Newton <case>; [(1982) 149 CLR 672] at 676 where it is said: "An incidental object of this Act [Lord Cairns Act] was to enable the Court to award damages in lieu of an injunction or specific performance, even in the case of a purely equitable claim".

This dicta is criticised by the learned authors of "Equity Doctrines and
Remedies" Butterworths 1992, Meagher Gummow & Lehane at 650; in particular that this could not have been what the framers of Lord Cairns Act meant. However, one may question whether a report prepared for the UK
Parliamentary draftsman in the 1850's, should necessarily influence the interpretation of its collateral descendant in New South Wales; see generally the discussion in Michael Evans' "Outline of Equity and Trusts" 1993 at -6 in support of that more flexible approach.
 # Unjust Enrichment 
Alongside unconscionability, unjust enrichment has started to emerge as providing a parallel remedial role at law. I should note that it was not however invoked in the present case. Thus Toohey J in Baumgartner (152-154) considered that there was no difference in principle in treating the unmarried male co-habitee of a house as in equity unconscionably retaining property or in law as a person thus unjustly enriched. "The notion of unjust enrichment is as much at ease with the authorities and is as capable of ready and certain obligation as is the notion of unconscionable conduct"; Baumgartner at 153. Indeed Deane J in Hospital Products at 125, but for it not having been argued, would have imposed an obligation to account as constructive trustee, without there being a fiduciary obligation, "in circumstances where a person could not in conscience retain a benefit, or the proceeds of a benefit, which he has appropriated to himself in breach of his contractual or other legal or equitable obligations to another". # Common Law Remedies and Equitable Relief in a Commercial Context 
However, Westdeutsche Landesbank Girozentrale concluded (though by bare majority) that common law remedies were not to be automatically amplified by elements of equitable relief in the particular circumstances of that case. This was in declining to supplement the common law's award of simple interest on recovered money in restitution with the compound interest equity awards against a fiduciary by way of recouping an improper profit (at 826).

Remedies of equity, flexibly applied in a modern commercial context, must be adapted to commercial realities. Thus, for example, relief which is appropriate to dealing with breaches of traditional family settlements may require adjustment in a commercial context, if it is not to be unduly heavy handed. That does not mean there are automatically lesser standards in a commercial setting, necessarily rendering equitable relief inappropriate.
Rather it recognises there may be wholly different circumstances and expectations. Such an adaptation of equitable relief removes much of the objection to equity's intrusion into commercial dealings, so long too as that intrusion remains principled rather than unpredictable. Thus the traditional equitable rule was that the trustee of a settled trust who committed a breach of trust by a wrongful distribution was required to reinstate the trust fully for any loss. However, the House of Lords in Target Holdings Ltd versus Redferns <case>; [[1995] 3 WLR 352] declined to apply that traditional approach to the case where solicitors were holding money as bare trustees as part of a wider commercial transaction. Those monies had been handed over by the bare trustee, contrary to that trust, in advance of receiving valid security documents. However, because they were later received, no loss resulted as a result of that failure. The House of Lords accordingly declined to find the solicitors liable as trustees to make equitable compensation in that commercial circumstance, despite the stringency of the equitable rule when applied to conventional family trusts. The case was of course concerned with equitable compensation and not damages; see the useful discussion in "Causation and
Compensation for Breach of Fiduciary Duty" by Mark Leeming 1996 ALJ 537 
Summing Up 
An over-ready tendency to reach for the amplitude of fiduciary remedy, contriving to find fiduciary relationship or duty where none properly exists, is now giving way to a more discerning approach in which resort is had to other equitable remedies. These are based on unconscionable conduct and estoppel (and at law unjust enrichment). They involve a lesser standard than fiduciary duty, yet are no less flexible in their application to cases warranting equity's intervention. But that intervention must be principled, sparing and predictable, with relief flexibly adapted to commercial realities, if commercial dealings are not to be rendered uncertain in their consequences. 
Do the present circumstances give rise to a fiduciary duty? 
Though the trade-marks are held by a trustee (Woodson (Sales) Pty Limited), we are here not concerned with the traditional fiduciary relationship of trustee and beneficiary. Rather we are concerned with the relationship between the two beneficiaries as beneficial co-owners of shared trade-marks. In particular, we are concerned with whether, in circumstances where the Carson interests seek to partition and sell the totality of their interest in the trade-marks, must they do so as a fiduciary acting in the interests of the Woods.

According to the Wood interests a fiduciary relationship or duty arises by reason of the present mutual vulnerability of each beneficiary to the other.
This is reinforced by the fact that they were once at least akin to joint venturers though not partners, with a partially exclusive dealing arrangement in favour of the Wood interests. Within that, the Wood and Carson interests acted as co-distributors. It was conceded that they were never partners even then, because they sold independently, did not share profits and there was no co-production. Nonetheless, it can be inferred that there was close co- operation over many years.

What then is their mutual vulnerability? First, the Carson interests are vulnerable to Woodson (Sales) Pty Limited seeking an order for sale of the trade-marks under s66G and of course vice versa. Second, in relation to the patterns and dies held in trust by Woodson Associates, the Carson family interests are vulnerable to a future s66G application being made by the Wood interests (and vice versa). If it were made and granted, the patterns and dies could thereby be denied to the Carsons, save by their buying them. At present, the Carson interests can continue to use them for no charge or further cost. The same, of course, applies to the trade-marks (save for the costs of maintaining registration).

To this the Carson interests respond that all they now do together is jointly own the trade-marks (as well as patterns and dies). Their exploitation is otherwise entirely independent of one another. They retain no continuing co- distributorship and never had any joint production or joint selling arrangement but merely the terminated co-distributorship. Nor are their joint arrangements even in process of termination -- they have long since terminated.

One might compare this situation with what was found to be a fiduciary relationship in Pacific Coal Pty Ltd versus Idemitsu (Qld) Pty Ltd (Ryan J,
Supreme Court of Queensland, 21 February 1992, unreported) arising from a joint venture. The court accepted in that case as necessary features of a fiduciary relationship, that the parties must be in a position of mutual confidence, undertaking to act so as to further their joint interest.
Accordingly each co-venturer was vulnerable to an abuse of power by another co-venturer. The parties had covenanted to be just and equitable in all dealings and to act bona fide in the interests of the joint venture's activities. Significantly, there never was any such express provision in the
Wood/Carson arrangements.

In Hospital Products there was also a position of vulnerability to the actions of the alleged fiduciary though that was not sufficient for the majority to find a fiduciary relationship. Indeed the factors which in
Hospital Products led the majority of the High Court to deny a fiduciary relationship are present here. Both arrangements are commercial in character.
They are both made by two parties at arm's length with legal advice and on an equal footing. In neither case was there a partnership or other traditional fiduciary relationship. In the present case, even the original arrangements are hardly to be described as a joint venture. Even if a joint venture once existed in a limited sense by virtue of the arrangements in clause 7, those arrangements have long since gone. All there is now is joint ownership and separate exploitation of trade-marks (and dies and patterns). Even an exclusive distribution arrangement in Australia was not enough for the majority in Hospital Products to characterise that part of the arrangements as giving rise to fiduciary obligation, despite vulnerability on the part of the producer to the claimed fiduciary with respect to product goodwill.

In Hospital Products at 99, Mason J emphasised: "entitlement under the contract to act in a relevant matter solely by reference to one's own interest will constitute an answer to an alleged breach of the fiduciary duty." 
He went on however to say that: "the difficulty of deciding under the contract when the fiduciary is entitled to act in his own interests is not in itself a reason for rejecting the existence of a fiduciary relationship, though it may be an element in arriving at the conclusion that the person asserting the relationship has not established that there is any obligation to act in the interests of another." 
Indeed, if clause 7 of the 1986 Agreement were to be relevant, despite that any transition to termination has long since expired, clause 7, unlike the provisions of the Hospital Products distributorship, left reasonable scope for the two interests to sell in competition in the territory. They were thus left under their contract largely free to act in their own interests.
This was subject only to the constraint that the Carson interests could not approach existing Wood customers and even that was qualified in the case of special equipment. And the area where Carson interests were not free to act against the Wood interests is clearly not relevant to the present situation, which concerns independent exploitation of the trade-marks only. There is thus a lesser vulnerability than in Hospital Products where the manufacturer,
USSC, left itself wholly vulnerable to the exclusive distributor for product goodwill in Australia -- yet even that did not persuade the majority to find a fiduciary relationship.

Now that the distribution arrangements and the underlying contract have terminated even that limited exclusivity has gone. It is true fiduciary obligations may operate after termination of contractual arrangements; see
Chan versus Zacharia (supra) and (by analogy in the case of a partnership in course of formation) Ravinder Rohini Pty Ltd versus Krizaic (supra). However we are not here dealing with a transition to final termination such as in Chan v Zacharia where a partnership had been dissolved, breach occurring in the course of its winding-up -- here the contractual arrangements actually ended six years ago. There was left only the constructive trust keeping the parties in a relationship of mere co-ownership. There was no continuing mutual confidence between them (compare the joint venture in United Dominions
Corporation Ltd versus Brian Pty Ltd (supra) at 7-8 and 10-11) though there was certainly mutual vulnerability to one another's actions in relation to the jointly owned property. In the analogous circumstances of the exclusive distributorship in Hospital Products , even those who concluded a fiduciary duty did arise, did not contend that it continued after termination of the distribution agreement; see, for example, McLelland J and the Court of Appeal in Hospital Products (1983) 2 NSWLR 157.
 # Conclusion re Fiduciary Duty 
Accordingly, in all the circumstances, I am not satisfied that a fiduciary relationship or consequential fiduciary duty exist. This is either on a broad or narrow basis. It would be entirely incongruous to treat the two beneficial owners, with their co-distributorship and other contractual arrangements long since terminated, as still undertaking any continuing obligation to act in relation to their half ownership of the trade-marks so as to prefer the interests of the other or to prefer their joint interests over their own. Such an undertaking is not here to be found either express or implied, nor are the circumstances such as to generate a legitimate expectation in that behalf. Such an undertaking or expectation would simply not conform to the reality of their present arm's length relationship, though closer in the distant past. True each may, in certain aspects of their residual relationship, be vulnerable to the actions of the other. But that of itself does not suffice to found a fiduciary relationship where the fiduciary must act positively in the interests of the other and not merely refrain from inflicting detriment. It is to that lesser obligation pertaining to unconscionability to which I now turn. 
Unconscionability 
Do the circumstances give rise to the unconscionable assertion or retention of beneficial ownership of property by the Carson interests, such that equity should intervene by the remedial institution of a constructive trust, or by other permissible relief? This may be either by analogy to the failure of consensual joint relationship without attributable blame by either party (to the extent this is contended) or on principles of unconscionability expressed more generally; Muschinski versus Dodds at 618 and 620 per Deane J.

As Sheller JA pointed out in Bryson versus Bryant [(1992) 29 NSWLR 188] at 218 in referring to Deane J's Judgment: `His Honour went on to say (at 615) that the remedial character remains predominant. As an equitable remedy it should still be seen as constituting an in personam remedy attaching to property which may be moulded and adjusted to give effect to the application and interplay of equitable principles and the circumstances of the particular case.'" 
It also needs to be emphasised that, as stated in Westdeutsche Landesbank
Girozentrale at 829, "In order to establish a trust there must be identifiable trust property. The only apparent exception to this rule is a constructive trust imposed on a person who dishonestly assists in a breach of trust who may come under fiduciary duties even if he does not receive identifiable trust property" 
Thus while joint ownership may give rise to the right to apply under s66G of the Act for a trust for sale, that right is not as such property but analogous to a mere expectancy, dependent for its fructification on a favourable exercise of judicial discretion. That is not to say the trade-marks themselves and the future proceeds of their sale from such a favourable exercise could not, when they come into being, be subject to a trust.

What the Carson interests seek to do by their application for a trust for sale of the totality of their respective interests in the trade-marks under s66G of the Act is at first sight, neither discriminatory nor detrimental to the Wood interests, nor does it give rise to an unconscionable benefit to the Carsons.
Thus the proceeds of sale will enure equally to both parties. And both parties may bid for the purchase of the trade-marks, as paragraph 3 of the Plaintiff's summons makes clear. If either purchases, it will have the value of 100 per cent of the trade-marks and thus be free of competition from another user.

To this the Woods respond that they do suffer a detriment in reality. Further that it is one which, in its practical application, is discriminatory. This is first because no similar proposal to invoke s66G relief has been sought in relation to the patterns and dies. This leaves the Carson family interests free to continue to produce using those patterns and dies. To that the Carson interests may fairly respond that it is open to the Wood interests to make a s66G application in relation to those, if it wishes, depending on the outcome of the present proceedings.

The second reason is that, although the Wood interests receive 50 per cent of proceeds and any profit upon sale of the trade-marks (with the other 50 per cent going to the Carson family interests) this, while apparently non- discriminatory, nonetheless denies continued free access to the trade-marks to the Wood family for their future sales of Woodson products. Indeed if the
Wood interests fail to purchase or are unsuccessful in doing so, they are denied access at all. This is so, even though similar denial applies to the
Carson family interests, However, one may infer that their interest may be greater as producers than sellers. While either or both may bid for the purchase of the trade-marks, the greater incentive to do so would thus inferentially apply to the Wood interests. Indeed to secure continued access, the Woods may be forced to pay more than the fair market value.

Then there is no guarantee that the Woods would be successful in buying back the trade-marks though the orders sought allow either party to do so, "at auction or otherwise". There are, however, no pre-emptive rights. And even if they were successful in purchasing the trade-marks, the Wood interests would, as I have said, have been forced to pay money for access to trade-marks when previously they enjoyed that access for free. It might be argued that there is little value to a 50 per cent owner of trade-marks with consequential access buying in the other 50 per cent, save defensively to preserve access, and to avoid competition, especially if re-sale were not envisaged. But if they did not buy 100 per cent, they would then have the cost of starting afresh and of building goodwill round new trade-marks.

Finally, it is emphasised by the Wood interests that the trade-marks were originally sold in 1983 into joint ownership for a concessional price.
 # Implications of the 1986 Agreement for Unconscionability 
Clause 2 of the 1986 Agreement, which gave rise to the Court of Appeal's determination that a trust should be declared, gives some support for the view that the trust arrangements were intended to be indefinite. Thus had the parties done what clause 2 first contemplated, they would have transferred both the trade-marks and the patterns and dies to a company, Carwood Pty Limited. This was to be equally owned between the Wood and Carson interests. The assets thereby transferred could only then be disposed of, by winding up the company. If this were not by agreement, then it would have to be under the just and equitable ground, if granted. There is no provision for a trust in those circumstances as the ownership would be joint via the 50/50 company.

It is true there was provision for a user agreement, terminable after eighteen months on notice by either side. However, that user agreement itself made no reference to its termination leading to any consequential termination of the Agreement and certainly not to termination of any completed arrangements under clause 2. Thus there was no requirement that Carwood Pty Limited, in those circumstances, would transfer back to the parties or either of them, the trade-marks or the patterns and dies, which would thus continue in joint ownership. However, each needed access to the trade-marks, they would have a shared incentive to co-operate in providing that continued access.

The Wood interests would argue that the contractual effect of the second part of clause 2 as it survived in the Court of Appeal's orders and provided for a trust over the trade-marks (and patterns and dies) reflects a similar assumption of indefinite duration. That assumption was not altered by termination of the 1986 Agreement.

It is clear that the trade-mark user agreement represented a convenient way of providing for the continued use by the Carson interests of the trade-marks. It was only contractually required to be entered into in favour of Woodson Pty
Limited representing the Carson family interests. This further suggests that the user agreement was not integral to the parties' ongoing arrangements since the clear assumption was both would own them equally and both would have equal access. I am thus satisfied that termination of the user agreement was not intended to terminate the 1986 Agreement or arrangements pursuant to it, and would not have done so.

Prior to the termination of the 1986 Agreement, there would have been little likelihood of any application under s66G of the Act being successfully made. A successful application would certainly have been incompatible with the joint distribution arrangements in clause 7. The Wood interests argue that on this basis it would be unconscionable for the Carsons to be better off now, having repudiated that Agreement, than they would have been when they could not have secured such a sale compatibly with the 1986 Agreement. In particular they argue that the Carsons would now be able to do the very thing that they could not have done then, other than in breach of the 1986 Agreement. Therefore the
Court ought not to allow the Carsons to benefit from their own wrongful conduct by ordering the sale of the trade-marks in totality, thereby precluding the Wood interests from continuing to use the trade-marks.

To this the Carson interests respond that the innocent party in the case of a repudiation of contract is able to elect whether or not to accept the repudiation and terminate the contract. If the Woods so elect to terminate, they cannot be heard to complain as to the consequences of that election in terminating clauses that might otherwise have been to their benefit.

I thus conclude that the user agreement as such is not determinative of the duration of the principal agreement to which it is annexed. However, for reasons which I consider below in discussing the contractual rights as affecting the trust for sale, I am satisfied that the 1986 Agreement, so far as the distributorship arrangements were concerned, was similar to the distributorship agreement in Hospital Products and therefore terminable like it, on reasonable notice. I am accordingly satisfied it could not be terminable unilaterally (otherwise than for cause). In Hospital Products ([1982] [2 NSWLR 766)] at 802-3, McLelland J reached this conclusion on the following basis.
 "Since it was within the mutual contemplation of the parties that the distributor would be making a substantial investment in establishing a new business organization for the dominant purpose of which would be distribution of USSC products, and USSC for its part was precluded for the duration of the distributorship from having any other distributor in Australia, I am of the opinion that the distributorship was not terminable unilaterally (otherwise than for cause) except upon reasonable notice to the other party: cf J C
Millett Co versus Park & Tilford Distillers Corp [123 F Supp 484] (1954); Bonda v
Wagenmaker [(1960) 77 WN 363];
W K Kitt (WA) Pty Ltd versus Metters Ltd [[1967] WAR 15]; Martin-Baker
Aircraft Co Ltd versus Canadian Flight Equipment Ltd [[1955] 2 QB 556] and see
Williston on Contracts 3rd ed (1967), vol 9 s1017A(3) at pp 150, 151, 152." 
In the Court of Appeal and subsequently in the High Court this conclusion remained undisturbed; see Gibbs CJ at 71, Mason J at 98 and Dawson J at 139.
That conclusion is consistent with more recent authority expressed more broadly; Crawford Fitting Co versus Sydney Valve & Fittings Pty Ltd [(1988) NSWLR 438], especially per McHugh JA at 443-6: "In Martin-Baker Aircraft Co Ltd versus Canadian Flight Equipment Ltd, McNair
J said (at 577) that there is no presumption of permanency in the case of an indefinite commercial agreement but that if there is it is in favour of termination and not perpetuity. Buckley J has also expressed the view that there is no presumption either way: Re Spenborough Urban District Council's
Agreement (at 150). To the same effect is the judgment of Lockhart J in
State Bank of New South Wales versus Commonwealth Savings Bank of Australia [(1985) 6 FCR 524] at 554; [60 ALR 73] at 101. However, it is not easy to reconcile these statements with the principle that there is a general presumption against adding to a contract a term which the parties have not expressed: Luxor (Eastbourne) Ltd v Cooper [[1941] AC 108] at 137 per Lord Wright. In principle, the better view would seem to be that, although there is a presumption against implying a term that an agreement is terminable, ordinarily the nature of a commercial agreement will lead to the conclusion that the parties must have intended it to be terminable on notice. This was the effect of the approach of the courts in
Winter Garden; Martin-Baker; Spenborough and Decro-Wall.

Whether a contract is terminable on reasonable notice instead of at will also depends upon the existence of an implied term: Winter Garden Theatre
Ltd versus Millennium Productions Ltd (at 206); Martin-Baker Aircraft
Co Ltd versus Canadian Flight Equipment Ltd (at 581); Australian Blue Metal Ltd v Hughes (at 99). That question is determined by the circumstances existing at the date of the contract: Australian Blue Metal Ltd versus Hughes (at 99).
However, the reasonableness of the period of notice depends upon the circumstances existing when the notice is given: Winter Garden Theatre
Ltd versus Millennium Productions Ltd (at 199-200); Australian Blue
Metal Ltd versus Hughes (at 99); W K Witt (WA) Pty Ltd versus Metters Ltd and
General Industries Ltd [[1967] WAR 15] at 23-24;
Decro-Wall International SA versus Practitioners in Marketing Ltd (at 370; 224; -377; 229; 381; 234).

In the present case, I am satisfied when regard be had to the 1986
Agreement, the parties' long association, their mutual arrangements and product goodwill, reinforced by the exclusivity arrangements, that reasonable notice of termination would also be implied to terminate the 1986 Agreement (in the absence of any accepted repudiation).

However, the implication of termination by reasonable notice does not detract from the clear intention that performance of clause 2, by vesting the trade- marks in Carwood or in default in a trustee for the two interests, as there contemplated, would leave those resulting arrangements in existence indefinitely. I do not mean by that, to suggest that the parties intended that the arrangements could never be terminated by reference to s66G -- merely that their termination was not something which could be done by either party without proper notice or so as to give rise to unconscionable conduct on the party terminating against the other party and that this underlay their common assumption, as elaborated later.
 # Unconscionability and s66G 
I return now to the question of unconscionability as a discretionary factor affecting whether an order should be made under s66G of the Act or its terms if made.

It might have been contended by the Wood interests that the failure of their consensual relationship should be treated as being without attributable blame on their part. Therefore as the innocent party who accepted the other party's repudiation and now seeks to invoke relief based on unconscionability, they are hardly at fault, but rather the Carson interests. Just as the better view is that the innocent party which has not brought about the frustrating event may invoke frustration in relation to a contract, despite the frustrating event having been brought about by the other party (F.C. Shepherd & Co Ltd versus Jerrom [(1987) QB 301] followed in
Penrith District Rugby League Football Club Limited versus Fittler & Anor (Santow J, 8 February 1996, unreported)) so here it is difficult to see why the same approach should not, by analogy, be taken.

However, Counsel for the Wood interests did not put his case for unconscionability primarily on the narrower ground of analogy to break-up of a partnership without attributable blame. This was on the basis that there was blame for the break-up attributable to the Carson interests, though not to the
Woods (save in the innocent sense that the Wood interests accepted the
Carsons' repudiation and terminated). Rather it was put on the more general equitable principle underlying unconscionability, that equity will not permit another party to assert or retain the benefit of relevant property to the extent it would be unconscionable to do so; Muschinski versus Dodds at 620.
However, I am satisfied that the narrower basis is at least supportive of the more general ground, in that termination of the joint ownership represents a last residue of their original arrangements, though these have long since terminated.

Counsel for the Wood interests put that argument as leading either to a denial of any order for sale or, if one were to be made, then that it should be on terms that any profit from the sale proceeds be distributed primarily to the
Wood interests. This was said to reflect the concessional nature of the original sale of the trade-marks.

To this the Carson interests respond that so to contend that the entitlement of the Carsons to the proceeds of sale be less than equal, is both outside the ambit of the present proceedings and contrary to the Court of Appeal's express holding as to their equal ownership of the trade-marks. They contend that the unconscionability in Muschinski versus Dodds concerned the failure to contribute equally to the acquisition of the property by failing to make an agreed financial and physical contribution. They contrast this to the present circumstances where the property was already equally owned. They assert that unconscionability has never been defined to mean the termination or breach of a commercial agreement. They characterise the essence of the Woods' submission as an assertion that the appointment of a trustee for sale is somehow unfair to their present commercial interest despite having elected to terminate the agreement. They cite Muschinski versus Dodds per Deane J at 615-6 as precluding such an approach: "Thus it is that there is no place in the law of this country for the notion of `a constructive trust of a new model' which, `by whatever name it is described, ... is ... imposed by law whenever justice and good conscience' (in the sense of `fairness' or what `was fair') `require it' ... Under the law of this country as, ... proprietary rights fall to be governed by principles of law and not by some mix of judicial discretion ..., subjective views about which party `ought to win' and `the formless void of individual moral opinion." 
To that is to be contrasted the earlier quotation of Deane J at 619 relied on by the Wood interests, as follows: "if the relevant relationship is not a partnership but takes the form of a contractual joint venture for the pursuit of some commercial advantage, a similar prima facie rule of equity applies in the event of the premature collapse of the joint venture and the consequent preclusion of the attainment of the commercial advantage, namely, that, to the extent that the joint funds allow, the joint venturers are entitled to the proportionate repayment of their capital contributions to the abortive joint venture. This is so notwithstanding that it was the common understanding or agreement that the funds advanced were to be applied for the purpose of the joint venture and that the return from them would take the form, not of a repayment of capital contributed but of a share in the proceeds of the joint venture when it was carried to fruition." 
The Carson interests contend that any concession in the price for the trade- marks should be treated as distinct from unequal contribution to a partnership or joint venture.
 # Conclusion re Unconscionability 
However, even if that distinction be correct, notwithstanding the substance of what occurred being equivalent in result to an unequal contribution to an equal partnership or joint venture, there is still in my judgment a sufficient basis for unconscionability in the circumstances. The property which would be asserted or retained unconscionably by the Carson interests if an order for sale of the totality of the trade-marks were made, is the reciprocal of the detriment suffered by the Wood interests in that result (though not necessarily precisely equivalent). The Carson interests would derive the benefit of half the sale proceeds attributable to the advantage of selling the whole of the trade-marks to a purchaser, rather than selling a partitioned half interest. Common sense indicates it may well be the case, though I should emphasise no evidence was given on that matter, that a third party purchaser going into the arrangements would prefer to purchase the totality of the trade-marks for exclusive exploitation than to share that exploitation with the Carson interests. Hence such a preference would likely be reflected in a disproportionately higher purchase price for the whole (as compared to selling half and multiplying the sale proceeds by two for comparison). If that were not the case, then presumably the Carson interests would be seeking merely to sell their half interest. This is because they would otherwise gain no advantage in selling the whole and accounting to the Woods for half the proceeds.

The reciprocal detriment suffered by the Wood interests starts with the fact that previously as a half owner of the trade-marks they could continue to exploit them with no further payment. Now if the Wood interests are forced to purchase 100 per cent of the trade-marks to preserve access, and are successful in doing so, they may have to over-pay to acquire that interest.
The extent of that over-payment is conveniently measured against fair market value excluding any special higher value the Woods might otherwise be forced to pay to retain access and also excluding any extra amount attributable to selling 100 per cent (as against 50 per cent multiplied by two). While it is true the Woods thereby gain the advantage of 100 per cent ownership of the trade-marks, they certainly should not have to pay more, proportionately, than they could recover on re-sale of the trade-marks. Finally, they may be unsuccessful in so purchasing as there are no pre-emptive rights proposed.

Had the Carson interests simply sought a sale by partition of their interests in the trade-marks, there would in my judgment be no basis for opposing an order for sale or imposing terms, based upon unconscionability or otherwise -- but that is not what the Carsons seek.

I am therefore satisfied that there is in the present circumstances a situation where the Wood interests are vulnerable to the Carson interests with respect to the latter seeking an order for sale of the totality of their joint interest. That the vulnerability is mutual simply emphasises the point. To that vulnerability may be added the situation of potential advantage which the
Carson interests enjoy. This advantage is in being able to make such an application notwithstanding that if it is successful, this will enure to the detriment of the Wood interests in the manner I have described. The Wood interests have a similar position of advantage vis a vis their half interest in the trade-marks.
 # Possible Orders Foreshadowed 
The difficulty lies in framing an appropriate order which goes no further than denying the benefit unconscientiously asserted or redressing the detriment suffered by the unconscionable conduct.

As I have not had the benefit of argument from Counsel as to the appropriate order to be made based upon my earlier reasoning, I will do no more than foreshadow the kind of order which I presently envisage. It is moulded to the circumstances and sets terms upon an order permitting a trust for sale, as s66G clearly permits. I am satisfied that such flexibility of relief is available in the circumstances. However, I would first give leave to Counsel to address on this before any order is made.

The order I envisage would be to require that the Carson interests first offer the trade-marks to the Wood interests at fair market value for them to have a reasonable opportunity, limited in time, to elect whether or not so to purchase them.. Such fair value should be determined by reference to a supposed sale by voluntary bargaining between vendor and purchaser, each of whom is both willing and able, but not anxious, to trade and with a full knowledge of all circumstances which might affect value (Gregory versus Federal
Commissioner of Taxation <case>; [(1971) 123 CLR 547)] but determined as if for a sale of a one-half interest, multiplied then by two. The order may need to provide for an independant valuer. That price should not, in fairness to the Wood interests, reflect any unique or special value which access to the trade-marks would have for the
Wood interests as a purchaser, compared to an ordinary external purchaser. The
Wood interests should not be forced to over-pay for the asset, nor be required to pay any extra value derived solely from the fact that both interests in the trade-marks are sold, as compared to the proceeds of selling a one-half interest multiplied by two. If the offer were not accepted, the Carson interests should then be free to sell at the same or higher price to any third party, within a reasonable specified time.

I envisage that the order might also cover the contingency that the Wood interests did not purchase the trade-marks. In those circumstances, the
Carson interests might be ordered not only to account for half the proceeds of sale to the Wood interests as envisaged. They might also be required to hold as constructive trustee for the Wood interests that portion of the remaining half that represented the extra value derived solely from the fact that both interests in the trade-marks are sold, as compared to the proceeds of selling a one-half interest multiplied by two. Whether that order should be made in addition to the earlier order is also a matter for Counsel to address, having regard to whether this would exceed the minimum equity appropriate in the circumstances.

It is possible that other alternatives may be preferred, such as sale of only a partitioned half interest. Those can be considered in light of this Judgment and further argument.

The foregoing orders are in keeping with the Court of Appeal's remedial constructive trust, based on unconscionability. They deal with a situation that could not have been envisaged, namely an application under s66G to sell the whole interest. It would be incongruous indeed if a constructive trust, ordered to overcome unconscionability, should itself be the platform for an unconscionable result in a manner totally unforeseen.

Modern flexibility of remedy for unconscionability should allow the orders proposed, assuming they are, after further argument, deemed appropriate. This is quite apart from the fact that s66G affords a discretion, whose exercise may therefore be appropriately on terms. I do not however consider that the minimum equity justifies denying a trust for sale altogether; that would be disproportionate when less far-reaching orders can overcome the relevant detriment. Rather, as I have sought to do, it should be on terms which merely remove its unconscionable aspect.

Equitable Estoppel 
I am satisfied that a similar result would be reached, by application of equitable estoppel, that is to say estoppel based on a relevant shared assumption.

I first set out what I consider to be the clearest synthesis of the propositions that have emerged concerning equitable estoppel since Waltons
Stores (interstate) Ltd versus Maher <case>; [(1988) 164 CLR 387.] I refer to that by Priestley JA in Silov Pty Ltd versus Barbaro [(1988) 13 NSWLR 466] at 472: "The following can I think be distilled from the reasons in Waltons notwithstanding the somewhat different language used by the different Judges.
Common law and equitable estoppel are separate categories, although they have many ideas in common. (2) Common law estoppel operates upon a representation of existing fact, and when certain conditions are fulfilled, establishes a state of affairs by reference to which the legal relation between the parties is to be decided. This estoppel does not itself create a right against the party estopped. The right flows from the court's decision on the state of affairs established by the estoppel. (3) Equitable estoppel operates upon representations or promises as to future conduct, including promises about legal relations. When certain conditions are fulfilled, this kind of estoppel is itself an equity, a source of legal obligation. (4) Cases described as estoppel by encouragement, estoppel by acquiescence, proprietary estoppel and promissory estoppel are all species of equitable estoppel. (5)
For equitable estoppel to operate in circumstances such as those of the present case there must be the creation or encouragement by the defendant in the plaintiff of an assumption that a contract will come into existence or a promise be performed, and reliance on that by the plaintiff, in circumstances where departure from the assumption by the defendant would be unconscionable.
Equitable estoppel may lead to the plaintiff acquiring an estate or interest in land; that is, in the common metaphor, it may be a sword. (7) The remedy granted to satisfy the equity (which either is the estoppel or created by it) will be what is necessary to prevent detriment resulting from the unconscionable conduct." 
The expanded version of proposition (5) given by Priestley JA in Austotel
Pty Limited versus Franklins Selfserve Pty Limited [(1989) 16 NSWLR 582] at 610 is as follows: "For equitable estoppel to operate there must be the creation or encouragement by the defendant in the plaintiff of an assumption that a contract will come into existence or a promise be performed or an interest granted to the plaintiff by the defendant, and reliance on that by the plaintiff, in circumstances where departure from the assumption by the defendant would be unconscionable." 
In Waltons Stores (supra) Brennan J (as he then was) laid down six probanda: "In my opinion, to establish an equitable estoppel, it is necessary for the plaintiff to prove that (1) the plaintiff assumed that a particular legal relationship then existed between the plaintiff and the defendant or expected that a particular legal relationship would exist between them and, in the latter case, the defendant would not be free to withdraw from the expected legal relationship; (2) the defendant has induced the plaintiff to adopt that assumption or expectation; (3) the plaintiff acts or abstains from acting in reliance on the assumption or expectation; (4) the defendant knew or intended him to do so; (5) the plaintiff's action or inaction will occasion detriment if the assumption or expectation is not fulfilled; and (6) the defendant has failed to act to avoid that detriment whether by fulfilling the assumption or expectation or otherwise. For the purposes of the second element, a defendant who has not actively induced the plaintiff to adopt an assumption or expectation will nevertheless be held to have done so if the assumption or expectation can be fulfilled only by a transfer of the defendant's property, diminution of his rights or an increase in his obligations and he, knowing that the plaintiff's reliance on the assumption or expectation may cause detriment to the plaintiff if it is not fulfilled, fails to deny to the plaintiff the correctness of the assumption or expectation on which the plaintiff is conducting his affairs." 
The first of these probanda in referring to an assumption by the plaintiff that a particular legal relationship then existed between plaintiff and defendant, should not be read narrowly but rather should be understood in the expanded version of proposition 5 given by Priestley JA earlier quoted. Thus there is no necessity that there be the creation or encouragement by the defendant in the plaintiff of an assumption that a contract will come into existence if there by at least the creation or encouragement that a promise will be performed. However, it is an essential element of the principle of estoppel, that the conduct of the parties sought to be estopped must properly be characterised as "unconscionable". Thus in Murray's Meats Pty Ltd v
Bevillesta Pty Ltd (McLelland CJ in Eq., 28 October 1993 Unreported)
McLelland CJ in Eq emphasised that the facts of Walton Stores were exceptional and that it is an essential element of the principle of equitable estoppel that the conduct of the party sought to be estopped is properly characterised as unconscionable.

Finally, in Commonwealth of Australia versus Verwayen (1990) 170 CLR 394, Mason
CJ concluded at 413 "(It) should be accepted that there is but one doctrine of estoppel, which provides that a court of common law or equity may do what is required, but not more, to prevent a person who has relied upon an assumption as to a present, past or future state of affairs (including a legal state of affairs), which assumption the party estopped has induced him to hold, from suffering detriment in reliance upon the assumption as a result of the denial of its correctness. A central element of that doctrine is that there must be a proportionality between the remedy and the detriment which is its purpose to avoid ... . The assumption may be one as to a legal as well as to a factual state of affairs." 
Brennan J at 422 stated that estoppel in pais precludes a party who, by his representation, has induced another to adopt or accept the fact and thereby to act to the other party's detriment from asserting a right inconsistent with the fact on which the other party has acted. He states that equitable estoppel precludes a person who, by a promise, has induced another party to rely on the promise, and thereby to act to his detriment from resiling from the promise without avoiding the detriment.

Deane J at 444-6 sets out the elements of the doctrine of estoppel by conduct.
He states that its central element is that the law will not permit an unconscionable departure by one party from an assumption adopted by the other party as the basis of some act or omission which would operate to that other party's detriment if the assumption be not adhered to. The first party must have played such a part in the adoption of, or persistence in, the assumption that he would be guilty of unjust or oppressive conduct if he were allowed to depart from it. The party seeking to rely on the assumption must have relied on it in his course of action or inaction, and that conduct must have involved some action to his detriment, or be such that he would suffer detriment if the first party was allowed to escape from the assumption. The assumption may be of fact or law, and may be either as to the present or future.
 # Conclusion re Equitable Estoppel.
 
Applying those principles to the present case, I am satisfied that the shared assumption was that the arrangements for holding the trade-marks in trust were to provide security of access to both parties on a continuing basis, and therefore was not to be interrupted by a forced sale of the whole interest in the trade-marks, save where such sale was effected either by consent or in a fair and equitable manner. It is clear that the Wood interests relied on that assumption.

I am satisfied that the conduct here sought to be estopped represents an unconscionable departure from that shared assumption so relied upon, for the reasons earlier stated.

The act or omission, which would operate to the Wood interests' detriment if the assumption be not adhered to, is the compelled sale of the whole of the trade-marks. The detriment they would suffer is possible loss of continued access to the trade-marks and of the consequent accretion of goodwill from use of those trade-marks. If they do succeed in purchasing the detriment consists of the possibility of having to pay more than fair market value to secure the trade-marks (see earlier).

The part played by the Carson interests in the adoption of, and persistence in, that assumption, is their insistence on the ordering of the constructive trust in the first place. There was no suggestion in the case put by the
Carson interests, that they were seeking such a trust to operate only for so long as it suited the Carson interests and that they otherwise were to be free to sell the whole of the trade-marks without inhibition, apart from the necessity for a successful s66G application. Of course that did not mean they were to be inseverably linked forever, like Siamese twins. What it did mean, was that the mode of severance should be fair and equitable and that element was part of their shared assumption.

I am thus satisfied that departure from that assumption by the Carson interests would lead to the Wood interests suffering detriment, of the kind I have earlier described and elaborated.

Subject to further argument, I would propose to make the kind of orders earlier envisaged, as distinct from a prohibition on sale altogether, which would provide the necessary proportionality between remedy and detriment which is the purpose of the doctrine; Verwayen (supra) at 413.

Relevance of alleged breaches of the 1986 Agreement by the Defendant in proceedings No. 2907/94 to s66G Discretion.
 
I am satisfied that the alleged breaches of the 1986 Agreement, even were these now able to be reagitated in a damages claim, could not affect the exercise of the Court's discretion under s66G of the Act. It is doubtful whether a successful contractual damages claim could ever preclude exercise of a s66G discretion, or affect its terms. Such a claim gives rise to no inconsistency between some proprietary right or contractual obligation. But even were the position otherwise, I am satisfied such a claim should not affect that exercise of discretion.

The Wood interests sought in the alternative some kind of offset for any moneys held to be payable to the Wood interests by way of damages for breach of contract, against the proceeds received by the Carson interests on sale of the trade-marks. This assumes a successful application under s66G, but the imposition of a term in the relevant orders to that effect. But such an offset assumes a mutuality of dealing which is quite contrary both to the order of events and to the real situation between the parties. The damage now claimed relates not to infringement of the trade-marks but to breach of clause 7 of the 1986 Agreement. There is no basis for so securing damages in this manner, even if such a damages claim could be brought. It is to that question I now turn.

Question 2 
Whether the Plaintiff (Woodson (Sales) Pty Limited representing the Wood interests) in proceedings No. 2907/94 is entitled to damages as a result of alleged breaches of the 1986 agreement or whether: the Plaintiff is estopped from maintaining these proceedings by reason of res judicata, issue estoppel or that extended species of estoppel known as
Anshun estoppel, the Plaintiff is precluded in whole or part in any claim for damages as a consequence of the [Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/) 1969.
 # Estoppel by Record The Principles 
I have earlier set out the contentions of the parties in relation to estoppel by record (res judicata and issue estoppel) and Anshun estoppel.

The bases of estoppel relied upon (res judicata, issue estoppel and its sub- species Anshun estoppel) did not extend to that more limited form of estoppel by record, based upon abuse of process. The latter typically occurs where a party is not technically bound by an earlier determination. However, the intending plaintiff is treated as bound in substance, because the further proceedings are adjudged to amount to a collateral attack upon an earlier final decision, so giving rise to abuse of process; Hunter versus Chief Constable of the West Midlands Police <case>; [[1982] AC ] and in the context of criminal proceedings Rogers versus The Queen [(1994) 181 CLR ], discussed in Neil Pearson & Co Pty Ltd versus Comptroller-General of Customs [(1995) 38 NSWLR 443] per Kirby P at 451-2.

Res judicata prevents the same cause of action from being re-litigated by giving preclusive effect to the judgment itself, being the Court's formal conclusion into which the original cause of action has merged (Blair v
Curran (supra) at 532). Whereas issue estoppel gives preclusive effect to the conclusive determination of some issue of ultimate fact or law which underlay or was subsidiary to that judgment, being legally indispensable to it; Blair v Curran at 532.

There are at least two precepts which underly these estoppels:
The undoubted value of finality in litigation; see Rogers at 273 per
Deane and Gaudron JJ.
No person should be harassed twice for the same cause; see Rogers op cit.

In Rogers, a third related precept was invoked by Deane and Gaudron JJ. This is the principle which "... gives expression to a rule of Roman law which has since been recognised as part of our common law. It expresses the need for decisions of the courts, unless set aside or quashed, to be accepted as incontrovertibly correct ...
[the] principle is not only fundamental, it is essential for the maintenance of public respect and confidence in the administration of justice ...

From earliest times, the principle embodied in the maxim res judicata pro veritate accipitur has been seen as necessary to protect against the scandal of conflicting decisions" [Spencer Bower and Turner, at 411] # What are Conflicting Decisions in this context? 
Do "conflicting decisions" refers only to the formal conclusion whereby the cause of action is conclusively determined (res judicata) or also to issues or ultimate facts indispensably so determined in reaching that formal conclusion (issue estoppel)? Deane and Gaudron JJ treat this third precept as overlaying both -- and by implication Anshun estoppel -- each being manifestations of what has been traditionally termed "estoppel by record" (at 273-4): "... Issue estoppel and res judicata or cause of action estoppel are mechanisms which protect against conflict of that kind [i.e. conflicting decisions]" 
Of course, if either such estoppel were applied, there can, ex hypothesi, be thereafter no possibility of a conflicting judgment, since that is the very thing precluded.

Conflicting judgments include "judgments which are contradictory though they may not be pronounced on the same cause of action; it is enough if they appear to declare rights which are inconsistent in respect of the same transaction" (Port of Melbourne Authority versus Anshun Pty Limited <case>; [(1981) 147 CLR 589] at 603-4 per Gibbs CJ, Mason J and Aickin J.

But it does not follow that every issue or fact determined or, importantly, expressly assumed in the course of a judgment, is to be treated as giving rise to inconsistent judgments if attempted to be re-visited in a subsequent proceeding. In Port of Melbourne Authority (supra) at 603, Gibbs CJ, Mason and Aickin JJ cite the decision of Brewer versus Brewer <case>; [(1953) 88 CLR 1] as "illuminating". This was a case concerning Anshun estoppel (though held not applicable) in which Fullagher J (with whom Dixon CJ agreed) made clear (at 15) the nature of a conflicting judgment.

According to Fullagher J, a conflicting judgment is one that contradicts an assumption "which was fundamental to the decision in the sense that, if the assumption had not been made, the decision must have been different".

The quoted passage from Fullagher J makes clear that "assumption" includes not only a point which might have been raised but was omitted in the first proceedings, but also the point which was not argued but expressly assumed against the party who might have argued it. Both are of course potential examples of Anshun estoppel.

That so much emphasis is placed in Anshun estoppel on the question of possible conflicting judgments is explained by the need for caution in applying Anshun estoppel. This is in any event, but especially in the case of a cross-claim or set-off. That caution is expressed in Port of Melbourne itself, at 601: "To require that the defendant always raise his cross-claim or set-off at the first available time could cause great inconvenience." 
And at 603: "... there are a variety of circumstances, some referred to in the earlier cases, why a party may justifiably refrain from litigating an issue in one proceeding yet wish to litigate the issue in other proceedings e.g. expense, importance of the particular issue, motives extraneous to the actual litigation, to mention but a few." 
However, it is clear that the test to be applied in relation to the Anshun principle is whether it was unreasonable of the person not to plead a particular defence or, if the principle applies to cross-claims, a particular cross-claim (see Scott versus Beneficial Finance Corporation Ltd (Wilcox J,
Einfeld and Beazley JJ, 31 May 1994, unreported)). I am satisfied that doctrine can apply to cross-claims, though especial caution is required in its application. In the case of cross-claims, it is true, the possibility of inconsistent judgments is highly relevant, though not only to that case.

The test of unreasonableness is sometimes expressed as requiring "reasonable diligence" on the part of the parties in bringing forward points which properly "belonged to" the subject litigation (Rogers at 435). That test ordinarily is satisfied where issues not raised are so closely or intimately related to the subject of the earlier proceedings that not to raise them would be unreasonable; see, for example, Bryant versus Commonwealth Bank of Australia <case>; [(1994) 123 ALR 642] at 649 per
Einfeld J and Port of Melbourne Authority at 604).
 # Application of the Estoppel Principles to the present case.
 
The question which here arises is whether the Woods' failure to bring a cross-claim in the 1990 proceedings for damages for breach of contract, gives rise to res judicata, issue estoppel or an Anshun defence against them. The Wood interests rely on the authorities which recognise that Anshun estoppel will rarely apply to the failure to bring a cross-claim, and that the better view is that it will only do so if there is a possibility of inconsistent judgments.

In the present case, the Wood interests failed to bring a cross-claim for damages for breach of contract in the 1990 proceedings. They did so in the following circumstances: 
The Wood interests did in fact bring a cross-claim in the 1990 proceedings but for infringement of trade-marks, not breach of contract. Thus those two actions were not in the same interest but clearly distinct.

However, the Wood interests' defence in the 1990 proceedings did plead breach of contract but not damages, this being solely as a defence to the
Carson interests' claim for joint ownership of the trade-marks. The factual basis for such breach of contract allegation is necessarily the same as the factual basis for the consequential claim for damages now sought to be brought, though further factual evidence may have come to light after the defence was dealt with.

Though successful before McLelland J, the Wood interests lost in the
Court of Appeal on a basis in no way dependant on breach of contract; the basis was that it would be unconscionable in the circumstances to deny a beneficial half interest to the Carson interests in the trade-marks. The result was that any orders made by McLelland J were discharged and replaced by the Court of Appeal's orders.

McLelland J ordered in the 1990 proceedings that the Wood interests' cross-claim be tried separately and after the Carson interests' claim to ownership of the trade-marks. However, I am satisfied that his order would not have precluded the trial of such cross-claim with reasonable promptness after his judgment of 21 September 1990 rather than awaiting the result of the Court of Appeal's determination in July 1994, some four years later.

It was only on 17 October 1994 that the Wood interests applied for leave to amend the cross-claim to add a claim for damages for breach of contract and that application was refused by McLelland CJ in Eq. for the reasons I have earlier set out.
 # Conclusion re Res Judicata and Issue Estoppel 
I am satisfied, for the reasons earlier contended by the Wood interests, that res judicata and issue estoppel are no barrier to a claim for damages for breach of contract; see (iii) above. Thus the decision of the Court of Appeal did not deal with the breach of contract findings of McLelland J as the Court of Appeal's decision was on a distinct and independant basis in "which His Honour's conclusions concerning the termination of the agreement were not challenged" Carson versus Wood at 13. Thus McLelland J's undisturbed findings as to breach of contract in the Court of Appeal (they not having needed to be challenged) were neither embodied in the ultimate decision so as to found res judicata nor fundamental to reaching it, so as to found issue estoppel -- indeed they were not even part of the chain of reasoning (as is itself not sufficient to found issue estoppel in any event); compare Cachia versus Isaacs [(1983) 3 NSWLR 366] There is no final judgment, preceding the Court of Appeal's, into which any cause of action can merge or be capable of grounding issue estoppel (Egri (supra) at 603D-E), as McLelland J's orders were discharged by that successful appeal. # Anshun Estoppel 
In those circumstances the primary question is whether, for purposes of Anshun estoppel and giving appropriate weight to the possibility of conflicting judgments, it was unreasonable for the Wood interests to have refrained from including in their cross-claim the claim for damages, either contemporaneously with the 1990 proceedings or within a reasonable time thereafter.

Leaving aside, for the moment, the possibility of conflicting judgments and the weight to be given to that, I am satisfied that it was otherwise unreasonable for the Wood interests to fail to include in their cross-claim, damages for breach of contract. The reasons for that conclusion are essentially those set out in the judgment of McLelland CJ in Eq. dated 21
October 1994 which I have earlier quoted.

We are not here dealing with a situation in which an application was made to amend the cross-claim to add damages for breach of contract even reasonably contemporaneously with the 1990 proceedings, though after. Were we doing so, this would raise the question whether such claim should rather have been included in the cross-claim prior to the hearing of the 1990 proceedings even though the cross-claim was to be heard thereafter. This is on the basis that failure to do so might have affected the way in which the Carson interests first dealt with breach of contract on the original proceedings.

This is based on the premise that the Carson interests may have conducted their case differently in the 1990 proceedings knowing that a claim for damages would follow, as indeed McLelland J suggested as a possibility in his
Judgment of 21 October 1990. This would be so even though the cross-claim were only to be heard after the 1990 proceedings. On the other hand, so to assume, is inherently speculative.

Nor are we dealing with a case where leave to amend (here to add damages) was actually made and refused prior to conclusion of the first proceedings. In
Macquarie Bank Limited versus the persons trading as Westgarth Middleton (1995) 8
ANZ Insurance Cases at |P61-261. Rolfe J (at 75,936-7) declined to follow the decision of Hill J in Scott versus Beneficial Finance Corporation (Federal Court of Australia, 17 December 1993, unreported) as a decision on its particular facts. In each case, just such a situation arose of a prior refusal to amend in the first proceedings. Rolfe J held that refusal of leave to amend did not preclude application of Anshun estoppel by reason of unreasonable conduct in failing to seek to cross-claim at an earlier point, and in that regard made clear that he would not have exercised his discretion in the way Hill J had done.

Rolfe J pointed out that the litigant who is denied the right to file or amend a cross-claim at an earlier point of time has the remedy of appealing against that decision, but if the litigant fails to do so, that factor does not save the litigant from Anshun estoppel if otherwise the litigant has acted unreasonably.

The present case involves no such prior refusal or indeed one not long after the first proceedings. It is a much stronger one for Anshun estoppel to apply, in which the action of the applicant is far more unreasonable. What here occurred was a belated application to amend the cross-claim made not contemporaneously but some four years after the original proceedings. Had the Wood interests sought leave to amend in a timely fashion, the difficulties alluded to by McLelland CJ in Eq. concerning the impossibility of adequately reviving impressions of witnesses from that original trial would not have occurred -- but they did not. Yet there was nothing to stop such an application being made, notwithstanding appeal to the Court of Appeal.
 # Anshun Estoppel and the Possibility of Conflicting Decisions.
 
I agree with the submission from Counsel for the Woods that there is here no possibility of conflicting decisions. This is again because McLelland J's orders were discharged by the Court of Appeal, which substituted orders which in no way depended on breach of contract or upon any assumption concerning it; see earlier. There is thus no final judgment of McLelland J still operating which could be inconsistent with a later judgment on damages. But does that matter? 
I turn now to consider whether my prima facie conclusion that it was unreasonable to fail to include a claim for damages for breach of contract in the cross-claim is affected by the possibility or otherwise of inconsistent judgments.

I am satisfied that the possibility of inconsistent judgments does not arise as a relevant factor capable of altering that conclusion in the present circumstances, which are exceptional. Here a cross-claim was brought prior to the original proceedings bringing another claim for damages, related but distinct, for infringement of trade-marks. It was brought along with a defence pleading breach of contract, with the very facts required to establish that being thus in issue. I am satisfied that it was clearly unreasonable to fail in those circumstances to amplify the cross-claim either at the time or at least within a reasonable time thereafter, to seek damages for the breach of contract so pleaded. So intimately connected is the question of damages to the already pleaded breach of contract, that it is difficult to see how it could not be unreasonable for a litigant to fail to introduce that claim for damages so long after resolution of the original proceedings. This is especially as the failure to do so, as McLelland CJ in Eq. pointed out, may well have affected the way in which the other party conducted its case in the original proceedings.

In Currabubula Holdings Pty Limited versus Mita Copiers Australia Pty Limited (Federal Court, Burchett J, 5 May 1995, unreported) at 15 refers in Anshun estoppel to the emphasis properly placed on the question whether a party is seeking a judgment which will conflict with an earlier judgment. It is, as he says, based on the need for caution in relation to Anshun estoppel. That, however, is not to say that the possibility of conflicting judgment is an essential condition for Anshun estoppel to be found, even granted that caution. The present exceptional circumstances involve such clear unreasonableness and so clearly offend the first two precepts underlying estoppel, that I do not consider the lack of possibility of conflicting judgments to be determinative. That recognises that this is an exceptional case, made the more unusual by the fact that a defence and cross-claim were filed in the original proceedings. The cross-claim was one which deliberately omitted damages for breach of contract, despite this being so closely and intimately connected with the pleadings filed.

McLelland CJ in Eq., in his Judgment of 21 October 1994, refers to distortion of the purpose underlying s78 of the [Supreme Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) in saving time and expense by facilitating cross-claims were a cross-claim for damages able to be brought so long after the original proceedings.

This is reinforced by [s63](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s63.html) of the [Supreme Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/), corresponding to [s22](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fcoaa1976249/s22.html) of the [Federal Court of Australia Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fcoaa1976249/). The latter was expressly cited by the Federal Court in Bryant versus Commonwealth
Bank <case>; [(1995) 57 FCR 287] at 298 in support of its conclusion that Anshun estoppel applied. The equivalent s49(2) of the Supreme Court Act 1981 (UK) was cited in support by Baggelay LJ in the area of actions which are barred because in the same interest, in Serras versus Noel [(1885) 15 QBD 549CA] at 559, as also the equivalent section in New Zealand in Dillon versus MacDonald (1902) NZLR 375CA (though not in Neylan versus Dickens [(1987) 1 NZLR 402CA).] The policy of those sections is that it is desirable for a trial judge formally to determine and make findings such "that all matters in controversy between the parties may be completely and finally determined, and all multiplicity of legal proceedings concerning any of those matters avoided". That important purpose too would be subverted if, in cases such as the present, a litigant could hold back a cross-claim so intimately connected with a defence in the original proceedings, especially when the litigant has already other cross- claim proceedings on foot albeit on distinct claims. However, that proposition should not be expressed more widely, as generally applicable to cross-claims.
 # Conclusion re Estoppel 
I am therefore satisfied that, exercising proper caution, in the present exceptional circumstances, Anshun estoppel precludes the Wood interests now bringing a claim for damages for breach of contract, notwithstanding there is no evident possibility of conflicting decisions.

I am further satisfied that res judicata and issue estoppel do not apply, in the circumstances.

It follows that I do not need to deal with the application of the [Limitation
Act 1969](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/) to any such claim for damages.

Question 3 
Whether the Defendants in proceedings No. 4611/94 (Woodson Sales (International) Pty Limited and Woodson (Sales) Pty Limited) are required to account for profits to the Plaintiff (Woodson Pty Limited) in relation to the continued usage by them of the trade-marks since 23 December 1988 and if so whether a defence exists by way of an estoppel or by reason of laches, acquiescence and delay, and 
Whether the Plaintiff (Woodson Pty Limited) in proceedings No. 4611/94 is required to account to the Defendants (Woodson Sales (International) Pty
Limited and Woodson (Sales) Pty Limited) for any use by it of such trade-mark since December 1988 and, if so, whether a defence exists by way of an estoppel or by reason of laches, acquiescence and delay.
 
I shortly answer this question by concluding that neither the Wood interests nor the Carson interests are required to account to the other for use by that party of the trade-marks since 23 December 1988 when the 1986 Agreement was terminated. This is because each of the Wood interests and the Carson interests were entitled, pursuant to the orders of the Court of Appeal, to equal beneficial ownership of the trade-marks and thus to their continued usage without any obligation to account one to the other.
 # CONCLUSIONS . There is no present fiduciary relationship between the Wood and Carson family interests as beneficial owners of the trade-marks or such as to give rise to fiduciary duty between them.
However, unconscionability and equitable estoppel do apply in the circumstances and affect the exercise of my discretion under s66G of the Act.
This is not in denying a sale of the whole of the trade-marks but as regards the terms to be imposed on any such sale.
The proposed orders which I have foreshadowed subject to further argument by Counsel, are intended to do no more than remove the detriment unconscionably inflicted on the Wood interests and prevent the retention of property otherwise unconscionably retained by the Carson interests.

Likewise, in the case of equitable estoppel, these proposed orders are intended to do no more than provide a remedy proportionate to the detriment to the Wood interests from departure from their shared assumption.
Anshun estoppel precludes the Wood interests now bringing an action for damages for breach of contract, notwithstanding the absence of possibility of conflicting judgments. This is in the exceptional circumstances of this case and based on the test of unreasonableness applied with appropriate caution.
 # ORDERS 
I direct each of the parties to submit orders (subject to argument) giving effect to this judgment within fourteen days.

So far as costs are concerned, each party has been successful in relation to one of the two principal issues outstanding between them. In those circumstances my present inclination would be to make no orders as to costs.
However, in the circumstances I give leave to either party to address me on costs.
 * * * 
