

Wood and Ors versus Attallah Matter No 10708/98 [1998] NSWSC 767 (3 June 1998) 
Last Updated: 20 January 1999 
RUSSELL BRUCE WOOD & ORS versus JOSEPH ATTALLAH /98 June 1998 
Greg James J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: An application is made by Mr. de Vere Tyndall, appearing for the defendant, in an action for possession of land seeking a stay of execution in respect of steps to be taken by the Sheriff tomorrow morning. 
Tendered in evidence has been a copy of the Notice to Vacate. Mr. de Vere
Tyndall moves on the affidavit of the defendant who deposes to an ability to pay out the mortgage, default under which gave rise to the action by the plaintiffs, and to be able to do so in the very near future. Notice has been given to the plaintiffs' solicitors seeking their written undertaking to stay the proceedings. No notice has been given that this application to stay the proceedings will be brought.

The defendants explanation for his delay and for failing to defend the proceedings, is entirely insubstantial. If the matters referred to in his affidavit were the only matters involved, I would not be prepared to grant the stay. However, I am informed the premises are commercial premises which have been let and that in possession under that lease (a lease which pre-dates the mortgage in question and which is for a term of three years with option for renewal) there is a tenant who is not named as a party to the proceedings but who would be liable to dispossession by the Sheriff pursuant to the writ of execution, and that tenant wishes the opportunity to be let in to defend.

I note that in the affidavits in support of default judgment there is no reference to the existing tenancy, although there is reference to the matters required by the Rules expressly to be negated.

There appears to be in the proceedings no reference to that interest at all, nor is there any indication that notice of the proceedings had been served upon the tenant, and as I have said, the tenant is not named as a party.

Mr. de Vere Tyndall, who appears for the tenant, whose name is Michelle Wise, has undertaken on her behalf to file today a motion seeking that she be joined in the action, and an affidavit in support setting out her position.

I order that that motion be returnable before me tomorrow at 10.00 am and I abridge the time for notice to provide that notice of the motion and the affidavit in support be served on or before 4.00 pm, 3 June 1998.

The affidavit of Joseph Attallah sworn 3 June 1998 may be filed in court today.

I stay execution of the judgment herein until further order. The motion filed in court by Mr. Attallah shall also be listed at 10.00 am tomorrow morning before me. Notice of these orders is to be given to the Sheriff on or before .00 pm today and to the solicitors for the plaintiffs by that date and time.
 * * * 
