

Hyland versus Burbidge and Ors No. 1687/93 Personal Property - Real Property [1995] NSWSC 90 (19 October 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
EQUITY DIVISION
WINDEYER J
HRNG
SYDNEY, 6-17 March 1995 #DATE 1:9:1995 #ADD 19:10:1995 
Counsel for the Plaintiffs:      D.E.J. Ryan 
Solicitors for the Plaintiffs:     Gadens Ridgeway 
Counsel for st and 7th Defendants:  R.W. White 
Solicitors for 1st Defendant:     Hickson Lakeman and Holcombe 
Solicitors for th Defendant:     William B. Beilby and Co 
Counsel for 4th and 5th Defendants:  P.L.G. Brereton 
Solicitors for 4th and 5th Defendants: Stacks 
Counsel for 6th Defendant:       R.W. Tregenza 
Solicitors for 6th Defendant:     Weaver
Gentle and Harrison 
Counsel for 11th Defendant:      P.M. Hall QC and
R.J.H. Darke 
Solicitors for 11th Defendant:     Maxwell Connery and Co
ORDER
Orders made
JUDGE1
WINDEYER J This action is an administration suit in respect of the late
Charles Keith Hyland who died on 16 April 1989. Probate of his will dated 27
March 1987 was granted in this State to Mr Richard John Burbidge QC on 29
August 1989.
By his will the deceased gave the whole of his estate to his trustee upon trust for Anne Chi Quang provided she survived him by three months which she did. That will was valid in New South Wales but it appears was not valid in accordance with the law of Thailand as it contained a trust. However the deceased had executed an earlier will to the same effect but without a trust and it appears a grant in respect of that earlier will has been obtained by Mr
Burbidge in Thailand on the basis that the later will was a nullity. Such a grant was obtained after obtaining the revocation of an earlier grant of administration in favour of the plaintiffs who claimed as wife and children of the deceased.
The deceased in 1972 and 1973 engaged in certain transactions for the purpose of ensuring that Lisa Ludlow-Hyland could not benefit from his estate and so that the two children of his marriage would benefit from his estate to only a certain extent. To this intent he constituted in
Liechtenstein the
Gartner Foundation, and arranged his affairs so that the major part of his not insignificant assets were and are held on trust for that body.
 
The parties
The plaintiffs are: 
Lisa Ludlow-Hyland who married the deceased in Thailand in .
Alexandra Larissa Kaitha Hyland, a child of that marriage born in 1968.
Charles Christian Ludlow-Hyland, a child of that marriage born in 1970.
Between 1975-1978 the deceased had a relationship with Elizabeth Macey
Kavalee.
She alleged that the 11th defendant, Edward Kavalee, born in 1979, is a child of that relationship. That is not admitted by the 1st defendant but at least the deceased appears on the birth certificate of Edward as being his father. In the determination of the questions presently before me the interests of the 11th defendant are the same as those of the plaintiffs.
The deceased, who had a rather flourishing feather business in Thailand and Vietnam, was captured by the Vietcong in 1968 and held captive for about ten months.
He subsequently claimed that his wife was unfaithful to him during this time. They separated in 1970 before their son was born. Mrs
Hyland took proceedings for divorce in NSW in 1972. The deceased contested this action on the basis that he was not domiciled in
New South Wales. His wife succeeded at first instance but the deceased successfully appealed to the Full Court and the decree was set aside. Before his marriage the deceased had established a relationship with the 7th defendant, Anne Chi Quang, and the 8th defendant
Charles Lap Hyland - who has not been served in this action - is a child of that relationship, born in 1964.
The other parties to this action are Panker Nominees and Hartigan Nominees
Pty Limited, companies associated with the accountants for the deceased, which companies hold shares in Ismene Pty Ltd and Ismene Holdings Pty Ltd, on trust for the Gartner Foundation. The Ismene companies hold all the shares in
Australian Feather Mills Pty Ltd and other assets in Australia formerly held by the deceased. The Armidale
School Foundation has received $50 000 pursuant to a Memorandum of Wishes lodged by the deceased with the Gartner Foundation.
Cura
Treuinstitut is what is called the "Founder" of the Gartner Foundation.
The actual assets in the deceased's estate at death were small. It seems that they have all gone on costs in this and the numerous actions against the estate under the [Family Provision Act 1982](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/) by each of the plaintiffs, Anne Chi
Quang, Charles Hyland and Edward Kavalee. The executor has treated the deceased as domiciled in New South Wales and by virtue of his grant here he has got in the proceeds of a bank account in Vietnam. One might have thought that this raised questions about the propriety of propounding an earlier will for probate in Thailand but those questions do not arise yet.
While Mrs Hyland failed in her divorce action in New South Wales the deceased failed in similar proceedings in Thailand, apparently because, under
Thai law, a wife does not take her husband's domicile and Thai law for divorce purposes requires domicile of both husband and wife in that country. On 6
November 1975 the deceased obtained a decree in the Republic of Haiti purporting to dissolve his marriage. Whether that will be recognized in New
South Wales or elsewhere is a question which may ultimately arise in these proceedings.
 
Questions for Determination
This administration suit was brought in an attempt to resolve some of the questions necessary for decision to enable the actions under the [Family
Provision Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/) to be determined. On 24 November 1993 Powell J settled a list of questions or issues for determination in the proceedings and on July 1994 an order was made that of those issues those listed as 9, 10, 11, 12 and 13 be decided separately from and before the other issues in the action. Those five issues for separate determination are as follows: "9. Were, or are, any, and if so, which, of the assets formerly, or now, held by, or on behalf of, the Gartner Foundation, assets forming part of the actual Estate of the Deceased?
If the answer to 9 is in the affirmative:-
Was any, and, if so, which of the several "bequests" paid, pursuant to the Memorandum of Wishes of the Deceased to, or for the benefit of, Ms Quang, Charles Lap Hyland, Alexandria
Larissa
Kaitha Hyland ("Ms Hyland"), Charles Christian Ludlow-Hyland ("Mr. Hyland") and the Armidale School Foundation Limited ("the beneficiaries") paid out of those assets?
Is the amount of any such bequest liable to be designated as notional property for the purposes of [Section 24](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s24.html) of the [Family
Provision Act 1982](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/)?
What, if any, other property held by, or on behalf of, the beneficiaries, or any of them, is liable to be designated as notional property for the purposes of [Section 24](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s24.html) of the [Family
Provision Act 1982](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/)?
If the answer to 9 is in the negative, is the Executor of the will, or the Administrator, or trustee, for the time being, of the Deceased's Estate, entitled to appoint the beneficiaries of, or otherwise to direct the disposition of, all, or any, and, in the latter case, which, of the assets held by, or on behalf of, the Gartner Foundation, and, if so, in what manner may such appointment be made or direction be given?
Did the Deceased enter into any, and if so, which prescribed transaction, or prescribed transactions, within the meaning of [Section 22](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s22.html) of the [Family Provision Act 1982](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/)?
If the answer to 12 is in the affirmative:-
Are any, and, if so, which, of the assets held by, or on behalf of, the Gartner Foundation liable to be designated as notional property for the purposes of [Section 23](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s23.html) of the [Family
Provision Act 1982](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/)?
What, if any, other property is liable to be designated as notional property for the purposes of [Section 23](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s23.html) of the [Family
Provision Act 1982](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/)?"
All those questions were dealt with on the basis in the hearing before me that the deceased was domiciled in New South Wales and will be answered on the assumption that question 1 as settled by Powell J, which raises the question of domicile for determination, is answered in that way.
 
Establishment of Gartner Foundation
In 1972 Mr Hyland, as a result of his desire to ensure that his wife and children of that marriage would have no claims on his estate arranged his affairs as follows: 
He transferred all his assets in Australia to Ismene Pty Ltd.
Ismene borrowed the purchase price from a bank and paid those moneys to the deceased.
The deceased then lent the purchase price to the Foundation.
The Foundation lent the same moneys to Ismene
Pty Ltd which used those moneys to pay off the bank overdraft.
Mr Hyland then gifted to the Foundation the amount of his loan less the sum of $150 000.

At a later stage the shares in Australian Feather Mills Ltd held by Ismene Pty
Ltd were transferred to Ismene Holdings Pty Ltd but little turns on that.
The Gartner Foundation is set up as a stiftung in accordance with the civil code of the principality of Liechtenstein with the object of the administration of its assets and property. Its activities are controlled by a
Board, the members of which are nominated by the Founder. Article 6 provides that beneficiaries are the persons who are designated by the founder by a special by-law, the founder determining on distribution of the income and/or corpus at any time. Article 8 provides that on resolution of the founder the
Foundation can be liquidated. Article 9 provides that the founder can transfer the rights given to him or it to any third party. The founder was Cura
Treuinstitut, the 10th defendant.
The articles are dated 3 October 1972. By document of the same date Cura
Treuinstitut transferred all its rights as founder to the Societe
De Controle
Fiduciare SA of Geneva (SCF). By power of attorney of 23 October 1972 the
Gartner Foundation appointed Mr Hyland its attorney in Thailand. By agency contract dated 17 April 1974 between SCF described as trustee and Hyland described as principal,
SCF undertook to exercise the functions of founder strictly in accordance with instructions from the principal Hyland.
On December 1972 Donald Noel James and Bruce Victor Nathan by separate declarations of trust declared that they each held one of the two shares in
Ismene Pty Ltd on trust for the Gartner Foundation, it having provided the allotment moneys. Those shares, subject to that trust, were eventually transferred to the 4th and 5th defendants.
The transactions dealing with the Australian assets of Hyland were completed on 21 December 1972. The assets were transferred to Ismene; Ismene borrowed the sum of $355 398.27, it paid that sum to Mr Hyland who lent it to the Gartner Foundation which lent it to Ismene Pty Ltd together with a smaller amount the total being $371 383. Ismene repaid the bank. By deed of 11 January Hyland released the Gartner Foundation from repaying $221 383 leaving a sum owing to him of $150 000.
It is not clear when the first by-law was made pursuant to Article 6 but it is likely that it was made quite early on by SCF. The list of beneficiaries was wide, comprising the existing or further children of Charles
Hyland, his present or future wife, his employees, children of the employees, corporations in which he owned shares and various other companies. The founder had the absolute right to determine distributions and the beneficiaries from the list.
On 26 October SCF transferred the founder's rights to Defago and CIE
SARL (DFC). Mr Defago had in effect looked after the affairs of the Foundation at SCF but had gone out on his own. No new agency contract was signed but DFC did execute a transfer in blank of the Founder's rights.
DFC did offer to sign an agency contract but it was a deliberate decision of Hyland not to have this but rather to rely upon the signed blank transfer as a means of exercising control.
 
Memorandum of Wishes
In 1985 and 1986 Hyland signed documents called "Memorandum of Wishes" in each case addressed to SCF although it appears DFC held the founder's rights.
The documents in effect set out the wishes of Hyland as to the conduct of his affairs after his death. It is not necessary to set out the details as these were superseded by a fresh Memorandum of Wishes dated 5 March 1987.
The Memorandum of Wishes of 5 March 1987 is the last such document signed by Hyland. It was prepared with the help of Mr Burbidge, a long time friend and adviser of the deceased. That document is of some importance and it is as follows: "MEMORANDUM OF WISHES OF CHARLES KEITH HYLAND 
TO: Societe de Controle Fiduciare
S.A. as transferee of all rights of the Founder of a Foundation constituted in Vaduz under the name of Gartner Foundation.

This Memorandum records my Wishes for the conduct of the affairs of the Gartner Foundation, and replaces any and all prior expressions of Wishes. This Memorandum whilst expressing my desires has no legal effect and does not fetter in any way the discretionary powers which you have as the Trustees of the
Gartner Foundation. My Wishes as expressed herein are intended by me to be taken into account only after my death or incapacity and this Memorandum may be at any time countermanded by me during my lifetime. During my lifetime and unless I am incapacitated I request you to deal with the capital and income of the Foundation as I may from time to time request.
In the event of my incapacity I request you are to act in accordance with the recommendations of the Advisors.

Before setting out my Wishes, I record certain matters which I desire to be taken into account should any question of discretion or interpretation of the Wishes expressed by me herein arise.

Firstly, the conduct of LISA LUDLOW-HYLAND following our marriage was such as to disentitle her from any consideration from me whatsoever.
That conduct included adultery shortly after our marriage, promiscuity and lack of concern for my well-being whilst I was incarcerated in Vietnam, and her attempts to obtain financial return by the callous manipulation of our two children, which children she has hidden from me for many years.

Secondly, ANNE CHI QUANG has provided constant and caring companionship to me for many years and is the mother of my son
CHARLES LAP HYLAND. She has made a substantial contribution to my various trading and investment operations and to my personal welfare.
 
Thirdly, I have had no contact with my two children by LISA
LUDLOW-HYLAND for many years and I believe that LISA
LUDLOW-HYLAND is likely to attempt to gain financial advantage from my death, using the two children if necessary. It is my desire that those two children should receive the bequest referred to in my Wishes but at a time and in a manner which minimizes the likelihood of legal action against my Estate to benefit them and/or LISA LUDLOW-HYLAND.

Fourthly, I have hereby appointed to act as Advisors after my death or incapacity ANNE CHI
QUANG, RICHARD JOHN BURBIDGE AND
BRUCE VICTOR NATHAN. I have empowered RICHARD JOHN BURBIDGE and
BRUCE VICTOR NATHAN to appoint successors, and references to them herein are to be understood to include those successors.
After my death or incapacity
I wish you to look to ANNE CHI
QUANG for advice in respect of my operating businesses and in respect of CHARLES LAP HYLAND, unless you believe that for good and proper reason the views of RICHARD JOHN BURBIDGE and BRUCE
VICTOR NATHAN should be obtained by you. In respect of matters generally upon which you wish advice or directions I wish you to obtain the views so far as practicable of the three Advisors and in the event that their advice is at variance as between themselves you are to exercise your own judgment.

Fifthly, it is my belief that ANNE CHI QUANG will provide proper management of my operating companies but should she marry or form a long-term relationship I do not want her to continue in the management of those companies, and in respect of the subsequent management of those companies, I request you to follow the advice of the other two Advisors.

Sixthly, CHARLES LAP HYLAND is presently at an age where he is in my view vulnerable to influences and ideas with which
I do not agree. Should he in the opinion of any two of the Advisors make or attempt to make substantial dispositions to persons or bodies of whom I would not have approved, I request you to accumulate those monies which would otherwise have been paid to CHARLES LAP HYLAND for such period or indefinitely-as to you appears appropriate.
 
Seventhly, it is my hope that
CHARLES LAP HYLAND will become increasingly active in the management of my operating companies and should this prove to be the case and should his competence in the opinion of the Advisors so warrant I want him to have the opportunity to take over the management of those companies from ANNE CHI QUANG.

Eighthly, in the long-term I request you to make provision for 
ANNE CHI QUANG and CHARLES LAP HYLAND during their respective lifetimes, and thereafter for the descendants of CHARLES LAP
HYLAND alone. Should CHARLES LAP HYLAND die without issue him surviving then at that time I wish a Foundation for the benefit of THE ARMIDALE SCHOOL, Armidale to be known as "THE C.K. HYLAND
FOUNDATION" to be set up, after the making of such provision for the widow of CHARLES LAP HYLAND (should such there be) as in the opinion of my Advisors is appropriate.

Ninthly, my Wishes record certain bequests: should any of the beneficiaries mentioned die leaving issue before payment of the bequest such issue is to take, and if more than one in equal shares such bequest.

Tenthly, it is my wish that the assets of the
Foundation should remain undistributed whilst the objects recorded herein are being served but should in the Advisors, opinion circumstances change in a manner such that the best interests of the beneficiaries require distribution or resettlement of the assets then I request that those assets should at that time be distributed or resettled.

MY WISHES ARE AS FOLLOWS:- 
BEQUESTS 
Upon my death I wish the following payments to be effected:-
ANNE CHI QUANG the sum of FIVE HUNDRED THOUSAND
DOLLARS ($500,000) in Australian currency.
ANNE CHI QUANG the amount of TWO HUNDRED THOUSAND DOLLARS $200,000) in
Australian currency to be held by her in trust for
CHARLES LAP HYLAND until he attains the age of thirty (30) years and she to apply the income therefrom for his benefit during this period. Should he not attain the age of thirty (30) years
ANNE-CHI
QUANG should refund the $200,000 to the Foundation.
THE ARMIDALE SCHOOL FOUNDATION the sum of FIFTY THOUSAND
DOLLARS ($50,000) in Australian currency.
AH JUN my housekeeper of many years, the sum of TEN THOUSAND
DOLLARS ($10,000) in Australian currency.
LIAM MOYA CHOU the daughter of my partner Chou Sui Kim (known as Benny Chou) of Munroe Trading Company Hong
Kong the sum of ONE THOUSAND DOLLARS ($1,000) in Australian currency.
SIMON FURBER my godson and the son of Timothy Furber, the sum of ONE THOUSAND DOLLARS ($1,000) in Australian currency.
JULIAN LUDOWICI of McCall and Hordern, Sydney, my godson and the son of the late John Ludowici the sum of ONE THOUSAND
DOLLARS ($1,000) in Australian currency.
BARBARA TOOVEY my goddaughter and the daughter of Desmond and Peggy Toovey of 35 Hinemoa Street, Panania, New South Wales the sum of ONE
THOUSAND DOLLARS ($1,000) in Australian currency.
 
After my death, at a time and in a manner deemed appropriate by my Advisors, there be paid:
To my son CHARLES CHRISTIAN LUDLOW-HYLAND the sum of ONE
HUNDRED AND FIFTY THOUSAND DOLLARS ($150,000) in Australian currency.
To my daughter ALEXANDRA LARISSA KAITHA HYLAND the sum of
ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY THOUSAND
DOLLARS ($150,000) in Australian currency.

Under no circumstances are my son and daughter, referred to in and (b) above, to be advised of my death by you until the above payments are made. They are now living or at some time have lived at Sag Harbour, New York 11963 in the United States of America.

ANNE CHI QUANG 
In the event that at the time of my death ANNE CHI QUANG is not then living in a comparable home, I wish you to obtain on her behalf a residence in Sydney at a cost of the order of THREE
HUNDRED DOLLARS ($300,000) as soon as practicable, such residence to be for her own use and to be owned by herself, ISMENE PTY
LIMITED or some other convenient entity, at her option.

I wish ANNE CHI QUANG to continue to have the management of all my trading companies of which you have control as shareholder (herein referred to as "Operating
Companies") being all my companies other than HYLAND DEVELOPMENTS LIMITED (in Bangkok) and ISMENE PTY LIMITED (in Sydney).
To this end I wish her to be appointed Managing Director of the Operating Companies at an appropriate salary.

I wish
ANNE CHI QUANG to be paid such part of the profits of the
Operating Companies as is appropriate to recognize her past and continuing contribution to the operations of those companies.

I wish you to pay from time to time an amount equivalent to available dividends from the Operating Companies and the available income derived directly or indirectly from HYLAND
DEVELOPMENTS
LIMITED and ISMENE PTY LIMITED to ANNE CHI QUANG for her own use and benefit.

I wish you to pay to ANNE CHI QUANG during the joint lifetimes of ANNE CHI QUANG and CHARLES LAP HYLAND an amount equal to one half of the balance of all income of the Foundations not otherwise the subject of my Wishes.
 
I wish you after consultation with the Advisors to utilize both capital and income in acting in accordance with my Wishes, and in particular as may be necessary to enable ANNE CHI QUANG to live in a lifestyle appropriate to her standing.

I wish ANNE CHI QUANG to be given sole control over the rights attaching to the shares owned by you in HYLAND DEVELOPMENTS
LIMITED and ISMENE PTY LIMITED. Should ANNE CHI QUANG so request and should
RICHARD JOHN BURBIDGE and BRUCE VICTOR NATHAN jointly agree I wish you to liquidate those two companies or either of them and to pay the proceeds of that liquidation to ANNE CHI
QUANG in cash or in specie for her own use and benefit.

CHARLES
LAP HYLAND 
I wish CHARLES LAP HYLAND provided that he in the opinion of the
Advisors demonstrates and continues to demonstrate an appropriate level of interest and competence in my businesses, to be invited to join the Board of Directors of each of the Operating
Companies.

I wish CHARLES LAP HYLAND if in the opinion of the Advisors he has demonstrated a willingness and capacity to assume and discharge the responsibilities of the Office to be invited to succeed ANNE CHI QUANG as Managing
Director of the Operating
Companies at such time as ANNE CHI QUANG ceases to act as
Managing Director of the Operating Companies.

I wish CHARLES LAP HYLAND to be paid such share of the profits of the Operating Companies as is appropriate to recompense him for his contribution to the operations of those companies.

I wish CHARLES LAP HYLAND to be paid one half of the balance of all income of the Foundation not otherwise the subject of my
Wishes during his lifetime and that of ANNE CHI QUANG and should
ANNE CHI QUANG predecease him thereafter the whole of such income.
 
GENERALLY 
I wish the affairs of the
Operating Companies to be undertaken by a Board of Directors comprised of ANNE CHI QUANG and such other persons as she may approve.

In the event that CHARLES LAP HYLAND dies without issue him surviving I wish the whole of the assets of the Foundation after the death of ANNE CHI QUANG to be applied in the establishment of a foundation for the benefit of THE ARMIDALE SCHOOL,
Armidale,
New South Wales, Australia, known as "TAS", after making such provision for the widow (if such there be) of CHARLES
LAP HYLAND as the Advisors may recommend.

I wish the Foundation to be established under the name "THE C.K.
HYLAND FOUNDATION" and the terms of the establishment are to be determined by RICHARD JOHN BURBIDGE and BRUCE VICTOR NATHAN with the Trustees of THE ARMIDALE SCHOOL within the broad purpose of provision of scholarships and bursaries to that
School to assist talented students to study thereat.

Should any legal action or claim affecting my estate or the
Foundation of any kind whatsoever be made by or on behalf of
LISA LUDLOW-HYLAND and/or CHARLES CHRISTIAN LUDLOW-HYLAND and
ALEXANDRA LARISSA KAITHA HYLAND beyond that provided for herein
I wish the Advisors to take all such action as may be appropriate in their opinion to resist such action or claim wherever it may be brought, and I wish you to provide all appropriate financial and other assistance as is necessary to enable them to undertake that course. Should any such legal action be taken by any other person, I wish you to take the opinion of my Advisors on the appropriate response thereto.

Whilst RICHARD JOHN BURBIDGE and BRUCE VICTOR
NATHAN are willing to act as advisors I wish them to receive remuneration appropriate to their professional standing for those duties which they undertake pursuant to this Memorandum of Wishes and in this regard I wish you during their lifetimes to act on the advice of ANNE CHI QUANG or in the event of her death or incapacity CHARLES LAP HYLAND."
On 15 March DFC by special by-law designated as beneficiaries of the
Foundation "those persons and that Foundation referred to in that section headed "Bequests" of a Memorandum of Wishes of Charles Keith Hyland 5 March ". This was ratified by Cura Treuinstitut on 27 March .
In 1983 and 1984 there was a considerable amount of correspondence between Hyland, Pannell Kerr Foster, Chartered Accountants , Nathan and
Minter Simpson about a re-organisation of affairs which would have involved the interposition of a new discretionary trustee company Ismene Holdings Pty
Ltd between Gartner Foundation and Australian Feather Mills. All approvals were obtained for this but the re-organisation did not proceed at least so far as the trust was concerned, although apparently the trading activities of
Australian Feather Mills were transferred to Ismene Holdings, the shares in that company being held on trust for the Gartner Foundation.
By this time Mr
Tracy and Mr Nathan had become partners in PKF, their previous firms having merged with PKF.
It is clear from the time it was set up that the Foundation acted on the instructions of Hyland. That was the position whether there was or was not in existence an agency contract as there was between SCF and Hyland but not between him and DFC. In fact Mr Defago suggested in a letter to Mr Tracy of 25
February 1987 that there should be an agency contract between Hyland and DFC "although there are proofs all round of the rights of Keith over the rights of the Foundation". It is not altogether clear when it came into existence but Mr
Burbidge, in a letter to Defago sent sometime in 1988, referred to the existence of a signed transfer in blank by DFC of founder's rights. In 1987
Hyland was involved in making some direct investments in the Gartner name. I think that all this indicates is that during his lifetime he was exercising substantial influence over the affairs of Gartner but to assume absolute control would at least have required transfer of founder's rights to him.
Not much further of the dealings in the estate needs to be set out to enable the questions before me to be determined. In accordance with the
Memorandum of Wishes payments were made after Hyland died to the persons listed, the payments to the two children plaintiffs being made in a way which made the source difficult to determine. Those children were not even told their of father's death until August 1989. It was suggested they were only told then because of a newspaper article about the deceased which appeared about that time. Mr Burbidge denied this and it is not really necessary to decide it. I think it unlikely the two events were not connected.
After Hyland died there was long continuing correspondence between
Defago,
Burbidge, Nathan and to some extent Mr Tracy, a lot of which appears to have arisen because Defago was expressing doubts about the validity of the deceased's will and Thai law and doubts about whether the Gartner Foundation would stand up against attacks made on it by the plaintiffs. On 12 March 1991, the founder's rights were transferred from DFC back to Cura Treuinstitut, the original founder. Why that was done is not apparent although it may have been due to some advice that despite the activities any such transfers were ineffective. But if that were so there was no need for this last transfer. In
November 1992 the shares in Ismene were transferred by the then holders, who of course were trustees, to Hartigan Nominees and Panker Nominees, they in effect being new trustees holding those shares on trust for Gartner.
It is now possible to turn to the questions for determination at this stage.
 
Question - The Sham Argument
The claim of the plaintiffs is that the whole of the Gartner scheme was a sham; in other words that it concealed the true state of affairs and was a pretended rather than a real transaction. See for example, Estate of William
Vicars <case>; [(1944) 45 SR NSW 85] There are many other cases but I do not think it necessary to list them here. The true state of affairs claimed was that Hyland remained owner of the assets held in the name of Gartner.
I have come to the clear conclusion that the Gartner Foundation was not and is not a sham. The most important time for determining this question is the time of constitution of the Foundation. It is absolutely clear from correspondence at the time that Hyland was prepare to do whatever was necessary to ensure that his wife could not benefit from his estate either during his life or after his death. He did go to somewhat extraordinary efforts to achieve the desired result, however that does not reveal a sham transaction but rather the opposite. His intention was to divest himself of his assets and he did so. A transaction which is, to some extent a round robin transaction, is not of itself a sham transaction; it can just as easily be real. Apart from the obvious fact that the deceased achieved what he set out to achieve, his loan account on the evidence of the accountants was properly handled; drawings by or for him in Australia were properly charged by accounting procedures against the
Gartner loan account. The original assets of
Hyland are now held by the Ismene companies. It is not claimed those companies do not hold the assets as beneficial owners. It is the shares in those companies which are held on trust for the Foundation so that it would have to be that trust which is attacked as a sham. But as I have said, the somewhat complicated transaction seems to have put in place the result intended, namely that Mrs Ludlow-Hyland would not be able to claim against Hyland during his life or on his death, as there would be no assets against which to claim. It is not to the point that Hyland may have been able to exercise control over those assets during his life assuming that to be the position. A Governing
Director of a company may have control over the affairs of a company and may be able to direct all dividends to shares he owns. But that does not mean he owns the company or its assets.
In the same way a person having a general power of appointment over a trust fund does not own the assets of the fund.
Mr Ryan, counsel for the plaintiffs, pressed upon me many indications in the six volumes of documentary evidence which he argued indicated a sham transaction. For the most part all that those documents do is to show that the holder of the founder's shares, and the Foundation, were prepared to act and did act in accordance with the wishes of Hyland; and while there was an agency agreement in force Hyland had additional powers as SCF bound itself to act as his agent in holding the Founder's rights. But the later correspondence as to the requirement of an agency agreement and the efficacy of the signed transfer of founder's rights indicates a desire to control rather than a claim for ownership, and the unwillingness of Mr Defago to act in accordance with the
Memorandum of Wishes after the death of Hyland is a further indication that he did not understand or think the deceased owned the Foundation assets. Question should be answered "No". On that basis no answer is required to Question 10.
It was agreed by all parties that if Question 11 fell to be answered, which it now does, then it should be answered "No".
 
Evidence of Foreign Law
Before turning to the other more complicated arguments about the [Family
Provision Act 1982](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/), it is necessary to deal with a matter of foreign law, because if the executor and the 4th and 5th defendants are correct it determines the matter. The question is whether or not any transfer of
Founder's rights was valid or whether those rights remained always with
Cura
Treuinstitut, the original Founder. As I have said, Article 9 gives the
Founder the right to transfer the rights granted to him under the Articles to any third party. It is obvious enough that the parties have acted under this in transferring those rights from Cura Treuinstitut to SCF to DFC and ultimately back to Cura Treuinstitut. And they have acted on the basis that such article was valid in giving to Hyland the signed transfer in blank of those rights by DFC or more precisely making a copy of that transfer available, the original it appears being held by Mr Defago.
There is in evidence a report of Dr Frommelt, a lawyer of Vaduz in
Liechtenstein. Objection was taken to its being admitted into evidence, on the basis of late notification. I allowed it in, subject to satisfactory arrangements being made for cross examination, if that were required, and later I was informed that the plaintiffs did not object to it and did not seek to cross examine Dr Frommelt. The position of the 11th defendant was somewhat different but no application for an adjournment was made and there was no application for cross examination so I allowed the document in subject to weight and relevance. I considered that the evidence was admissible under
Baron de Bode's Case <case>; [(1845) 8 QB 208] although whether or not it should be given weight is another matter. In the long run I have decided that I should not find that the evidence of Dr
Frommelt establishes the Founder's rights cannot be assigned. He does not set out the relevant statutory provisions on which his opinion is based nor enough of four judgments relied upon to enable me to be satisfied that the decisions determine that there is no right of transfer. In fact the final judgment of , if correctly summarised, would appear to hold that at least some rights of a Founder can be included in the governing statute which for these purposes is the articles. It is obvious that all interested parties proceeded upon the common assumption that Founder's rights could be transferred and conducted themselves accordingly.
In ordinary circumstances that would give rise to conventional estoppel at least between Hyland and his privies in estate and the
Foundation, unless there were no basis in law for the assumed situation.
It is not contended that the Foundation ever suggested that the transfers were ineffective; it has not appeared and Panker and Hartigan hold their interests on trust for Gartner. That is another reason I think for not being prepared to accept Dr Frommelt's evidence as sufficient to determine the question.
A further problem remains because Dr Frommelt said that it was possible for Cura Treuinstitut to ratify the special by-law as it purported to do. But if it could do so it would presumably only be because DFC was purporting to act as its agent but outside the scope of its authority; here it was never suggested that DFC was not purporting to act for itself in exercise of the
Founder's rights so that ratification would not be applicable. The evidence of
Dr Frommelt alone in my view is not strong enough to enable me to hold that the powers given under article 9 are not valid. I should add that I have had concerns when considering this matter about the propriety of Mr Burbidge and the 5th and 6th defendants relying upon the evidence of Dr Frommelt when the ability to transfer Founder's rights was an integral part of the scheme they seek to uphold. However no argument was addressed to this and my concern has not affected my conclusion.
 
Question 12 - Prescribed Transactions [Sections 22(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s22.html) and 22.4(a) of the [Family Provision Act 1982](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/) (the Act) are as follows: "22.(1) A person shall be deemed to enter into a prescribed transaction if: on or after the appointed day he does, directly or indirectly, or omits to do, any act, as a result of which: property becomes held by another person (whether or not as trustee); or property becomes subject to a trust, whether or not the property becomes in either case so held immediately; and full valuable consideration in money or money's worth for the first mentioned person's doing, or omitting to do, that act is not given".
 "22.4(a) In particular and without limiting the generality of subsection (1), a person shall, for the purposes of subsection (a), be deemed to do, or omit to do, an act, as a result of which property becomes held by another person or subject to a trust if: he is entitled, on or after the appointed day, to exercise a power to appoint, or dispose of, property which is not in his estate but the power is not exercised before he ceases (by reason of death or the occurrence of any other event) to be so entitled and, as a result of the omission to exercise the power and of his death or the occurrence of the other event: the property becomes held by another person (whether or not as trustee) or subject to a trust (whether or not the property becomes held in either case so held immediately); or another person becomes (whether or not immediately) or, if he was previously entitled, continues to be, entitled to exercise the power".
The plaintiffs and the 11th defendant advanced in the long run four bases for their claim that
Hyland entered into a prescribed transaction. I will deal with these in turn.
 
That in executing the Memorandum off Wishes (and in having the Founder incorporate this into a by-law) and in leaving this unrevoked, the deceased undertook an act as a result off which Property became held by another
There is no doubt that as a result of the execution of the Memorandum of
Wishes by the deceased, the execution of the special by-law and the decision of Cura Treuinstitut or Gartner to make distributions in accordance with the
Memorandum of Wishes or the ratified special by-law, property of the
Foundation became held by Alexandra Larissa Ludlow-Hyland and Charles
Christian Ludlow-Hyland, by Anne Chi Quang and by the Armidale School without their providing full consideration for it. At least the action of the deceased in signing the Memorandum of Wishes was a causal link in this chain. Those interested argued that this is sufficient for the purposes of [s22(1)(a)(i).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s22.html)
The Founder was not compelled to act in accordance with the Memorandum of
Wishes, it was its decision whether or not to do so. The passing and non-revocation of the special by-law were actions or omissions of the Founder, not Hyland. Therefore he was only responsible for one step in the causal chain. However one action out of three necessary actions to bring about a result cannot in itself bring about a particular effect or result and this argument of the plaintiff must, I think, be put aside.
 
That Hyland, by the acts or omissions of (a) execution of the Memorandum of Wishes, (b) causing the making of the by-law of 15 March 1988 and the failure to cause its revocation and (c) failing to direct he Foundation to appoint property to persons other than the foundation, caused property to become held by another person on his death or acted so as to bring about that result. [S22(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s22.html) [36](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s36.html). The property was said to be the difference in the assets held by the
Foundation during the life of Hyland and those assets after his death being held freed from his control. "Another person" was the Foundation. Property is defined in the Act as including "any right with respect to property, and any valuable benefit" [(s 6(1)).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s6.html) Thus it is said that during the lifetime of Hyland the Foundation held its property subject to the right of control by Hyland whereas after his death it was freed from that control. I must admit that I have had the greatest difficulty in understanding this argument.
While the
Foundation holds the assets its articles provide for the Foundation to have beneficiaries. In conventional terms the Foundation holds the assets upon trust for such of the beneficiaries designated in an appropriate special by-law, in such shares as the Founder determines. It is difficult to see how it obtains for itself any valuable benefit as a result of some form of control being extinguished and some other form being substituted. The assets held by the Foundation remained the same after death and there is nothing to show their value increased as a result of Hyland's death. If anything one might assume that without his control the assets might decrease in value. It is not to the point to say that there might have been no relevant by-law because as things happened there was.
 
The ground based on [s22](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s22.html) (4) (a) of the Act
In so far as the argument was based on the property being the assets minus Hyland control it fails for the reasons I have given. I pass that to consider its wider application.
For this provision to operate two conditions must be satisfied. First,
Hyland must have been entitled to appoint or dispose of property not in his estate and second, the property (meaning that property) must have become held by another person by reason of the non appointment and of his death. As to the first, Hyland had no power to appoint or dispose of property. At best what he had was a power to obtain that entitlement by taking to himself the
Founder's rights, and then executing a special by-law designating beneficiaries, after which he would have been able to direct a distribution to particular beneficiaries. There is I think a clear distinction between entitlement and the ability to become entitled; one is present and one is potential. See W.P.
Keighery Pty Ltd versus Federal Commissioner of Taxation <case>; [(1957) 100 CLR 66] on the evidence Hyland never had in his possession the signed transfer in blank of
Founder's rights; it was held by Defago. But on the assumption that he could have obtained it - and Defago, said he could - to make it of any value he needed to complete it in his favour or in favour of an agent of his; to have that transfer accepted by the Foundation; and to execute a special by-law before any entitlement to appoint property arose. He was not so entitled although I accept he could have become entitled. De facto control does not equate to entitlement which has a legal connotation. That view is supported by cases such as Re Sutton Coldfield Grammar
School [(1881) 7 App Cas 91] and is not I think contrary to what was said by Hodgson J in NCSC versus Brierley
Investments Ltd [(1988) 14 NSWLR 273] at 287. Further, assuming that he did have the entitlement, the property, (namely the Foundation assets held by that
Foundation), did not become held by another person by reason of his death, it remained subject to the same disposition rights of the founder as before and remained held by Gartner. It is not a case of a gift over in default of appointment. One could consider this matter in terms of a discretionary trust where the trustee has power to amend the list of beneficiaries, and where the appointor has the power to remove a trustee and appoint another trustee. I do not think that it could be said that in such circumstances the omissions of failing to remove the existing trustee; (b) failing to appoint the appointor himself or his agent as trustee; (c) failing to alter the list of possible beneficiaries and (d) then failing to provide that the assets in the trust go a particular way could amount to a prescribed transaction. No property rights move as a result of the death, but if removal of control was a valuable benefit it arose as a result of death not as a result of any other act or omission and death.
 
The omission of Hyland to exercise powers to take control and distribute
Foundation assets prior to his death was a prescribed transaction as it resulted in assets becoming held by another person
This argument would overcome the problem that otherwise would arise from the fact that death itself would not activate [s22(1)(a)(i).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s22.html) This argument is of course entirely different from the freedom from control argument. I accept that the proper construction of the relevant clause is that "another person" means a person other than the deceased. However the answer to this argument is that property did not become held, it remained held by Gartner. "Becomes" does not mean "continues"; Archer versus Kelly 1 Dr and Sm 300 at 304; [62 ER 394] at 396.
It follows from this that I consider Question 12 should be answered "No".
 
Question 13(a) - Designation of Gartner assets as notional estate
I proceed to this question on the basis that I am incorrect in my findings up to date and there is a prescribed transaction.
Assuming that there is a required act or omission I consider the requirements of [s26(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s26.html) are met. On the basis Hyland could have appointed to himself prior to his death or directed distribution to himself his estate must have been disadvantaged by this omission.
Assuming the deceased was domiciled in New South Wales, the disponee, apart from the holders of distributed assets from the Foundation, is under s2l, the Foundation. On that basis it would be possible to designate as notional estate all of the assets of the Foundation. it is not necessary to decide whether the beneficiaries named in the special by-law are objects of a trust; it would be difficult to say they were as the by-law could be altered at any time.
If the deceased were not domiciled in New South Wales then under [s23](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s23.html) it would seem possible to make an order against property in this State held on trust for the Foundation. That property is probably limited to the shares in the Ismene companies and is certainly not the assets of those companies.
However as the matter proceeded on the basis that I would answer the question assuming New South Wales domicile I will take it no further. It may well be that considerations under [s27](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s27.html) are sufficient to overcome any problem. It seems strange that, for instance, an otherwise eligible person domiciled in the
United
Kingdom could make a claim for a designating order in respect of property in this State over which a deceased person domiciled in the United
Kingdom had a general power of appointment (which he did not exercise) pursuant to the terms of a will of a person who died domiciled in the United
Kingdom.
 
Question 13(b) - designation of other assets
Any property of the persons to whom distributions have been made from the
Foundation since the death of Hyland could be designated if the distributions to them resulted from a prescribed transaction. As I understand it there is no argument about this although obviously no designating order would be made which would have the result of making available more property than had been distributed to those persons. The property however need not be the property which has been distributed. Wentworth versus Wentworth, (Bryson J, unreported, 14
June 1991).
 
Notional estate - general .
In coming to my conclusions on the notional estate questions I have borne in mind the clear instruction of the Court of Appeal in
Wentworth versus Wentworth, (unreported, 3 March 1992) and in Schaeffer versus Schaeffer, (unreported, Court of
Appeal, 2 December 1994) that the notional estate provisions are beneficial provisions of legislation which should be given the benefit of a liberal construction.
But keeping that instruction and obvious intention well in mind the acts or omissions which result in a prescribed transaction must be those described by [s22](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s22.html) of the Act. The legislators in their many efforts to cover the same sort of field by s102(2) of the [Stamp Duties Act 1920](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/), with its many amendments, failed to achieve complete success and it could never have been expected the framers of the notional estate provisions in the [Family Provision
Act, 1982](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/) would achieve complete success, even if it were desirable or contemplated that they should. It is important to remember that consideration was given for the assets transferred and that even taken as a whole so far as
Australian assets were concerned consideration of $150 for total value assets of $371 383 was received. The gift by way of release in 1972 was genuine.
Finally I should say the Wentworth decision held that as a result of the deceased not exercising during his lifetime certain rights he had in respect of his shareholding in a company, which rights came to an end on death resulting in an increase in the value of shares held by his son, that increase in value was a valuable benefit and thus property which became held as a result of such failure. When Hyland died no property or valuable right was conferred on anybody although Hyland in dying lost the opportunity to put himself in a position to confer property on another.
I answer the questions for separate determination as follows:- 
No.
Does not arise.
No.
No.
Does not arise.

But on the assumption there was a prescribed transaction and the deceased was domiciled in New South Wales I would answer the subquestions as follows: (a) all of the assets of the Gartner Foundation.
(b) property of disponees of assets of the Gartner Foundation where dispositions took place after the death of the deceased.

I propose to direct that these answers be recorded.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/90.html  
