

Regina versus Lethlean Matter No 60729/95 [1997] NSWSC 668 (19 December 1997) 
Regina versus Neil Joseph Lethlean /95 60729/95 December 1997 
Hunt CJ at CL, Smart J, McInerney J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Crown appeal against Sentence. Appeal against Conviction and Application for Extension of Time. 
FILE NO/S: 60685/95, 60729/95 
DELIVERED: Friday, 19 December 1997 
HEARING DATE: Monday, 23 September 1996 
PARTIES: REGINA v. Neil Joseph LETHLEAN 
JUDGMENT OF: Hunt CJ at CL; Smart J; McInerney J 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant/Respondent: S R Norrish QC 
Crown: RD Ellis 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant/Respondent: TA Murphy 
Crown: SE O'Connor 
CATCHWORDS: SECTION 178BB CRIMES ACT, OBTAINING BENEFIT BY FALSE PUBLICATION, ABUSE OF SENIOR POSITION, DETERRENCE OF "RORTING". 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Crown appeal allowed. Extension of Time for Conviction. 
Appeal Refused.

NO. OF PAGES: 27 
CCA 60729/95 
REGINA versus Neil Joseph LETHLEAN 
HEADNOTE 
L was convicted under s178BB of the Crimes Act 1981 of obtaining a financial advantage by publishing a false statement. L was the General Manger/
Town Clerk of Tamworth, employed on a five year contract, expiring in November
L claimed that about November 1992 he spoke to the Mayor who said that he could not give any guarantee as to his re-appointment. L applied for the position of Chief Executive Officer with Hervey Bay City Council in late
January 1993. L claimed that a further discussion with the Mayor in February also made him very worried about his future. L was interviewed at Hervey
Bay. A couple of days later, Tamworth Council adopted a memorandum from its
Director of Corporate Services, signed by L, the effect of which was to continue L in his position after the 1993 amendments to the [Local Government
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/lga182/) came into force. L discussed with a Director of the State Authorities Superannuation
Board the benefits payable upon retrenchment or resignation. After further interviews at Hervey Bay, L was offered the position of CEO with Hervey Bay
City Council and accepted. L informed the Mayor of Tamworth who asked if L could be dissuaded. L said "No". L gave formal written notice of withdrawal from the Council which agreed to his request to be released from his contract as from 1 April 1993. L knew a new General Manager was to be appointed. On 31
March 1993 L sent a completed and executed SASS9 Form headed "Notification of
Exit- Retrenchment" to the Superannuation Board indicating that he had been retrenched from his position on the ground that his employment was not necessary and his position was not to be refilled. The benefits payable to L on resignation would have been $150,000 less than the benefits payable on retrenchment. L was not retrenched.

Upon conviction, L was directed to enter into a recognisance in the sum of $1000 and to be of good behaviour for a period of 3 years. The Crown appealed against the sentence on the ground that it was manifestly inadequate. L appealed against his conviction.

HELD: 
Appeal against conviction: 
There was no merit in the appeal against conviction. There was ample evidence to support the trial judge's findings, both as to the primary facts and the ultimate issues. This was a case where the applicant applied for another position, obtained it, sought to be released from his service agreement and the Council agreed to his request. The applicant knew that he was not being retrenched and that his statement to that effect was false.

Crown appeal against sentence: 
Despite the fact that L's cash reserves have been spent on litigation costs, his employment was terminated and he is unlikely to obtain future employment with local government, and that L had been of previous good character, the sentence was manifestly inadequate. L's own dishonesty and greed caused his misfortunes. This was a deliberate, premeditated and carefully planned act of dishonesty by which L abused his very senior position at Tamworth City Council to obtain a benefit to which he clearly knew that he was not entitled. The need for public deterrence to those in similar positions to "rort" the system is great. A deferred sentence would not have that deterrent effect. The seriousness of the crime requires the Crown appeal to be upheld and that L be given a custodial sentence.

ORDERS:
The application for an extension of time by the applicant to appeal against his conviction out of time is refused, on the ground that the appeal against conviction has no prospect of success.
The appeal by the Crown against sentence is allowed.
Pursuant to <case> of the Criminal Appeal Act the issues identified by s 5(1)(b) of the Periodic Detention of Prisoners Act are remitted to Smart J as a single judge of the Supreme Court to determine. In the event of Smart J being satisfied as to such issues, he is to be at liberty to make orders implementing a sentence of two years periodic detention. In the event of any difficulty arising, or Smart J not being so satisfied, he is to return the matter to this Court.
This matter is directed to be listed before Smart J on Wednesday 21
January 1998 at 10.00 am or as he may otherwise direct.

CCA 60729/95 
REGINA versus Neil Joseph LETHLEAN 
JUDGMENT 
THE COURT: After a lengthy trial before a judge alone the applicant (Neil Joseph Lethlean) was convicted of between 23 March and 7 April 1993, with intent to obtain for himself a financial advantage, namely a retrenchment benefit, publishing a statement, namely, that he had been retrenched by his employer, Tamworth City Council, on the ground that his employment was not necessary and his position was not to be refilled, which he knew to be false in a material particular. The applicant was sentenced on 17 October 1995, being directed to enter into a recognisance himself in the sum of $1000 to be of good behaviour for a period of three years and to appear and receive sentence in respect of any breach of the recognisance committed in that period. 
The Crown appealed against the sentence contending that it was inadequate having given prior notice that it was considering doing so. Ten days after the
Crown appeal was lodged, and out of time, the applicant sought an extension of time within which to appeal against his conviction.

At the trial there was no dispute that under cover of a letter dated 31 March the applicant forwarded to the State Authorities Superannuation Board a "completed SASS9 Form which has been duly executed by the council and undersigned." That form is headed "Notification of Exit - Retrenchment". That form contained the statement that the applicant was retrenched by the employer on 1 April 1993 on the ground that the employment of the member (the applicant) was not necessary and his position was not to be refilled. That declaration was under the signature of Mr SM Bartlett, the Council's authorised officer.

At the trial there was no issue that the applicant published this statement to the Superannuation Board nor that a retrenchment benefit was a financial benefit. The statement had obviously been published by the applicant with intent to obtain a financial benefit. The contested issues which the Crown had to prove beyond reasonable doubt were: (i) the applicant was not retrenched; and the applicant was not entitled to be paid a retrenchment benefit; and the applicant knew that he was not entitled to be paid that benefit.

It was the contention of the Crown that the applicant was only entitled to the benefit payable on resignation, discharge or dismissal. That was about $150,000 less than the benefit payable on retrenchment which was about $254,527. From at least February 1993 onwards the applicant was anxious to obtain the higher benefit.

The important facts lie within a relatively short compass. There was much other material of lesser weight, some of which appeared to be peripheral.

The applicant became the Town Clerk of Tamworth City Council in November 1987.
On 5 November 1990 he became the Council's General Manager/Town Clerk. He and the council entered into an Executive Service Agreement on that day whereby the council agreed to employ him and he agreed to serve the council in the position of and with the title, "General Manager" for five years. The employment was agreed to be subject to the provisions of the Local Government
Act 1919 , the Local Government Code of Conduct for employees and any other relevant legislation. He was to be provided with a motor vehicle for use by himself and his family. All maintenance and operational costs were to be met by the council. The council was also to make superannuation payments.

Provision was made for the General Manager to advise the Council at least 6 months before 5 November 1995 whether he was seeking re-appointment. The council had to advise at least 5 months before 5 November 1995 whether re- appointment to the position and renewal of the Executive Service Agreement was offered. As at November 1990 the total amount of the remuneration package was $100,000 per year. There was provision for the council to terminate the agreement for cause shown. There was no provision for termination by the applicant. Cl.18.1 provided that the agreement should not be changed or modified in any was subsequent to its execution except in writing signed by the council and the General Manager.

In October 1992 the applicant attended a conference which dealt amongst other things, with the proposed amendments to the Local Government Act relating to the appointment of staff and superannuation. The applicant said that he spoke to the Mayor about his future in November 1992. The Mayor could give him no guarantees as he was just one of twelve councillors.

In about January 1993 the applicant spoke with the Mayor of Hervey Bay City
Council about the vacancy in the position of Chief Executive Officer with that
Council. On 30 January 1993 the applicant submitted a detailed and attractive application for the position. He forecast his availability as six weeks from confirmation of his appointment. He anticipated that the Tamworth City Council would not stand in his way.

According to the applicant, he had a meeting with the Mayor of Tamworth City
Council on 17 February 1993 which made him very worried about his future with
Tamworth Council. He claimed that he believed that the Mayor was expecting to advertise the position of general manager.

The applicant attended his first interview with representatives of the Hervey
Bay City Council on 20/21 February 1993.

Two days later there was a firm indication of the Council's approach to its senior staff. The judge said: "At a council meeting of 23 February 1993 the council had before it a document prepared by the director of corporate services and signed by the accused and this contained a recommendation that upon commencement of the new Local
Government Act the general manager/town clerk be authorised to submit an application to the Minister for Local Government seeking confirmation of compliance with the provisions of the new Act in regard to the appointment and the employment of a general manager and the senior staff positions of department officers. This recommendation was also referred to by Councillor
Taylor at page 206 of the transcript. The accused was present at this meeting of 23 February. If the accused was concerned about his position as he said he was it is difficult to accept that he was unaware of what happened at that meeting. All the evidence is that the Tamworth Council was not contemplating getting rid of the accused. It was conceded by the accused that is was his initiative to approach the council to get them to release him from his contract. However the accused claimed that he jumped before he was pushed. To my mind the evidence clearly establishes that the accused ('s) employment was not compulsory (sic) terminated by the Tamworth Council." 
The evidence justifies those findings. On 25 February 1993 the applicant attended an appointment which he had made with Mr Grant, a Director, State
Authorities Superannuation Board. Mr Grant stated that the applicant enquired as to his benefits if he resigned from the council. Mr Grant explained that there was a difference depending on whether he took the benefits now or preserved them until he attained 58. The latter was the better course. Mr
Grant gave the applicant approximate calculations in the form of a computer printout later in the meeting. The applicant told Mr Grant that he was having negotiations with the council about retrenchment and enquired as to the benefits payable on retrenchment. Mr Grant explained that this was an even better benefit and, at the applicant's request provided him with an approximate calculation of the retrenchment benefits. He said that he did not ask Mr Grant to provide him with figures of the payout he would receive if he resigned and that the provision of that document resulted from a mistake by Mr
Grant which he admitted. The applicant said that Mr Grant had told him that he was entitled to superannuation on a retrenchment benefit basis. This was on the facts as to what was occurring related by the applicant. The judge did not accept this evidence of the applicant. He wanted a guarantee of future employment when his contract expired. His future employment came up for review at a later date. Declining to give a guarantee as to future employment after the expiration of his service agreement in 1995 does not amount to retrenchment nor does it following the intended and actual provisions of the amendments to the Local Government Act 1919 .

On 7 March 1993 the applicant was offered the position of Chief Executive
Officer with the Hervey Bay City Council. The following day the applicant spoke to the Mayor of Tamworth and told him that he would be leaving as he had accepted a job as General Manager at Hervey Bay, Queensland. The Mayor expressed his disappointment, said it was the last thing he needed, and enquired whether it was a final decision and whether the applicant could be dissuaded. The applicant said that he had made up his mind.

The Mayor and his brother ran a substantial business in North West New South
Wales employing 85 people. He was not inclined to chase the applicant but he did give him the opportunity to say what he wanted.

About 11 March 1993 the applicant handed the Mayor two letters. The first letter enclosed what the applicant termed his "formal notice of withdrawal from the Executive Service Agreement." The applicant proceeded to make recommendations as to the recruitment of a General Manager and his salary package. He explained that he wished his formal withdrawal to take effect as from 1 April 1993 for the purposes only of superannuation but that he proposed to remain with council on a contract basis until outstanding matters were completed. He recommended that a Mayoral Minute be issued that day, which he offered to draft on the Mayor's behalf and that a special meeting of Council be convened for the following day (12 March 1993).

In his other letter of 11 March 1993 the applicant wrote, amongst other things,: "Further to our brief discussions on Monday 8th March, 1993, regarding my future engagement by Council as its General Manager/Town Clerk, I now formally advise that I seek Council concurrence to my withdrawal from the Executive
Service Agreement under which I am engaged. In extending this notice I sincerely acknowledge the overwhelming support of yourself, Council and all of
Council staff to the position of General Manager/Town Clerk.

My decision at this time has been taken strictly for personal reasons and after much deliberation and conscious thought.

Because of the fact that the superannuation year commences 1st April, 1993, I seek Council's acceptance of my formal notice to take effect from the 1st
April, 1993. I propose, however, that to ensure all responsibilities and outstanding work associated with the position of General Manager/Town Clerk is completed or at least managed prior to my departure together with the recruitment of a General Manager that I remain with Council on a contract basis (under the general terms of the existing Executive Service Agreement) until Friday 23rd April, 1993, or sooner should all outstanding matters be resolved prior to that date.

I wish to place on record my sincere acknowledgement of your support and direction to myself as General Manager/Town Clerk in the overall performance of my duties but more importantly to the leadership that you have granted the
Council and City during your term as Mayor.

I fully understand your disappointment in my decision, however, I firmly believe that it is opportune for the Council at this time to capitalise on the achievements that it has made in corporatisation of its functions and to take the opportunities of the new Local Government Act and Award Restructuring in the appointment of a new General Manager." 
The Mayor accepted the applicant's offer to draft a Mayoral minute and the applicant did so. The minute set out the applicant's letter of 11 March 1993, parts of which we have earlier quoted, summarised his employment history with the council and recommended that the services of a qualified management consultancy be retained to assist with the appointment of a new General
Manager, the appointment of a special committee to oversee the recruitment process, that the applicant manage the recruitment process and that the title for the Chief Administration Officer of the Council be that of General Manager to ensure that the best applicant was recruited. While not essential,
Ordinance 4 qualifications would be advantageous and even desired by the council. This recommendation was said to comply with the draft Local
Government Bill 1992. The minute dealt with some other matters. Its final recommendations included: "RECOMMENDATION: 
That in relation to the General Manager/Town Clerk Mr. N. J. Lethlean's request for Council authorisation to his withdrawal from the Executive Service
Agreement to the position and the appointment of a General Manager, Council:- 
Authorise the cancellation of the Executive Service Agreement between
Council and the General Manager/Town Clerk effective as of 1st April, 1993, and further that Council engage Mr. N. J. Lethlean on a contract basis to complete any outstanding work associated with the position and in relation to the recruitment of a General Manager.

Delegate to the Director of Corporate Services, Mr. Stephen Bartlett, the delegations of the General Manager/Town Clerk as from the 2nd April, 1993, until further determined by Council.

Appoint a Recruitment Committee comprising the Mayor, Ald. David P.
John, Deputy Mayor, Ald. Tom Hannah and the Chairman, Works &
Environmental Services Committee Ald. James Treloar, such Committee to have delegation for the engagement of professional consultant and over all management for the recruitment of a new General Manager, excluding the final interview and appointment which will be undertaken by the full Council.

Provide a Reference under Seal covering the employment period that Mr. N.
J. Lethlean had with the Council.

The resolution passed by council was in those terms. There was considerable conflict whether the recommendations in the Mayoral Minute included 5 paragraphs with the paragraphs (iii) & (iv) above being numbered (iv) & (v) and paragraph (iii) reading: "(iii) Recruit a General Manager under the guidelines of draft legislation encompassing the new Local Government Act, specifically Section 317/319 and that the position of Town Clerk be made redundant." 
There was a strong body of evidence that this clause was in the Mayoral Minute and was deleted when the matter was considered by the council in committee.
The applicant denied that this clause was in the Mayoral Minute which he had drafted. In evaluating this point the judge also relied on the applicant having dictated a letter (obtained from the hard disc of a secretary's computer) bearing date 24 March 1993 and addressed to Mr Vic Grant. The letter does not appear to have been sent. It includes: "Having regard to recent
Council decisions I now enclose executed form SASS9. The council has resolved that the position of Town Clerk will become redundant on and from 1 April 1993 and superseded by a General Manager under the specific legislative provisions of the new Local Government Act." The judge stated, "The mere fact that the contents of this document were dictated to Mrs Croxon strongly suggests the accused was lying when he claimed that there was no mention of the Town
Clerk's position being made redundant either at the council meeting or in the mayoral minute." 
In early March 1993 the applicant enquired of Mr Fitzgerald how the
Superannuation Board was notified of his leaving the Council. Mr Fitzgerald said that a SASS 8 form headed resignation, discharge or dismissal was sent to the Board. The applicant asked for and was given his salary for superannuation purposes, namely, $90,763. The applicant contested this version of the conversation.

About 18 March 1993 the applicant asked Mr Lyon, the executive assistant to the General Manager/Town Clerk for a copy of the State Superannuation Act  (sic). Mr Lyon obtained one and gave it to the applicant. He and the applicant looked at the definition of retrenchment in the Act. Mr Lyon remarked to the applicant "it would appear that there was no avenue for you to claim redundancy as your resignation didn't meet the requirements of the definition of retrenchment." Mr Lyon said that the applicant did not respond.
The applicant disputed this conversation.

Shortly before 19 March 1993 the applicant telephoned Mr Grant, advised that he had been successful in negotiating his retrenchment with the Council and arranged to see Mr Grant to obtain updated figures, as a matter of some urgency. The meeting took place early on 19 March 1993 with the applicant confirming that the Council had agreed to his retrenchment. The applicant advised Mr Grant of his salary and procured a further computer print out showing the applicant's retrenchment benefit. There is no need to recount all the conversation.

The applicant contended that he endeavoured to speak with Mr Grant during the week of 22-26 March 1993 but without success. Eventually, early on 26 March the applicant sent a fax to Mr Grant of the State Authorities
Superannuation Fund. It referred to their conversations of 25 February and 19
March 1993 and the applicant's unsuccessful endeavours to speak to Mr Grant.
It set out the council's resolution of 12 March 1993, stated that the Council has now proceeded to recruit a new general manager and sought Mr Grant's professional advice as to the applicant's superannuation entitlements. The applicant gave his private box at Tamworth Post Office as his postal address and a special fax number (that is, not the Council's general fax number).

Mr Grant ascertained that he was not in his office on 22, 23 & 24 March but that he was there on 25 and 26 March 1993. He did not believe that he had seen the fax of 26 March 1993 prior to being shown it in Court. Mr Grant stated that on 26 March 1993, he spoke on the telephone with the applicant who said that he had reached agreement with the council as to his retrenchment and asked Mr Grant to send him the form, to be filled in by an employee who is to be retrenched, to a mail box number. Mr Grant stated that he did so immediately and attached a note on his own personal letterhead enclosing the form and advising that the form should be completed and sent to the Manager,
State Superannuation Investment and Management Corporation. The applicant denied that there had been any telephone conversation and that he had requested Mr Grant to send the retrenchment form. The applicant said that it just arrived with Mr Grant's letter.

The form is on one sheet of paper, printed on both sides. The front sheet is divided into Part 1 to be completed by the employer and Part 2 to be completed by the member. The back of the sheet contains a form of statutory declaration for completion by the authorised officer of the employer and extensive notes for employers and members (employees). The former group of notes sets out the statutory definition of retrenchment.

Part 1 of the form for completion by the employer contained the name of the employer, the name and date of birth of the employee, the date of exit as 1
April 1993 and the full time salary (annual) at exit as $99,398, the name of the employer's authorised officer, his signature and the date. There are these curious features. When referring to the Council of The City of Tamworth
Council is misspelt "Conncil" and there was an unwanted full stop after these words. This part of the form appears to have been typed in an amateurish way.
In the statutory declaration, Mr Bartlett's middle name of Matthew is spelt `Mathew'.

The statement in the Statutory Declaration that the applicant was retrenched on the ground that the employment of the member was not necessary and his position was not to be refilled was obviously incorrect.

According to the applicant the date of 24/03/93 in Part 1 and the date of twenty fourth March 1993 in the Statutory Declaration are incorrect.
Curiously, this was the date of the letter earlier mentioned. The applicant was not in Tamworth on 24 March 1993.

Part 2 of the document was in the handwriting of the applicant and contained formal details which are presently unimportant.

Mr Bartlett said that on the date on which he signed the document (which because of the date inserted on the document he thought was 24 March 1993) he was asked by the applicant to sign superannuation forms. Mr Bartlett said that when he signed the form, it was completed. He did not prepare Part 1 or the
Statutory Declaration. He did not read the document before signing it.
However, he was aware that he was signing a statutory declaration and mentioned to the applicant that his signature needed to be witnessed by a
Justice of the Peace. The applicant said that he would have Colleen witness it. Mr Bartlett had no recollection of signing a further form which the judge described as a photostat. The "photostat" does not contain some of the formal details in the copy received (see the answers in section A relating to the address/phone number to be used for contact).

Ms C Riboldi stated that the applicant asked her to sign a superannuation document which Stephen Bartlett had signed, stating that he was aware that the applicant was bringing it down to be "J P'd". She knew and saw Bartlett's signature and signed the document as a 
J P as requested.

The applicant said that he completed the document sent to the Board on 31
March 1993 and gave it and two copies of the form to Bartlett to complete together with a handwritten note reading: "To: Mr S Bartlett 
Director - Corporate Services 
Re: Superannuation 
Attached is my superannuation file with original SASS form 9 forwarded direct to me by the super board.

I have completed Part 2 - Please complete Part 1 and Statutory Declaration on behalf of Council.

Note. Full time salary (annual) at exit is $99,398 - (Calculated by Vic Grant
SASB - refer attached schedule) 
Two copies required - Council file.
 - NJL personal 
Return completed forms to me for covering letter and mailing.

Thanks 
Neil" 
The judge made these findings: "Mr Bartlett said he had no recollection of seeing that form and in any event did not complete the SASS 9 form. He said there was no copy of this note on the files of council, nor was there a copy of the SASS 9 form. It is interesting that the note says that the full time salary at exit was $99,398 calculated by Mr Vic Grant of the SASB.

The paymaster's evidence was that the accused salary was $90,763. The
Superannuation Board would be advised by the employer what the accused salary was. Mr Grant's evidence as stated previously was that the accused had given him the salary figure of $99,398.

The accused said that he made a mistake in dating the form to 24 March. If the form was completed by Mr Bartlett it is odd that part one and the statutory declaration also contained the incorrect date of 24 March. It is also odd that
Mr Bartlett would not notice that his middle name had been misspelt. It is odd that exhibit 14 also bore the date 24 March. From evidence at the trial it appears clear that the accused was not in Tamworth on 24 March.

I accept the evidence of Mr Bartlett and Miss Riboldi as to how their signatures came to be on exhibit 11 (the SASS form sent to the Board)." 
Those findings were well supported by the evidence.

On 31 March 1993 the applicant forwarded the SASS 9 form signed by Bartlett and himself to the State Superannuation Investment & Management
Corporation, the Fund Manager, which received it on 2 April 1993. The applicant collected a cheque for $254,527.06 on 7 April 1993.

In the March 1993 issue of the Tamworth Council Staff Newsletter under the heading A Message From the General Manager/Town Clerk this appears: "The extent of rumour circulating throughout the city regarding my decision to resign and accept a senior position in Hervey Bay Qld are extreme ... my new position offers not only a promotion but very different challenges. The area administered by Hervey Bay Council has an 8 % growth rate and a much sought after area for new Tourism, Commercial and Industrial Development. The Council also administers part of Fraser Island.
 ... and ... are now at University ... pursuing careers in Tourism and Coastal
Management. Hervey Bay therefore has very much appeal for career and family reasons." 
The Newsletter was under the control of the applicant and he was a contributor. Mrs Croxon said that the message was dictated by the applicant or written out by him. His evidence that he did not write the message or have anything to do with it was not credible. The judge noted the concern of the accused about the phrase "my decision to resign". To the staff and others the applicant portrayed the Hervey Bay appointment as a step forward and one with potential.

The applicant kept a tight rein on the completion and lodgement of his retrenchment claim form. He prepared it and waited while Mr Bartlett signed it. He took it to an office J P to sign it while he waited. The applicant was the superior of both Bartlett and the J P. The applicant sent the completed form to the Fund Manager. There was little real opportunity for enquiry or assessment by anyone. It is notable that the applicant wanted the retrenchment claim form sent to his private box.

The receipt by the applicant of superannuation benefits on a retrenchment basis came to the knowledge of the council as a result of the vigilance of its paymaster. In May 1993 he noticed on the monthly statement of account for
April from the Board that the applicant was shown as retrenched. Mr Fitzgerald believed that a mistake had been made so he telephoned the board and requested a copy of the form. On receipt of a copy of the form he then drew matters to the attention of his superiors. Shortly afterwards he spoke to the applicant who said "Fitzy mate how are you, how did you pick up that it was a retrenchment." The applicant denied that any such conversation had taken place.

When Mr Bartlett spoke to the applicant on 12 May 1993 he insisted that he was entitled to a retrenchment package. The applicant primarily placed reliance upon what he claims Mr Grant said to him. Mr Grant stated that the applicant never told him that he was on contract and had been appointed as General
Manager. Mr Grant proceeded on the assumption that the applicant was a Town
Clerk. He was not aware that the applicant had been appointed General
Manger/Town Clerk until he was shown a letter in cross examination.

The materials reveal that the applicant was a man of considerable ability and energy who was intent on obtaining the extra $150,000 which became available if his departure from the council was classed as a retrenchment. He endeavoured to have the Board believe that his departure was so classed.

The applicant faced considerable difficulties at his trial. On important points he was in conflict with Mr Grant, Mr Lyon, Mrs Croxon, Mr Bartlett, Ms
Riboldi and Mr Fitzgerald. It was the applicant who applied for a new position and on obtaining it sought release from his agreement with Tamworth Council to serve as its General Manager/Town Clerk.

Counsel for the applicant furnished the court with 59 pages of submissions.
These reviewed the evidence facts in considerable detail as well as stating the legal submissions. These have been studied.

Before turning to the grounds of appeal and the applicant's submissions, the definition of "retrenchment" in <case> of the State Authorities Superannuation
Act should be set out: "retrenchment, in relation to a contributor, means the termination of the employment of the contributor with an employer where the employment is expressed by the employer to be: compulsorily terminated by the employer on the ground that: the employer no longer requires the contributor's services and, on termination of the contributor's employment, does not propose to fill the contributor's position; the work that the contributor was engaged to perform has been completed, or the amount of work that the employer requires to be performed has diminished and, due to that fact, it has become necessary to reduce the number of employees employed by the employer, or terminated as a result of the acceptance by the contributor of an offer by the employer of terms of retrenchment made on a ground specified in paragraph (a)." 
This definition differs from the ordinary meaning of "retrench". One example of that ordinary meaning is contained in the Macquarie Dictionary: "1. To cut down, reduce or diminish; curtail (expenses) 2. To sack or dismiss as part of an effort to economise 3. To cut off or remove, ... 5 To economise: reduce expenses: they retrenched by cutting down staff." 
The statutory definition envisages that the employer no longer requires the contributor's services and does not propose to fill his position, or the work for which he has been engaged has been completed or the work has diminished.
None of the statutory provisions for retrenchment even arguably applied in the present case. This was a case where the applicant applied for another position, obtained it, sought to be released from his service agreement and the Council agreed to his request. It was a case of mutual termination.
Despite what happened at the council meeting on 23 February 1993 the applicant pressed on with his claim for a retrenchment benefit.

Ground of Appeal 1 "The trial judge erred in law in holding that there was a case to answer, or alternatively that, as a matter of law, the appellant could be found guilty on the basis that either: he published a statement false in a material particular and/or that he knew that statement to be false in a material particular." 
After the conclusion of the Crown case the applicant sought leave to appeal against the decision of the judge that there was a case to answer. The Court of Criminal Appeal declined to intervene. Inter alia, it was not persuaded that there was no case to answer. The facts narrated show that there was a case to answer.

The applicant submitted that "material particular" refers to a statement of fact alone and cannot include a statement of "law" or mixed law and fact and that the issue whether the facts found fell within the provisions of a statutory enactment properly construed is a question of law. It was emphasised that the word retrenchment was not to be construed according to the common understanding of the word. This point is without substance.

The applicant further submitted that if a statement of law can be a "material particular" for the purposes of <case> BB of the Crimes Act, the evidence did not establish that the appellant was relevantly not retrenched within the meaning of the Act.

The charge alleged that the material particular which he knew to be false was the statement that he had been retrenched by his employer on the ground that his employment was not necessary and his position was not to be refilled. That followed sufficiently the statement in the form that the applicant "was retrenched by the employer 1/04/1993 on the ground that the employment of the member is not necessary and his/her position is not to be refilled." 
Thus the court was not dealing simply with the statement that the applicant had been retrenched but with a statement which revealed the sense in which the word "retrenched" was used. Taken as a whole this was a statement of fact and not a statement of law. The statement should not be dismembered in an endeavour to create a question of law. While it is unnecessary to express any final opinion, it is difficult to accept that the statement in the form that the applicant was retrenched by the employer on 1/04/1993" was a question of law. No final opinion is expressed on the argument that the statement must be a false statement of fact and cannot be a false statement of law. As presently advised it is not easy to see why a false statement of law knowingly made would not fall within <case>. A representation is being made as to the true position.

As to "retrenchment" the applicant complained that the judge proceeded on the basis that the definition of that word in paragraph (a)(i) of <case> was relevant and failed to take into consideration paragraph (b). The completed form was based on paragraph (a) and the charge followed the form as completed. This was not a case where paragraph (b) had any application. At no stage did the employer offer terms of retrenchment. Further, none of the provisions of paragraph (a) applied.

The applicant complained that the judge failed to take into account that the provision of a statutory declaration by the employer gave rise to a prima facie entitlement to benefits pursuant to <case>. The judge was well aware of the statutory declaration and its effect. He paid attention to the circumstances in which it was executed. They and the facts which were so well known to the applicant precluded any retrenchment benefit.

The applicant submitted that the judge failed to consider that "voluntary redundancies" were not regarded as excluded from the term "compulsorily terminated". This was not a case of a redundancy or an induced resignation.

This ground of appeal is rejected.

Ground of Appeal 2 "The finding of guilt was unsafe and unsatisfactory and represents a miscarriage of justice in that the Crown failed to satisfactorily establish that the appellant had made a statement which he knew to be false in a material particular." 
An examination of the whole of the materials leaves no doubt that the applicant knew that he was not being retrenched and knew that the statement that he "was retrenched by the employer ... on the ground that the employment of the member was not necessary and his/her position is not refilled" was false. From the special meeting of council on 12 March 1993 he knew that a new
General Manager was to be recruited to fill his position.

The Crown case against the applicant was a very strong one. This ground of appeal fails.

Ground of Appeal 3 "The Crown failed to prove that the appellant knew that he was not relevantly retrenched at the time the statement was published, either as a matter of law or in failing to disprove on the part of the appellant "honest belief" held by the appellant that he had been so retrenched." 
Both at the trial and on appeal it was contended that the applicant's "belief" in his entitlement to a retrenchment benefit was based upon information given to him by Mr Grant at a conference in Tamworth in October 1992, conversations he had with the Mayor in November 1992 and February 1993, information given to him by Mr Grant at meetings on 25 February and 19 March 1993, his own study of the SAS Act and his general understanding of the industry. The judge accepted
Mr Grant's evidence and not that of the applicant.

The evidence established that the applicant was trying to engineer a retrenchment benefit for himself. There was much evidence from which it could be concluded that the applicant knew that he was not being retrenched, that he asked to be released from his service agreement so he could accept the position which he had been offered with Hervey Bay Council, that the council agreed and that he did not honestly believe that he was entitled to a retrenchment benefit.

The judge did not fail to apply correct principles or to have regard to parts of the evidence. Despite the extent of the evidence and the lengthy submissions, the judge saw this as essentially a straightforward case and avoided becoming lost in a forest of detail.

Notwithstanding the volume of evidence and documents and the elaborate arguments, this is a clear and simple case. There was nothing remotely approaching a retrenchment as defined in the Act or as commonly understood.
There was no basis for any belief, and certainly no honest belief, on the part of the applicant that he was entitled to a retrenchment benefit, no matter how he massaged the facts or tried to give them a different hue.

The third ground of appeal should be rejected.

The Appropriate Order 
The question arises whether this Court should refuse to extend the time within which an appeal may be lodged or grant such an extension of time and dismiss the appeal.

The Crown case was overwhelming, and any acquittal would have been perverse.
As earlier mentioned, the application for leave to appeal was filed only after the Crown appealed against the inadequacy of the sentence which was imposed.

The conviction appeal was hopeless. There was ample evidence to support the trial judge's findings, both as to the primary facts and the ultimate issues.
This Court does not re-hear matters decided by a judge alone pursuant to [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/s33.html) of the [Criminal Procedure Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/) :
Regina v. Kurtic [(1996) 85 A Crim R 57] at -60; Regina v. Ion [(1996) 89 A Crim R 81] at
Even if this were a rehearing, the judge's primary findings of fact would lead inevitably to the same result. There is no basis upon which the argument that the verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory could succeed. The applicant's evidence and the material upon which he relied does not lead this Court to conclude that the judge ought to have had a reasonable doubt as to his guilt or to experience any reasonable doubt itself: M versus The Queen [(1994) 181 CLR ]
at 492-495, 508; Regina v. McKnoulty [(1995) 77 A Crim R 333] at -339; Jones v. The Queen, High Court, unreported 2 December 1997. Leave to the applicant to appeal against conviction out of time should be refused, upon the basis that there was no arguable point to be determined.

Crown Appeal Against Sentence 
The Crown contended that the judge dealt with the applicant in a way which was manifestly inadequate.

The judge noted that the applicant obtained an extra $150,000 as a result of the false statement, the severe drain on his finances in defending himself, that he would lose his position as the chief executive officer of Hervey Bay
Council, his cash reserves had been expended and his house was encumbered. It was unlikely that he would be able to obtain a position in local government.
There were civil proceedings in train between the Board and the applicant.

He was born on 6 June 1948. His wife had recently commenced part time employment. One child was dependant. Importance was attached to the applicant's previously unblemished character. He was spoken of highly as to his ability, industry and honesty by a former Minister for Local Government, most of the Councillors and employees of Tamworth Council and other discerning referees. The judge thought that it was not necessary to impose a custodial sentence.

Before this Court the applicant relied on 3 further references each of which was from a former employer and spoke highly of him. His affidavit reveals that his legal costs of defending the criminal proceedings exceeded $230,000. He was dismissed from Hervey Bay Council and despite his efforts to obtain employment he has remained essentially unemployed. He is no longer able to work in the field in which he spent his entire working life. His wife has now obtained full time employment. They have a dependant child at a tertiary institution who does not receive any other financial support.

Nevertheless, the "sentence" imposed was manifestly inadequate and a custodial sentence was required. The applicant knew that there was no retrenchment involved. He was less than frank with Mr Grant and was at pains to keep the nature of the superannuation payment which he was seeking to himself as much as possible so it would not be queried.

This was a deliberate, premeditated and carefully planned act of dishonesty by which the applicant received the substantial sum of about $150,000 more than he was entitled to by way of superannuation benefits. He abused his very senior position with the Tamworth City Council in order to obtain this benefit to which he clearly knew that he was not entitled. He manipulated the council staff in order to achieve his ends. It was a crime executed for sheer greed.
The objective gravity of the offence was substantial. The need for public deterrence to those in similar positions to "rort" the system is great. The facts of this case may be well known in the Tamworth area, and perhaps also in the Hervey Bay area, but a deferred sentence will not deter others in those areas or elsewhere from thinking that they can get away with similar dishonest conduct.

The applicant's standing and previous good character enabled him to carry out his dishonest scheme. It was his own conduct which led to his payment of large legal fees trying to defend the impossible, his dismissal from his new position in Hervey Bay and his losses from financial, employment and integrity aspects.

The seriousness of the crime requires that the Crown appeal be upheld. Even taking into account the double jeopardy involved in a Crown appeal, the appeal in this case should not be dismissed in the exercise of this Court's discretion. There has been unfortunate delay in hearing and disposing of the appeal but some of this was due to the volume of work in preparing and considering a mass of material in what turned out to be a hopeless appeal. Had it not been for that delay a substantial full time custodial sentence would have been appropriate. However, having regard to all the circumstances, a sentence should be imposed to be served by way of periodic detention. There is a problem in the present case with that because the applicant is now living in
Queensland, and there is (we were informed) no reciprocity between the two
States in relation to periodic detention.

In lieu of the deferred sentence imposed by Acting Judge Job QC, a sentence of imprisonment for two years should be imposed, to be served by way of periodic detention. If the applicant is unable to comply with such an order (cf Regina v Maslen & Shaw [(1995) 79 A Crim R 199] at ), then a shorter period of full time custody should be imposed which takes into account the leniency inherent in periodic detention: Regina v
Hallocoglu [(1992) 29 NSWLR 67] at 73;
Regina v. Graeme MacDonald (CCA, 12 December 1995, unreported) at 8. It is now well accepted that the length of the sentence imposed with the intention of it being served by way of periodic detention will be longer than if it were to be served in full time custody: Regina v. Mikas [(1996) 85 A Crim R ] at 47-48; Regina versus Slattery [(1996) 90 A Crim R 519] at .

The capacity of the applicant to serve a sentence by way of periodic detention, as well as the other matters identified by [s (1)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/pdopa1981332/s5.html) of the [Periodic Detention of Prisoners Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/pdopa1981332/) , should be referred for determination by a single judge of the Supreme Court pursuant to [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s12.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) , to be dealt with thereafter as set out in the orders of this Court.

The following orders are made.
The application for an extension of time by the applicant to appeal against his conviction out of time is refused, on the ground that the appeal against conviction has no prospect of success.
The appeal by the Crown against sentence is allowed.
Pursuant to <case> of the Criminal Appeal Act 1981 the issues identified by [s (1)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/pdopa1981332/s5.html) of the [Periodic Detention of Prisoners
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/pdopa1981332/) are remitted to Smart J as a single judge of the Supreme Court to determine. In the event of Smart J being satisfied as to such issues, he is to be at liberty to make orders implementing a sentence of two years periodic detention. In the event of any difficulty arising, or Smart J not being so satisfied, he is to return the matter to this Court.
This matter is directed to be listed before Smart J on Wednesday 21
January 1998 at 10.00 am or as he may otherwise direct.
 * * * 
