

Jennings versus National Australia Bank Ltd Matter No 21025/94 [1997] NSWSC 498 (22 October 1997) 
Jennings versus National Australia Bank Limited /94 October 1997 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /94 - Jennings versus National Australia Bank Limited 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: The plaintiff brings a claim for damages against the defendant. The formulation of the claim may be found in the Amended Statement of Claim filed on 5 June 1997. For present purposes, the relevant causes of action are founded on allegations of breach of obligation. 
The defendant has brought a Cross-Claim. It has obtained judgment in a monetary sum in those proceedings. The plaintiff now seeks a stay of execution of that judgment.

The defendant has prepared a List of Documents dated 31 January 1996. The plaintiff has sought further and better discovery. A Notice of Motion was filed on 24 June 1997. Further and better discovery was sought in respect of the following:- "(a) All documents, records, manuals and instructions issued or kept by the
Bank or its officers or employees in relation to the handling, retaining, recording, implementing or discharging of any security, or the return of any security documents or material relevant thereto." 
The Notice of Motion came before Registrar Irwin. The Registrar delivered his decision on 18 August 1997. He gave written reasons for the decision. The
Registrar dismissed the Notice of Motion.

On 4 September 1997, the plaintiff filed a further Notice of Motion. It came before me on 15 October 1997 by way of review of the decision of the
Registrar.

Two affidavits were before the Registrar. One was sworn by Mr Doherty (the solicitor for the plaintiff). The other was sworn by Mr Linton (a senior litigation officer) for the defendant.

The Court was referred to the following material contained in the affidavit sworn by Mr Linton:- "5. Annexed hereto marked with the letter `A' is a copy of the pages of the
Bank's internal manual, which were applicable from January 1989 until February in relation to the Surrender of Securities. I have satisfied myself that no other pages of the Bank's internal manual are within the category described.
Annexed hereto marked with the letter `B' is a copy of the pages of the
Bank's internal manual which were applicable from November 1982 until May 1993 in relation to the Payments by Guarantors, Retirement of Guarantee, Release of a Joint and Several Guarantor, Release of Securities and Right of
Subrogation." 
I am informed that the documentation which is referred to as annexures `A' and `B' to that affidavit (the documentation) was not made available to the plaintiff. I am further informed that it was made available to the Registrar and that he had the opportunity to inspect it. It seems that this material may have been the subject of some cursory examination by the Registrar. It was not made available to me for inspection.

The plaintiff guaranteed the repayment of financial accommodation made by the defendant to Colonial Sweets Pty Ltd (Colonial). The repayment of this loan was further secured by the granting of a Mortgage which was given by another party (Moody). The defendant did not obtain registration of the Mortgage. The defendant transferred the debt of an account opened in favour of Colonial to an account held by the plaintiff. Without the consent of the plaintiff, the defendant returned the security to Moody.

The plaintiff complains of breaches of obligations to both obtain registration of the Mortgage and to maintain that security. The defendant disputes both the existence of the obligations and any breach thereof.

The issue agitated between the parties is whether or not the documentation is relevant to a fact in issue in the proceedings. The Registrar took the view that the documentation was not relevant to any fact in issue.

It has been said that the discovery test under the present rules is still relatively wide and, in a very general sense, it is still appropriate to say that everything which would "throw light on the case" is prima facie subject to the discovery obligation. However, a merely speculative possibility or suggestion that a document may contain relevant material is not sufficient to attract the obligation to give discovery.

In this instance, the plaintiff is making an application for further discovery. The only order sought was one made in respect of the documentation.
The plaintiff is challenging the sufficiency of the discovery that has been given. This discovery has been verified by affidavit (see Fruehauf Finance
Corporation Pty Ltd versus Zurich Australian Insurance Ltd & Ors [(1990) 20
NSWLR 359).] The other material affords little assistance to the Court.

The onus rests with the plaintiff to demonstrate an entitlement to further discovery. In the circumstances of this case, I am not satisfied that the onus has been discharged. Accordingly, I am not satisfied that any basis has been demonstrated for disturbing the decision of the Registrar.

I dismiss the Notice of Motion filed on 4 September 1997. The plaintiff is to pay the costs of the application.

There remains the question of the application for a stay. I am informed that an application for a stay was made before the Registrar and that he declined to deal with the application on the basis of lack of jurisdiction. In my view, it is erroneous to contend that a Registrar lacks jurisdiction to stay execution of a judgment or order.

A power to stay execution of a judgment or order is conferred by Part 44 rule of the Supreme Court Rules. A registrar has an unrestricted jurisdiction to exercise the powers conferred by Part 44 (see Part 61 rule 1). Registrars have been exercising that power to stay execution of a judgment or order for some considerable time.

The application for a stay is referred back to the Registrar for determination.
 * * * 
