

Wilkinson and Ors versus Feldworth Financial Services Pty Limited and Ors
Matter No 50230/97 [1998] NSWSC 647 (22 October 1998) 
Last Updated: 17 December 1998 
MICK WILKINSON & 45 ORS versus FELDWORTH FINANCIAL SERVICES PTY LIMITED & 4 ORS /97 October 1998 
Rolfe J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Commercial Division 
JUDGMENT - On application by Minter Ellison to amend defence to fifth cross-claim and seventh cross-claim 
HIS HONOUR: The defendants, Minter Ellison, seek to amend their seventh cross-claim against National Registries to add paragraph 3(c), which makes a number of further allegations. 
The same application, in essence, is made in relation to the defence to the fifth cross-claim but, for the moment, I shall simply deal with the amended seventh cross-claim in respect of which leave is sought. My ruling in relation to that will also govern the matters pleaded in the defence to the fifth cross-claim.

It is not in issue, nor could it be in issue, that the matters now sought to be pleaded raise new matters, in the sense of matters not previously pleaded.
These proceedings have been the subject of consistent case management, and set down for hearing on the basis of some urgency. Notwithstanding the degree of urgency, I think that Minter Ellison have had ample time to plead the matters in paragraph 3(c). In my view, there is a very real prospect of prejudice accruing to the National Registries.

National Registries has been entitled, and is entitled, to conduct its case on the basis of the matters pleaded. The case has taken various twists and turns at an evidentiary level because certain statements which have been exchanged, including, in particular, for present purposes, one of Miss O'Shannessy, which was served on behalf of the third and fourth defendants, is not now to be relied upon. That, in turn, may influence the course which National Registries takes at an evidentiary level. Nonetheless, I think that National Registries has been entitled to conduct its case on the matters pleaded and should not be required at this stage of the trial to consider a case, which it has been entitled to anticipate will not be brought against it.

Mr Downes has articulated that whilst enquiries were put in place to seek to meet the assertions made by Miss O'Shannessy in her statement, which statement
I would add was only served quite late, those enquiries are not complete, and he made clear, yesterday, that he did not wish to cross-examine Miss
O'Shannessy until those enquiries were complete.

I think he also said that he wished to consider whether he would call Mr
Higginbotham in the light of the evidence given by Miss O'Shannessy. I assume that some time yesterday afternoon Mr Downes, or those instructing him, was or were, informed that Miss O'Shannessy's statement would not be read and, in those circumstances, Mr Downes has advised me, this morning, that the further investigations have not been pursued.

Mr Jackman has also submitted that the evidence upon which reliance will be placed is to be found in various documents, without specifying which documents. It seems to me that if the material is in documents, then the pleading should have been brought forward much earlier and the documents should have been identified with a view to allowing Mr Downes' client the opportunity, firstly, of considering them and, secondly, of considering any evidence it may wish to call to meet the additional case.

I am acutely aware of the obligation under the rules to grant amendments, but that obligation must be tempered by a general consideration of when the amendments are brought forward and the possible effects which they may have on the hearing. The bringing forward of late amendments is likely to cause disruption to it. I mean by that this particular case, in circumstances where there would be high inconvenience, not merely to Mr Downes' client but also to other parties, who perhaps are not as acutely concerned with the matters sought to be pleaded as Minter Ellison are.

This is the type of amendment to which Kirby P referred in The State of
Queensland versus JL Holdings Pty Limited [(1997) 187 CLR 146], which is brought forward, during the course of the trial and is likely to be disruptive of it. In my opinion the application to amend the seventh cross- claim should be refused. As I said earlier, that will have a consequence upon the terms of the defence to the fifth cross-claim.

The only qualification I would add to that is that it may be that, in the fullness of time, the parties choose to conduct the matter on an evidentiary basis which would allow an application to be made to amend to conform with the evidence as given or, alternatively, which would allow submissions to be made on the common basis on which the parties have approached the case (Dare v
Pulham <case>; [(1982) 148 CLR 658).] 
The application to amend the seventh cross-claim is refused and, insofar as the defence of the fifth cross-claim incorporates any such amendments, I decline leave to file that document.

I will return the documents to Mr Jackman so that those instructing him can bring in a defence to the fifth cross-claim consistent with my ruling.
 * * * 
