

Seinor versus Wilson Matter No 4259/96 [1998] NSWSC 664 (7 December 1998) 
Last Updated: 12 January 1999 
SEINOR versus WILSON /96 December 1998 
Hodgson CJ in EQ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The late Thelma Wilson died on 12th July 1996, aged 74. By her last will dated 15th May 1996, she appointed her husband Frank Wilson executor, gave $30,000.00 to Grahame Seinor (a son from a prior marriage), and left the balance of her estate to her husband. Her estate comprised a one half interest as joint tenant in the matrimonial home, being a unit at 702/20 Gerrale Street, Cronulla, which went by survivorship to her husband as surviving joint tenant; about $47,000.00 in bank accounts; shares worth about $22,500.00; and an interest in remainder in the estate of her late father Albert Wall. 
The Wall estate relevantly consisted of Unit 4, "Fairways", St. Andrews Place,
Cronulla, and about $33,000.00 in two bank accounts. The life tenant was
Albert Wall's second wife Dorothy Wall, aged about 90; and the interest in remainder was shared between Thelma Wilson and her sister Gloria Osborne.

By a deed dated 29th August 1996, Frank Wilson assigned the interest of his deceased wife in the Wall estate to Grahame Seinor, in return for Mr. Seinor giving up any other claims (including any [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/) claim) to
Thelma Wilson's estate.

In these proceedings, Mr. Seinor seeks specific performance of this deed; and in the alternative, seeks provision from Mr. Wilson's estate under the [Family
Provision Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/). Mr.
Wilson has put on a Cross-claim seeking relief under the Contracts Review Act in respect of the deed; and in the alternative, provision from Mrs. Wilson's estate under the [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/).

OUTLINE OF FACTS 
Mr. Seinor was the only child of the late Mrs. Wilson, having been born on rd November 1943. His parents separated in about 1946, and were later divorced; and on 29th May 1953, his mother married Mr. Wilson.

Mr. Seinor married on 15th April 1965. There were two daughters of this marriage, Angela born 5th November 1965 and Simone born 12th October 1973. It seems clear that Mr. Seinor had a close and affectionate relationship with his mother, and rendered considerable assistance to her over the years. It is also clear that Mrs. Wilson gave financial assistance to Mr. Seinor: in about 1965 she purchased tools for use in his motor mechanic trade and gave him £300 to purchase his first car; in about 1988, she lent him $20,000.00; and in about , she gave him $30,000.00.

Mrs. Wilson's father Albert Wall died on 4th May 1988, leaving a will dated th September 1986. Probate of that will was granted to Mrs. Wilson on 13th
September 1988. The life tenant continued living in the "Fairways" unit until after the death of Mrs. Wilson.

On 26th September 1995, Mrs. Wilson made a will in which she appointed her husband executor, gave $30,000.00 to her son Mr. Seinor, and gave the residue of her estate to her husband.

In February 1996, Mrs. Wilson was in Calvary Hospital, Rockdale, having been advised that she was terminally ill with cancer. At her request, Mr. Seinor arranged for Philip Abigail, a long-standing friend and solicitor of Mr.
Seinor, to see her in hospital. Mr. Abigail saw her in hospital on 8th
February 1996, and took the following notes of that attendance: .2.96 Attended Mrs. Wilson at Calvary Hospital, Rockdale Married around 40 years Son by previous relationship Matrimonial Home paid for from moneys from her family but not [should be "now"] in joint names 2 Joint A/cs with Husb. $4,000 and $7,000 respectively Interest in Father's Estate Investment in her name with AGC.

Interest in Father's Estate plus investments in her sole name to son Grahame Rest and Residue to husband William Frank Wilson.

Mr. Abigail took further notes concerning assets and also a note to the effect that there was to be a Power of Attorney to Mr. Seinor.

Mr. Abigail then prepared a will for Mrs. Wilson, appointing Mr. Seinor executor, giving to Mr. Seinor the interest in the Wall estate and all moneys in Mrs. Wilson's name as sole owner, including $30,000.00 with AGC, and the residue to Mr. Wilson; a statutory declaration; and a Power of Attorney in favour of Mr. Seinor. However, shortly afterwards Mr. Seinor telephoned Mr.
Abigail and told him not to go ahead with these documents.

Mrs. Wilson executed her last will on 15th May 1996, it being very similar in effect to the will of September 1995. She died on 12th July 1996.

Mrs. Wilson's funeral was held on 17th July 1996. There was some discussion between Mr. Seinor and Mr. Wilson concerning her estate: a question was raised as to who should act in the estate, Mr. Wilson suggested Mr. Abigail, and Mr.
Seinor said he would contact him.

Mr. Seinor spent the weekend of 20th and 21st July with Mr. Abigail at Mr.
Abigail's property at Cessnock.

On 23rd July, Mr. Seinor gave some assistance to Mr. Wilson concerning the registration of Mr. Wilson's car. There was a conversation between them, as to which there is some conflict in the evidence, to which I will return. Mr.
Seinor made the following notes in his diary for 23rd July: 
Spoke to Frank this afternoon about Mum's will in regard to Grandfather's estate and my Mother's jewellery probly (sic) some $30,000 worth. On jewellery he said as I knew firstly was to be mine then she said sell it and keep the money finally she gave it to Angela before her death. I pointed out the unfairness to Simone. Re Grandfather's estate he said that was to be mine too, she made a new will just before her death. He said in view of it was always to go to me and to be passed on he would do what ever (sic) necessary to transfer the Estate to me. His words were that was how it was all along. 
There is a further entry at the top of the page as follows: 
Deal Estate ring PLA. Jewellery! & Title pass. No ground given re Cash.

It appears that thereafter both Mr. Seinor and Mr. Wilson telephoned Mr.
Abigail. Mr. Abigail had a conversation over the telephone with Mr. Wilson, as to which there is some dispute. Mr. Abigail made the following note of the conversation: 
We discussed the Will of Mrs. Wilson.

We particularly discussed Thelma's father's estate which is subject to a life interest of his second wife who is 90-odd and going strong. He said that he was happy to assign that estate to Grahame Seinor.

In any event he does not expect to leave [should be "live"] that long. He suffers from Paget's Disease and has a daily medication. He says he could die any time "I am quite comfortable financially. I do not expect to live long enough to enjoy the benefit of the Estate so I want to give it to Grahame so he can pass it onto (sic) his kids when he is ready".

Between 24th and 29th July there are records of a number of calls from Mr.
Wilson to Mr. Abigail's office concerning Mrs. Wilson's estate. On 6th August, it appears that Mr. Wilson went to Mr. Abigail's office with information concerning the estate, and said he would post other documents the next day.

On 11th August, Mr. Wilson had a meal with Mr. Seinor and his wife at their house. There was a conversation on that occasion, the terms of which are in dispute. Mr. Seinor made the following entry in his diary for 11th August: 
Frank came to dinner to-day & also helped Beth & I pick up Berns cupboards etc. from the Home. The three of us had a drink to-gether (sic) in the lounge room. I once again thanked him for his amicable agreement about assigning Grandfather's estate to me. He replied O well as I said before your Mother always said that Estate is your birth right.

On 20th August, Mr. Wilson telephoned Mr. Abigail's office with the enquiry whether there was "anything to sign".

Mr. Abigail during August prepared papers for the probate application, and also drew up a deed assigning the interest in the Wall estate to Mr. Seinor.
On 27th August, Mr. Abigail instructed an employee Narelle Austen to telephone
Mr. Wilson to arrange an appointment for Mr. Abigail to attend Mr. Wilson's residence on 29th August. According to a note of a telephone attendance on that day, in that or another call Mr. Wilson expressed concern about Mr.
Abigail being able to park in the vicinity of his home unit. It appears that the appointment was made for between 12 noon and 1pm.

On 29th August, Mr. Seinor telephoned Mr. Wilson to advise that Mr. Abigail would not be able to meet him until 2.30pm. Mr. Abigail arrived at Mr.
Wilson's unit at around 2.30pm, and Mr. Seinor and a barrister Robert Lee arrived soon after. There was a conversation concerning papers to be signed, and particularly the deed. Mr. Wilson went out to his bank to draw out $1,000.00 to give to Mr. Abigail on account of costs and expenses. Mr. Lee accompanied him, and before they returned to the unit gave him an explanation of the deed. When they returned to the unit, Mr. Wilson signed documents including the deed and an authority, copies of which are annexed to this judgment.

During the following weekend, Mr. Seinor's daughter Angela spoke to Mr.
Wilson, and it appears that she was given to understand that Mr. Wilson had signed a number of documents, including a document assigning part of Mrs.
Wilson's estate to Mr. Seinor. She advised him to consult another solicitor.

Mr. Wilson did this the following week. On 5th September Mr. Wilson signed a new will prepared by that solicitor, leaving his whole estate to Angela. By letter dated 9th September from the new solicitor to Mr. Abigail, it was asserted that Mr. Wilson did not fully understand what he signed, and did not agree with it. There was a plain repudiation of the deed by Mr. Wilson in a letter from his new solicitors to Mr. Seinor dated 15th October 1996.

Probate of Mrs. Wilson's estate was granted to Mr. Wilson on 27th November .

ISSUES 
It is first necessary to consider questions of credit of a number of witnesses who gave evidence, and to make the best finding I can as to the content of disputed conversations.

Next, I will consider on a preliminary basis the strength of the [Family
Provision Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/) claim that Mr. Seinor would have had in Mrs. Wilson's estate, prior to the execution of the deed. This is relevant in assessing the consideration given by Mr.
Seinor in return for the assignment to him of property apparently worth something over $100,000.00.

Thirdly, it is necessary to determine Mr. Wilson's application to have the deed declared void or varied under the Contracts Review Act, ss.7, 8 and 9, and Schedule 1 of which are in the following terms: (1) Where the Court finds a contract or a provision of a contract to have been unjust in the circumstances relating to the contract at the time it was made, the Court may, if it considers it just to do so, and for the purpose of avoiding as far as practicable an unjust consequence or result, do any one or more of the following: it may decide to refuse to enforce any or all of the provisions of the contract; it may make an order declaring the contract void, in whole or in part; it may make an order varying, in whole or in part, any provision of the contract; it may, in relation to a land instrument, make an order for or with respect to requiring the execution of an instrument that: varies, or has the effect of varying, the provisions of the land instrument; or terminates or otherwise affects, or has the effect of terminating or otherwise affecting, the operation or effect of the land instrument.

Where the Court makes an order under subsection (1)(b) or (c), the declaration or variation shall have effect as from the time when the contract was made or (as to the whole or any part or parts of the contract) from some other time or times as specified in the order.

The operation of this section is subject to the provisions of section 19.
 . Schedule 1 has effect with respect to the ancillary relief that may be granted by the Court in relation to an application for relief under this Act.
 (1) In determining whether a contract or a provision of a contract is unjust in the circumstances relating to the contract at the time it was made, the Court shall have regard to the public interest and to all the circumstances of the case, including such consequences or results as those arising in the event of: compliance with any or all of the provisions of the contract; or non-compliance with, or contravention of, any or all of the provisions of the contract.

Without in any way affecting the generality of subsection (1), the matters to which the Court shall have regard shall, to the extent that they are relevant to the circumstances, include the following: whether or not there was any material inequality in bargaining power between the parties to the contract; whether or not prior to or at the time the contract was made its provisions were the subject of negotiation; whether or not it was reasonably practicable for the party seeking relief under this Act to negotiate for the alteration of or to reject any of the provisions of the contract; whether or not any provisions of the contract impose conditions which are unreasonably difficult to comply with or not reasonably necessary for the protection of the legitimate interests of any party to the contract; whether or not: any party to the contract (other than a corporation) was not reasonably able to protect his interests; or any person who represented any of the parties to the contract was not reasonably able to protect the interests of any party whom he represented, because of his age or the state of his physical or mental capacity; the relative economic circumstances, educational background and literacy of: the parties to the contract (other than a corporation); and any person who represented any of the parties to the contract; where the contract is wholly or partly in writing, the physical form of the contract, and the intelligibility of the language in which it is expressed; whether or not and when independent legal or other expert advice was obtained by the party seeking relief under this Act; the extent (if any) to which the provisions of the contract and their legal and practical effect were accurately explained by any person to the party seeking relief under this Act, and whether or not that party understood the provisions of their effect; whether any undue influence, unfair pressure or unfair tactics were exerted on or used against the party seeking relief under this Act: by any other party to the contract; by any person acting or appearing or purporting to act for or on behalf of any other party to the contract; or by any person to the knowledge (at the time the contract was made) of any other party to the contract or of any person acting or appearing or purporting to act for or on behalf of any other party to the contract; the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to similar contracts or course of dealing to which any of them has been a party; and the commercial or other setting, purpose and effect of the contract.

For the purposes of subsection (2), a person shall be deemed to have represented a party to a contract if he represented the party, or assisted the party to a significant degree, in negotiations prior to or at the time the contract was made.

In determining whether a contract or a provision of a contract is unjust, the Court shall not have regard to any injustice arising from circumstances that were not reasonably foreseeable at the time the contract was made.

In determining whether it is just to grant relief in respect of a contract or a provision of a contract that is found to be unjust, the Court may have regard to the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the performance of the contract since it was made. 
Schedule 1 . Where the Court makes a decision or order under section 7, it may also make such orders as may be just in the circumstances for or with respect to any consequential or related matter, including orders for or with respect to: the making of any disposition of property; the payment of money (whether or not by way of compensation) to a party to the contract; the compensation of a person who is not a party to the contract and whose interest might otherwise be prejudiced by a decision or order under this Act; the supply or repair of goods; the supply of services; the sale or other realisation of property; the disposal of the proceeds of sale or other realisation of property; the creation of a charge on property in favour of any person; the enforcement of a charge so created; the appointment and regulation of the proceedings of a receiver of property; and the rescission or variation of any order of the Court under this clause, and such orders in connection with the proceedings as may be just in the circumstances.
 . The Court may make orders under this Schedule on such terms and conditions (if any) as the Court thinks fit.
 . Nothing in section 6 limits the powers of the Court under this Schedule.
 . In this Schedule: "disposition of property" includes: a conveyance, transfer, assignment, appointment, settlement, mortgage, delivery, payment, lease, bailment, reconveyance or discharge of mortgage; the creation of a trust; the release or surrender of any property; and the grant of a power in respect of property, whether having effect at law or in equity; "property" includes real and person property and any estate or interest in property real or personal, and money, and any debt, and any cause of action for damages (including damages for personal injury), and any other chose in action, and any other right or interest.

Fourthly, if the deed is declared void or varied so as to deprive Mr. Seinor of the interest in the Wall estate, it will be necessary to return to Mr.
Seinor's [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/) claim. If the deed is not declared void or varied, it will be necessary to consider Mr.
Wilson's [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/) claim.

Finally, it will be necessary to determine the detailed orders to be made, and questions of costs.

CREDIT AND CONVERSATIONS 
Submissions 
Both sides provided written outlines of submissions, directed mainly to the
Contracts Review Act question but to some extent relevant to questions of credit. I will leave them with the papers.

Mr. Slattery QC for Mr. Seinor submitted that I should accept the evidence of
Mr. Seinor, Mr. Abigail and Mr. Lee, and that I should find that the evidence of Mr. Wilson and Angela were affected by substantial reconstruction. He submitted that the evidence of Mr. Wilson and Angela concerning their conversation after the signing of the deed showed some prevarication as to whether Mr. Wilson did or did not indicate that he had assigned his interest in the Wall estate to Mr. Seinor. Mr. Wilson's denials in cross-examination of statements asserted in his affidavit showed that his evidence was not reliable. Mr. Wilson's evidence that he understood that the assignment was for the benefit of Mr. Seinor's daughters could not stand with the evidence of Mr.
Seinor and Mr. Seinor's wife that he had acknowledged on 11th August that this was Mr. Seinor's "birth right".

Mr. Hilton SC for Mr. Wilson conceded that Mr. Wilson was at times a little confused, but submitted that I should accept the substance of his evidence.
Mr. Hilton accepted that Mr. Lee was attempting to give a truthful account, but submitted that there were serious questions concerning the evidence of Mr.
Seinor and Mr. Abigail. He submitted that Mr. Seinor had plainly approached
Mr. Wilson on 25th July with the intention of impressing on Mr. Wilson that he should transfer the interest in the Wall estate to him, and had set out to put to Mr. Wilson that this was for the benefit of his daughters. As for Mr.
Abigail's evidence, it was extraordinary that he had no recollection whatsoever of spending the previous weekend with Mr. Seinor.

Decision 
Although at one stage there was a question in my mind whether or not I should accept Mr. Seinor's evidence that he made his diary entries on or about the day the events occurred, I am satisfied by his evidence and by the appearance of the diary that this was the case. I am also satisfied that Mr. Abigail's notes are genuine notes made at the time of the relevant meetings or telephone calls.

It is clear that Mr. Wilson's recollections as to the details of conversations is not reliable. In cross-examination, he expressed himself as being certain that some statements asserted in his affidavit were not said. Mr. Wilson has very definite views as to the rights and wrongs of the matter, and his memory is not completely reliable; and his evidence of the details is in my opinion affected by reconstruction influenced by his views as to the rights and wrongs of the matter.

I accept that Mr. Lee gave evidence truthfully to the best of his recollection, and that his recollection is reasonably accurate. In particular,
I accept that he went through the deed carefully with Mr. Wilson, that he made sure Mr. Wilson understood and was satisfied with his own financial situation, that Mr. Wilson gave every appearance of understanding the deed and of being willing to sign it, that he told Mr. Wilson he was giving everything away and that he (Mr. Lee) would not sign such a deed, that Mr. Wilson said to him "I have a very good reason", and that he said to Mr. Wilson words to the effect that once the deed and authority was signed, the deal was done.

In general, I think that Mr. Seinor and Mr. Abigail are more reliable on the details of conversations than Mr. Wilson: Mr. Abigail's notes give a good indication of at least some of what was said on the occasions they relate to; and Mr. Seinor's diary entries reflect Mr. Seinor's understanding of what happened very shortly after the events in question.

However, I accept Mr. Hilton's submission that Mr. Abigail's inability to remember at all that he spent the weekend prior to 23rd July 1996 with Mr.
Seinor was extraordinary; and this leads me to be not fully confident in Mr.
Abigail's evidence where it is not supported by contemporary notes.

Furthermore, I am unable to accept Mr. Seinor's denial that, on 23rd July, he told Mr. Wilson that he had seen Mr. Abigail the previous weekend. Mr. Seinor said that Mr. Wilson knew he was going to spend the weekend with Mr. Abigail, but in my opinion the probabilities strongly support Mr. Wilson's evidence that Mr. Seinor told him he had been with Mr. Abigail over the weekend and that they had discussed Mrs. Wilson's estate. There is in evidence a note made by an employee of Mr. Abigail of a telephone call from Mr. Wilson on 24th
July, which notes that "he mentioned you were with Graham (sic) Seinor on weekend": that in my opinion suggests that this was something actually discussed on 23rd July.

The entry in Mr. Seinor's diary for 23rd July "did not give ground on cash" suggests to me that Mr. Seinor had approached the meeting on 23rd July with the thought that he might need to bargain away some or all of the $30,000.00 cash which he was given by Mrs. Wilson's will; and the note reflects that he did not have to do this. This to my mind confirms that the approach made by
Mr. Seinor on 23rd July was a planned approach, which had been discussed with
Mr. Abigail over the weekend, and for which Mr. Seinor was prepared to advance arguments. I am satisfied that Mr. Seinor did say to Mr. Wilson something to the effect that he and Mr. Abigail thought that the interest in the Wall estate should have been left to Mr. Seinor to be passed on to his daughters; and that Mr. Seinor did put to Mr. Wilson that the proposed transfer was for the benefit of the two daughters. Mr. Seinor accepts that he did advance the consideration "I have two daughters"; and Mr. Abigail's note of the conversation of 25th July includes reference to the interest being passed on by Mr. Seinor to the two daughters.

I also accept that it was put to Mr. Wilson that if he did not agree to the transfer, there would be a court case and substantial money would be wasted on lawyers. I am not certain whether this was put by Mr. Seinor on 23rd July, or by Mr. Abigail during the telephone conversation of 25th July; but I am satisfied that it was put on one or other of those occasions. Mr. Seinor also accepts that he said to Mr. Lee on 29th August, possibly in Mr. Wilson's presence, that they had agreed on the deal because if Mr. Seinor took the matter to Court, they would "burn up all our money on you guys".

Apart from those matters, I substantially accept the conversations as given in evidence by Mr. Seinor and Mr. Abigail. However, I am not satisfied that Mr.
Wilson used the precise words "birth right" on 11th August: I am satisfied he said something to the effect that the Wall estate should go to Mr. Seinor or his daughters, or to Mr. Seinor on behalf of his daughters, and that the expression "birth right" was an interpretation put on this statement by Mr.
Seinor and his wife.

STRENGTH OF MR. SEINOR'S [FAMILY PROVISION ACT](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/) CLAIM 
Submissions 
Mr. Slattery submitted that Mr. Wilson had received a substantial benefit from his late wife by survivorship, and was reasonably well provided for without further provision under the will. Mr. Seinor was Mrs. Wilson's only son, had had a close and affectionate relationship with her, and rendered considerable assistance over the years. There were no special rules in relation to the position of adult sons. In so far as Mr. Seinor had not answered questions concerning the financial circumstances of his company, by reason of a claim of privilege against self-incrimination, it was impermissible for the Court to draw any adverse inference: see Dolan v. Australian & Overseas
Telecommunications Corporation <case>; [(1993) 42 FCR 206] at 215-16; Pappas v. New World Oil Developments <case>; [(1993) 43 FCR 594] at 595; C v. T [(1995) 58 FCR 1] at 16-17 and
Cross On Evidence, 5th Aust.Ed., par.25040.

In any event, Mr. Slattery submitted, even if it were the case that the consideration provided by Mr. Seinor was of little value, there was no real perception by Mr. Wilson that he was receiving anything of value: it is plain that Mr. Lee conveyed to Mr. Wilson that it was he who was giving up everything. Furthermore, Mr. Wilson had the perception that what he was giving up was virtually valueless to him, because of the uncertainty as to whether he would outlive the life tenant. On the other hand, he was being confirmed in ownership of property that was valuable to him, namely his own accommodation and other assets received by survivorship or under the will.

Mr. Hilton submitted that Mr. Seinor's [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/) claim was a very weak one. Substantial provision had been provided to him during his mother's lifetime, and he was left $30,000.00 by the will. Mr. Wilson's competing claim, as a spouse of 43 years, was a very strong one. Mrs. Wilson had been in the best position to decide how to dispose of her estate. The only other will which she had signed was to similar effect. Mr. Seinor's refusal to answer questions meant that the Court was not given all information which it needed in relation to Mr. Seinor's financial position: although no adverse inference could be drawn from his claim of privilege against self- incrimination, that claim meant that the Court was left without evidence in relation to matters on which Mr. Seinor bore the onus of proof.

Decision 
I accept that Mr. Seinor was Mrs. Wilson's only son, had a close and affectionate relationship with her, and rendered considerable assistance to her over many years. I accept that he was not in July and August 1996 in affluent circumstances. His health was reasonable, except for circulation difficulties in his legs. He had two daughters, aged 22 and 31, who he no longer supported.

His main assets comprised joint ownership with his wife of a house at Oatlands said to be worth $275,000.00 in July 1997, and a loan to a family company then in the order of around $100,000.00. His main liabilities were a housing loan of around $36,000.00, and a joint liability to the bank for money borrowed to be on-lent to the company. As at June 1997, this liability stood at around $83,000.00. In around June 1997, his income comprised repayment of loan accounts from the company and wages from the company totalling around $600.00 per week, and his expenses were around $500.00 per week. His wife was earning around $45,000.00 per annum (gross, I assume).

As regards his refusal to answer questions about his company's accounts and affairs, as required by the authorities referred to by Mr. Slattery I draw no adverse inference against him. However, I accept Mr. Hilton's submission that this refusal means that I am left with inadequate evidence about the financial position of Mr. Seinor's company, and thus of Mr. Seinor, in circumstances where there is an onus on [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/) claimants to fully disclose their financial circumstances to the Court.

The other claim on Mrs. Wilson's estate was that of Mr. Wilson, her spouse of years. It appears that he owned his home unit, to which he became wholly entitled by survivorship, unencumbered. As at July 1997, he had about $20,000.00 in bank accounts and $45,000.00 invested with AGC. His income comprised a Telecom pension, a part-pension from the Government, and AGC interest, totalling around $330.00 per week. His expenses, apart from food, clothing, tax etc. were around $136.00 per week. He also had shares and investments from the estate amounting to around $40,000.00. He had Paget's disease, but otherwise was in reasonable health. His Paget's disease was controlled by medication; and if he did not develop complications, his future and life expectancy were reasonably good.

As submitted by Mr. Slattery, Mr. Wilson was reasonably well provided for by his own assets and income, and by the property to which he succeeded by survivorship. But the estate disposed of by will was relatively small, and in my opinion it was a reasonable disposition by Mrs. Wilson that, apart from $30,000.00, the whole estate should go to Mr. Wilson, inter alia to cover any contingencies that might occur. I accept that weight should be given to the considered decision of the deceased on this matter.

Mr. Seinor's relationship with his mother was such that, had his financial circumstances been such as to show substantial need, he would have had a reasonable claim; but in the financial circumstances disclosed, his claim was a marginal one. The deceased had given him $30,000.00 during her lifetime, and a further $30,000.00 by will; and having regard to the financial circumstances of himself and his wife, it is very difficult to say that he had been left without adequate provision for his proper maintenance. When one adds to this his failure to fully disclose his company's financial affairs, it must be concluded that his [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/) case was not a strong one.

I should add that Mr. Seinor sought to advance his case by claiming that he had been assured by Mrs. Wilson that her interest in the Wall estate was his birth right, and that in reliance on these assurances he had made no provision for superannuation. I accept that Mrs. Wilson did from time to time say to Mr.
Seinor words to the effect that this interest should go to him; although she did also say to others words to the effect that she had given enough to Mr.
Seinor and that her main concern was that Mr. Wilson should be adequately provided for, and it was that view which she gave effect to in her wills.
Further, Mr. Seinor was unable to point to any income in recent years from which he could have provided for superannuation, and this illustrated the problem created by his refusal to answer questions concerning his company's affairs.

Accordingly, the consideration provided by Mr. Seinor in return for the assignment was quite small. It is true that the strength of Mr. Seinor's [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/) case was not a factor in Mr. Wilson's consideration, leading to his entry into the deed; but in my opinion it is relevant to the objective fairness of the deed.

CONTRACTS REVIEW ACT 
Submissions 
Mr. Hilton submitted that, even though Mr. Wilson may have understood that the deed effected an assignment of the interest in the Wall estate to Mr. Seinor, and intended that the deed have that effect, the question was, how was that intention produced: see Bridgewater v. Leahy [(1998) 158 ALR 166.] The initiative for the transaction had come from Mr. Seinor, who sought this arrangement less than two weeks after the death of Mr. Wilson's wife, and one week after the funeral. Even 29th August, the date when the deed was signed, was only about one and a half months after his wife's death. Mr. Wilson acceded to the approach on the basis that the transaction was for the benefit of Mr. Seinor's two daughters; and was never plainly advised and never clearly understood that the effect of the deed was that Mr. Seinor could do whatever he liked with the property. Mr. Wilson was influenced by the prospect of dissipation of assets through court proceedings, and was never advised as to the merits of any court case Mr. Seinor might bring, or of the options he had in relation to the matter. He first saw the document on 29th August, and had no opportunity to consider its terms adequately or to negotiate.

Mr. Abigail was a good friend of Mr. Seinor, so although he regarded himself as acting for Mr. Wilson and was paid for his services by Mr. Wilson, he was not independent and did not advise as an independent solicitor. Mr. Lee was instructed because it was convenient for Mr. Abigail to instruct him, not because of any expertise; and having regard to Mr. Lee's professional association with Mr. Abigail, his advice could not be considered truly independent. Although Mr. Lee did advise Mr. Wilson that he would not sign such a document, he did not explain why, or enquire as to Mr. Wilson's reasons for signing the document. Mr. Wilson needed a truly independent solicitor who would have discussed with Mr. Wilson precisely what he wanted to do and why.

The transaction was improvident; and having regard to Mr. Wilson's age (70), health, emotional state, and lack of education and experience, he was unable to protect his interests. He also believed that he would not be bound by the deed until it was dated.

Mr. Slattery submitted that Mr. Wilson well knew he was assigning the interest in the Wall estate to Mr. Seinor, and placed no value on it. There was no need for him to consider, and he did not consider, the strength of any claim which
Mr. Seinor may have had against the estate or to the interest in the Wall estate. Mr. Lee's advice was sufficient in the circumstances. He forcefully told Mr. Wilson that he would not sign such a document; he made sure that Mr.
Wilson was fully aware of his own financial position and considered it adequate, and that Mr. Wilson fully understood what he was doing. Mr. Wilson told Mr. Lee "I have a very good reason", conveying that there was no need to discuss this. Mr. Lee advised Mr. Wilson that once he signed the deed, it was binding on him. Any suggested lack of independence of the advice did not detract from the fact that Mr. Wilson's mind was fully brought to bear on what he was doing. Mr. Lee had told him "You're giving everything away".

The case was one where Mr. Wilson knew what he was doing on 29th August, but was later talked out of it by another member of the family, not well disposed to Mr. Seinor. The case was one where Mr. Wilson had changed his mind, under such influence from that other member of the family that he made a will in favour of that person a few days later.

Decision 
In my opinion, Mr. Wilson was aware that, by signing the deed, he was assigning his interest in the Wall estate to Mr. Seinor; but I accept that he understood this to be for the benefit of Mr. Seinor's daughters, and that he did not fully appreciate that Mr. Seinor could dissipate the property or give it all to just one of the daughters. He received no clear advice to this effect. I also accept that, in agreeing to the assignment, Mr. Wilson was influenced by Mr. Seinor holding out that it was for the benefit of his daughters, and by the prospect of dissipation of assets by court action.

Mr. Abigail, although accepting instructions and payment from Mr. Wilson, did not act as a solicitor giving independent advice; and having regard to his long association and friendship with Mr. Seinor, was not in a position to do so. I accept that Mr. Lee explained the deed to Mr. Wilson to the best of his ability, and was satisfied that Mr. Wilson understood the deed and was very willing to enter into it. Again, however, Mr. Lee was not truly independent, having regard to his professional association with Mr. Abigail; and he did not explore the intentions of Mr. Wilson as one would have expected a truly independent solicitor to have done. Furthermore, it should have been apparent to Mr. Seinor that the advice given to Mr. Wilson, being advice given by his own long-standing friend and a barrister professionally associated with that friend, was not truly independent.

I accept that, at the time, Mr. Wilson placed very little value on what he was assigning: in my opinion, his gloomy view of his own prospects was consistent with his being saddened by the death of his wife of 43 years. I accept Mr.
Wilson's evidence that he was grieving at this time.

Mr. Wilson was not given a copy of what he had signed. Mr. Abigail told Mr.
Wilson that the deed would have no effect until probate was granted and the deed dated; although he also asked for an "irrevocable authority", and Mr. Lee advised Mr. Wilson that when he signed, the deal was done. In those circumstances, I accept Mr. Wilson's evidence that he was under the impression that the deed was not immediately binding; although I do not consider this to be a significant factor inducing Mr. Wilson to sign. However, it is of some relevance in circumstances where he repudiated the deed so promptly, prior to the grant of probate.

In terms of the Contracts Review Act, I think there was inequality of bargaining power, having regard to Mr. Wilson's grief and to the preparation of Mr. Seinor for negotiations, including consultation with Mr. Abigail. Mr.
Wilson was given little opportunity to negotiate, and none on 29th August; although in fairness I think it appeared at the time to Mr. Seinor and Mr.
Abigail that Mr. Wilson was quite willing to make the assignment. In my opinion, by reason of his age and emotional state, Mr. Wilson was less than fully able to protect his own interests. He received useful advice as to the meaning of the deed, and the provisions of the deed were explained to him; but the advice could not be regarded as fully independent, and it was not made clear to him that the assignment would not necessarily be for the benefit of the two grand-daughters. I would not regard this as a case of undue influence.
Nor would I regard it as a case where there was major unfairness in pressure and tactics, although I would have to say that there was some unfairness in these matters.

No finding of unconscionability is sought against Mr. Seinor, and I do not make any such finding. Steps were taken to ensure Mr. Wilson understood what he was doing. Mr. Seinor had some legitimate moral claim to the property in question, and had a legitimate concern for his own interests concerning the property and the interests of his daughters. Mr. Wilson correctly recognised that there was some merit in the claim, at least as regards Mr. Seinor's daughters. However, having regard to all the considerations, I think that it was unfair that Mr. Wilson be deprived by such a transaction of the provision which Mrs. Wilson intended him to have, that accordingly the contract was unjust, and that (subject to what I say below) an order should be made declaring it void.

A question arises whether this order should be absolute or conditional. There is plainly a danger of a permanent estrangement within this family, not only between Mr. Wilson and Mr. Seinor, but also between Mr. Seinor and Angela, and indeed between Angela and her sister Simone. Mr. Wilson, a few days after signing this deed, made a will leaving everything to Angela. An appropriate condition applied to the order setting aside the deed may help to reduce the possibility of permanent estrangement a little; and such a condition might to some extent alleviate legitimate concerns of Mr. Seinor, without continuing any unfairness in the transaction.

What I propose to do is to impose a condition that Mr. Wilson leave by will or make an inter vivos gift equally between Angela and Simone of either the whole of the interest in the Wall estate or so much of it as has not been disposed of for Mr. Wilson's own benefit, or else one-quarter of the total of Mr.
Wilson's estate at his death plus amounts given away inter vivos in the meantime, whichever is the greater.

No submission was made that the Act does not authorise a conditional order.
Schedule 1 dealing with ancillary orders expressly provides for conditional orders, but there is no such express provision in relation to the principal orders provided for by s.7. However, cases such as Esanda Finance Corp. v.
Tong [(1997) 41 NSWLR 482] emphasise that the relief is discretionary and should interfere with contractual obligations no more than is necessary to remedy unfairness; so in my opinion conditional orders can be made. In any event, the same effect could be achieved in this case by an order under Schedule 1 requiring Mr. Wilson to make the disposition proposed by the condition.
 [FAMILY PROVISION ACT](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/) CLAIMS 
Since the deed is to be set aside, it will only be necessary to consider Mr.
Seinor's claim. I have already discussed various aspects of that claim, and it is really only necessary to consider whether, having regard to the present financial circumstances of the parties, Mr. Seinor has been left without adequate provision for his proper maintenance. There has been little relevant change in Mr. Wilson's financial circumstances since the date of death, but it will be necessary to set out Mr. Seinor's current financial circumstances.

As at 20th November 1988, his assets comprised joint ownership with his wife of the house at Oatlands, $300,000.00; furniture and personal effects, $5,000.00; shares in the family company; and a loan (jointly with his wife) to the family company of about $100,000.00 (the total assets of the family company said to be $77,500.00, liabilities about $111,000.00). Mr. Seinor's liabilities comprised a home loan of about $25,000.00; an overdraft of $120,000.00 (including $37,000.00 for legal fees); another overdraft of $35,000.00 for legal fees; a Mastercard debt of $8,000.00; and $12,000.00 for his daughter's wedding.

His income comprised substantially repayment of company loans of about $800.00 per week, and wages of about $100.00 per week; and his expenses amounted to about $500.00 per week. His wife was earning about $36,000.00 per annum after tax, and presumably her expenses were about $500.00 per week as well.

There was evidence that expenditure required on the family home amounted to about $32,000.00, and that another $11,000.00 needed to be spent on electrical appliances and curtains.

The principal difference in Mr. Seinor's position, as compared with July 1997, appears to be the incurring of around $70,000.00 legal costs in these and related proceedings. The related proceedings were such as to have involved only a relatively small proportion of these costs. I do not think the liability for these costs should weigh significantly in assessing Mr. Seinor's need, or whether he was left without adequate provision for proper maintenance. The claim remains a marginal one, and its strength is affected by the non-provision of particulars sought concerning the financial affairs of the family company. As before, no adverse inference is drawn from the claim of privilege against self-incrimination; but the Court is left with inadequate material to fully assess Mr. Seinor's financial position in circumstances where the onus lies squarely on him to satisfy the Court that he has been left without adequate provision for proper maintenance. In those circumstances, I am unable to be so satisfied.

CONCLUSION 
For those reasons, I propose to make an order under the Contracts Review Act declaring the deed void, subject to the condition indicated above. All other claims will be dismissed.

I am not in a position to make a decision on costs. I will need to hear submissions on this, and there may possibly be some evidence.
 * * * 
