

Double Bay Newspapers P/L and Ors versus A W Holdings P/L [1996] NSWSC 111 (8
May 1996) 
DOUBLE BAY NEWSPAPERS P/L & ORS v. A.W. HOLDINGS P/L & ORS /95 
WEDNESDAY 8 MAY 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
BRYSON J 
CATCHWORDS:EQUITY- competing priorities - equitable interests and mere equities.

MORTGAGES- three competing unregistered mortgages were created by mortgagor who represented to second and third in time that they were second mortgages - appraisal of competing priorities where (1) earliest in time was not supported by caveat (2) second in time searched title, relied on search but did not take a completed document which stated what was charged on the land and (3) third in time did not search title and was not influenced by absence of caveat. Held - as the second in time was defective in form and needed to be supported by
Doctrine of Part Performance and litigation to compel mortgagor to execute an enforceable document, it was a mere equity and did not prevail over earliest in time notwithstanding failure to caveat.

JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The litigation. Easyfind's second mortgage.

These proceedings relate to the competing claims to priority of the holders of three unregistered mortgages over the house property at 165 Alexander Street, Crows Nest, the land in Folio Identifier 1/502236. When the proceedings were commenced by Summons on 21 March 1995 the registered proprietors of the house were the second defendants Mr and Mrs Yannacoulacos. Mr and Mrs Yannacoulacos became registered proprietors on 2 July 1990, and they granted mortgage I038662 to Perpetual Trustee Australia Limited on 24 December 1992. The mortgage to Perpetual Trustee Australia was registered on 12 January 1993 and had the priority of a registered first mortgage. It incorporated clauses in Memorandum E160221, which I allowed to be marked as an Exhibit after the hearing had concluded.

While this litigation was pending and after some interlocutory restraints had been imposed by extending a caveat, an arrangement was made under which Mr and
Mrs Yannacoulacos were enabled to sell the house, pay Perpetual Trustee
Australia Limited enough money to discharge the first mortgage, and pay the remaining fund into court. Mr and Mrs Yannacoulacos sold the house for $450,000 to Mr and Mrs Davies (who are not in the controversy). The fund of $92,137.66 was duly paid in on 25 August 1995, and the debts secured by the unregistered mortgages are such that only the first in priority of them will be paid any of it.

The earliest unregistered mortgage is held by the first defendant A.W.
Holdings Pty Ltd, which was named Easyfind Pty Ltd when the significant events happened. Until 1992 Easyfind owned a business of publishing and distributing a calendar referred to as the Easyfind Planner Directory. By an
Agreement for Sale of Business (Exhibit 1) dated 12 January 1993 Easyfind agreed to sell the business to Spadtan Pty Ltd, which was formed in Victoria in 1988 and was controlled by Mr and Mrs Yannacoulacos. Spadtan Pty Ltd had a nominal capital of $2 only. The price on sale of the business was $270,000 of which $20,000 was payable as a deposit and, under special condition 1, the balance purchase moneys of $250,000 "... shall be secured to the vendor by a second registered mortgage over the property of the purchaser at 165
Alexander Street, Crows Nest and a registered fixed and floating charge over the undertaking of the purchaser company." This agreement substituted for an earlier agreement between the same vendor and purchaser made in 1988. The house was not owned by the purchaser Spadtan Pty Ltd (although the agreement said it was), but Mr and Mrs Yannacoulacos in fact gave the mortgage for $250,000 on completion of the sale. This mortgage was executed on 12 January on a form appropriate for registration. Indeed it appears to have been lodged for registration as 041646, at a time when it could not be registered because of caveats lodged by the plaintiff and the third defendant. Schedule A first says that it is in consideration of $250,000 paid by Easyfind to Mr and
Mrs Yannacoulacos but the true arrangement is obvious and is referred to in the twelfth clause of Sched A which shows that the mortgage covered the same advances as a fixed and floating charge of the same date given by Spadtan Pty
Ltd.

By the Agreement for Sale of Business and also the mortgage, the principal sum of $250,000 was to be repayable by 82 weekly instalments of $3,000, the first on 19 May 1993 and the last on 21 December 1994. Interest was not payable unless there was a default, and the whole became payable if defaults amounted to $10,000.

By Deed of 30 September 1993 between Easyfind and Spadtan it was recorded that
Easyfind had made further advances for $20,940 which were to form part of the amounts secured by the Deed of Charge. Mr and Mrs Yannacoulacos executed a
Variation of Mortgage dated 30 September 1993 which increased the mortgage principal to $270,940.

In evidence Easyfind gave very little information about its transactions and relationship with Mr and Mrs Yannacoulacos. Easyfind had a contractual entitlement to a second registered mortgage over the house and took a mortgage and variation in registrable forms. No commercial or other reason for omitting to proceed to registration has been shown. Easyfind did not lodge a caveat on the title until it lodged Caveat U741500 on 28 October 1994 and again there is no evidence establishing any commercial or other reason for not lodging a caveat before then.

Spadtan granted to Easyfind a fixed and floating charge over its undertaking and assets by Deed dated 12 January 1993. Details of the charge were notified to Australian Securities Commission on 21 April 1993. A registration copy of the charge was thereafter available for search. Clause 21 of the charge was:- "This Deed secures the same advance as mortgage of even date made by the
Directors of the Company on their home property being the whole of the land in
F.I. 1/502236." 
Exhibit C contains the documents produced by Easyfind on a Notice to Produce given by the plaintiff requiring production of any Letters of Demand or documents relating to realisation of security. The documents produced show that Mr Guy Dawson, Solicitor, who acted for Mr and Mrs Yannacoulacos, was, at least in early stages in March 1993 taking some steps in the interests of
Easyfind, and in July and September 1993 he was taking action in the interests of Easyfind relating to breach of the terms of the mortgage and charge, calling for payment of amounts due and referring to the mortgagee's options about action it could take. A cheque paid to the solicitor's trust account by
Spadtan Pty Ltd on 5 February 1993 for $4,930 Stamp Duty was dishonoured. A demand for every endeavour to make payments by letter of 15 September 1993 was followed by the Variation of Mortgage of 30 September 1993.

The first sign of activity directed to registering Easyfind's mortgage appears on 15 November 1994 when a solicitor's firm of which Mr Guy Dawson was a consultant, apparently acting in the interest of Easyfind, wrote to Austral
Mortgage Corporation furnishing particulars of the second mortgage. This seems to have been treated as a request for consent of the first mortgagee to registration. Although the connection between Austral Mortgage Corporation and
Perpetual Trustee has not been shown, there is obviously a close connection, as this letter produced a response from Perpetual Trustee dated 24 November consenting to the granting and registration of the second mortgage, giving particulars of the amount outstanding on the first mortgage and stating that the Certificate of Title would be produced by Perpetual Trustee's solicitors to enable registration of the second mortgage subject to prior payment of costs of the consent and production. What was then proposed to be registered was Easyfind's mortgage and not the variation; this omission is unexplained. There was a contractual prohibition of creating further charges without the written consent of the mortgagee in cl.1 of the Memorandum incorporated in the first mortgage (see Exhibit 13), but the prompt response illustrates that there was no practical difficulty about obtaining that consent.

The next and last sign of activity before the litigation began is the lodgment, apparently in February or March 1995, of the mortgage for registration as 041646. This led to a notice from the Registrar General to the plaintiff that the plaintiff's Caveat I963157 would lapse after 21 days unless an order of the court extending it was obtained. This notice was sent, again by Messrs Dawson and Butt, to the plaintiff's solicitor by letter of 2 March and led to the commencement of the proceedings and the order extending the caveat.

The strength of Easyfind's position is in its holding the earliest in time of the three competing mortgages. Its position has no other strength. For more than 2 years it was inactive in any way which could have notified others proposing to become interested in the land of its mortgage or restricted the opportunity of Mr and Mrs Yannacoulacos to deal with others. Easyfind did not lodge a caveat until long after the other two competing mortgagees had dealt with Mr and Mrs Yannacoulacos, given value and obtained their interests. So far as appears it did not even communicate with the first mortgagee until long after those events. It left its affairs in the hands of solicitors who in some ways acted in the interests of Mr and Mrs Yannacoulacos. It did not so far as evidence shows respond in a vigilant way to the prompting presented by early defaults, except by the transaction of 30 September 1993 which may have been a further advance or may have capitalised money payable in default. In spite of these unmeritorious aspects of its position its priority in time gave it a strong prima facie advantage over any other unregistered mortgagee, and the onus is on persons asserting priority over it to establish grounds for departing from this.

Other parties and cross-claims.

After amendments Easyfind is the first defendant and Australian Postal Corporation is the third defendant. The second defendants are Mr and Mrs Yannacoulacos and they have never appeared in the proceedings. As they have not filed an appearance they did not receive notice of the date appointed for the hearing. Their solicitor was served with the Summons in accordance with an order of the Court of 21 March 1995 and they did not appear to it. Their solicitor took part in practical arrangements with other parties while the proceedings were pending, and these led to sale of the property and payment into court of part of the proceeds. In the circumstances it is clear that they had been served and have had an opportunity to defend, which they have not taken.

Easyfind commenced a cross-claim, now the Further Amended First Cross-claim, claiming declaratory orders establishing its alleged priority against the other persons holding unregistered mortgages and against Mr and Mrs
Yannacoulacos. Mr Butt, solicitor was also joined as a cross-defendant but proceedings against him were later discontinued. The third defendant
Australian Postal Commission also brought a cross-claim seeking to establish that it had priority.

The plaintiffs and their mortgage.

The plaintiff companies carry on business which includes printing business as Champion Communications. For some years before 1993 they printed the Easyfind Planner Directory for the first defendant. Mr H.F. Bowring is the plaintiff's credit controller for Group Printing. Mr Yannacoulacos approached him in September or early October 1993 and asked whether Champion Communications would print the Easyfind Calendar Planner on credit. Mr Bowring did not at first understand that this was a new approach and not a continuation of business from the source with which Champion Communications had dealt in the past. At first he made a note "Credit Approved 6/10/93" in Champion's Communications papers but when he found that there had been a change of ownership he declined to allow the work to be done on credit. After some other communications he obtained information about Spadtan Pty Ltd, Mr and Mrs Yannacoulacos and their house, and he had some searches made in October. He wrote to Spadtan Pty Ltd on 22 October 1993 referring to their application to credit and said that the trading terms would require a bank guarantee for the amount of the quotation plus sales tax or a letter of credit and "We would require either of the above to be in place prior to commencement of any production." 
Shortly after Mr Bowring sent this letter Mr Yannacoulacos spoke to him again and said "I can give you a second mortgage over my house. It is worth about $500,000. There is a first mortgage of about $300,000 so there would be about $200,000 equity as security for the mortgage." Mr Bowring asked for and was given title particulars and had a search made in the Land Titles Office. He obtained a search paper dated 28 October 1993 and of course, the only mortgage which it showed was the registered first mortgage to Perpetual Trustee
Australia Limited; the search paper also showed that there were no unregistered dealings. If Easyfind had lodged its mortgage for registration, with or without the Variation, or had lodged a caveat, Mr Bowring would have found out about it at this stage. He then decided to give credit on a second mortgage from Mr and Mrs Yannacoulacos, and came to agreement with Mr
Yannacoulacos for a second mortgage and a floating charge over Spadtan. Mr
Bowring told Mr Yannacoulacos "We won't move until the documents have been signed and returned to us." He gave instructions to Champion Communications' solicitors to prepare a mortgage on 4 November. By 1 December 1993 he had the mortgage documents and he sent them by letter to Mr Yannacoulacos for signature. In his letter he said "Floating charge as discussed will be ready
Friday at which point I will forward to yourself for execution. Upon payment of account in full both caveat and floating charge will be discharged."
Consent of registered proprietors to the caveat was not essential. The purpose of sending the caveat form was to obtain the registered proprietors' consent under s.74F(6), so that the minor simplification of notice of the caveat under that subsection would be obtained. By 8 December Mr Bowring had received back the mortgage and caveat, and on that day he forwarded them to Champion
Communications' solicitor with instructions to attend to stamping and registration and confirm when effected. When he had the mortgage and caveat Mr
Bowing told the people concerned with production that the job was in order to proceed, and work proceeded. By 10 December Mr Bowring had received a draft floating charge for Spadtan and he sent that to Mr Yannacoulacos for execution. Champion Communications' solicitor had the caveat stamped and then lodged it on 20 January 1994. Notice of the caveat was sent out by the
Registrar General on 21 January 1994, presumably only to Perpetual Trustees.

Mr Bowring was cross-examined and confronted with the contention that the work or some significant part of it was done before he received back the executed mortgage and caveat. He adhered firmly to his evidence on this matter. It was contended that for some reason his evidence was unsatisfactory but in my view it was quite clear, satisfactory and reliable and I should act on the basis that no significant part of the contract work was done and none of the
Easyfind Planner Directories were produced before Mr Bowring had those documents.

Mr Bowring was also challenged with having made the memorandum "Credit approved" on the order form for 7 October 1993. However I find that his evidence about his later actually maintaining control so as to prevent any significant work being done before he held executed security documents is correct. Even though he had marked the papers "Credit approved" he kept control over what happened thereafter so as to preserve Champion
Communications' interest in having security.

The plaintiffs' records appear to show that the printing work was completed on December. Business records on the back of the job sheet envelope in Exhibit appear to show that deliveries of product began on 4 January 1994 and continued until 13 January 1994 (apart from a relatively small number which were delivered later and were not part of the general circulation through the
Post Office.) 
The plaintiff or its solicitor did not press on with the project of lodging the mortgage for registration. The mortgage was stamped on 13 January 1994 and there is no evidence that any steps were taken to obtain the consent of the first mortgagee and to see to production of the certificate of title so as to enable the mortgage to be registered. From 20 January 1994 on the plaintiff had as much protection for its position as is attained by lodging a caveat.
From 12 May 1994 on the registration of its mortgage was prevented by the lodgment by Australian Postal Corporation of its caveat U257638. Then from 28
October 1994 it was further impeded by the lodgment by Easyfind of its Caveat
U741500.

The charge obtained from Spadtan Pty Ltd was executed and bore date 20
December 1993 and was a charge over the company's book debts. It was described in the registration particulars as a charge to secure liability which arose out of an agreement for printing to be done at the request of Spadtan Pty Ltd; the prospective liability was said to be $70,000. The document referred to the liability as "a quoted price of approximately $70,000". Notification was lodged on 30 December 1993.

The suggestion was made by counsel for Easyfind that in some way the plaintiff's position is prejudiced by the reference in the charge granted by
Spadtan to Easyfind, a copy of which was deposited in the Australian
Securities Commission and could have been available on search, to a collateral security granted by the owners of the house (who were not there named). There is no evidence that the plaintiffs or their solicitor actually knew of the reference to the collateral security, or ever actually read through the copy of the deed of charge on the register so as to find the last clause in it which referred to that security. (Even if they had read the document, it would be an unusually acute reader who would notice that the persons referred to were Mr and Mrs Yannacoulacos, who were not named, and that the property referred to was the house, the address of which was not given although the reference to the certificate of title was.) 
The Doctrine of Constructive Notice has been restated in [s.164](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s164.html) of the [Conveyancing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/), and relates to a purchaser as defined which includes a mortgagee; see [s.7.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s7.html) It is quite clear from Mr Bowring's evidence that he had no actual knowledge of the terms of the Deed of Charge. He knew that it existed, but he regarded it as of small importance because it was collateral to the security which he was relying on, which was the security over the house. He was the executive who was managing this matter on behalf of the plaintiffs.

Under para.(b) of subs.164(1) the plaintiff would also be affected by knowledge which came to its solicitor in the same transaction. The terms of the subsection show that the onus of proof is on the person who alleges that a solicitor had such knowledge or would have had such knowledge in the circumstances stated. The circumstances were that Mr Bowring knew that there was a prior security over Spadtan's undertaking, and the Deed of Charge granted to the plaintiff was regarded as collateral to the main security.
There is no evidence that if the searches, inquiries and inspections which ought reasonably to have been made had been made by the plaintiffs' solicitor, the solicitor would have read right through the registration copy of the Deed of Charge granted to Easyfind. My own knowledge of practice, which is the only source available from which I can draw, leads me to find that a solicitor acting for a client who was taking a mortgage over a house from a company director to secure a guarantee for a debt of the company would not peruse charges and securities granted by the company itself to other lenders and registered at the Australian Securities Commisision. It would only be reasonable for the solicitor to do that if the charge granted by the company was important for his client's protection.

Quite apart from what searches are reasonable under subs.164(1)(b), subs.(1A) appears to exempt mortgagees of land from any requirement to search charges registered with Australian Securities Commission.

Mr Bowring was taxed in cross-examination with not having inquiries made of
Perpetual Trustee company to ascertain whether what he was told by Mr
Yannacoulacos about the debt to the Perpetual Trustee company was correct. He could well have checked this, but no adverse result was produced because what
Mr Yannacoulacos told him about the first mortgage debt was correct.

It was suggested by counsel for Australian Postal Commission that information available to Mr Bowring, which he could have obtained or the implications of which he could have considered, suggested that Spadtan or Mr and Mrs
Yannacoulacos might well have been in a poor financial position. I am unable to see clearly any conclusion to be drawn from this. Plainly enough he thought that their position was such that he ought to require security; that is commonplace for people who give credit. Nothing was put forward which suggested that he ought to have been unusually vigilant with respect to whether or not there was some other unregistered mortgage in existence. The simple fact is that Mr Bowring and his company were cheated by Mr
Yannacoulacos, who spoke of giving them second mortgage security and did not tell them that he already given a second mortgage to somebody else. The circumstances show that Mr Bowring believed this, and I see nothing in the evidence which would establish that he ought not to have believed it or should have been unusually suspicious. Much the same is true of the Australian Postal
Commission and its officers.

A number of matters were contended by Easyfind's counsel to be adverse to the plaintiffs' position. Some of them appear to me to have no importance. It was contended to the effect that Mr Bowring's account of his arrangement with Mr
Yannacoulacos should not be accepted, or that some difficulty about accepting it was created by the terms of the Statement of Liquidated Claim in the
District Court at Sydney which led to a judgment, probably a default judgment, against both Spadtan Pty Ltd and Mr and Mrs Yannacoulacos for the debt for printing work. The Statement of Liquidated Claim alleged Champion
Communications' rights in terms of all three having requested the printing work to be done and incurred liabilities as principals, and in terms of the work having been done in February 1994. These are inaccuracies but they do not vitiate the plaintiffs' position or cause me to have any real doubt about accepting Mr Bowring's account of what took place. Mr and Mrs Yannacoulacos did incur liability, although it was only under the mortgage and not as contracting parties for the printing work.

It is quite clear from circumstances that the plaintiffs relied on the absence of any registration of Easyfind's mortgage and of any caveat; Mr Bowring knew that he should get a search, got one and acted on the position which it showed. At a very late stage he averred in an affidavit sworn on the eve of the hearing that the plaintiffs on his directions would not have done the work if they had not obtained a second mortgage or if the Land Titles Office search had indicated prior caveats or mortgages other than a registered first mortgage. The fact that he made this affidavit very late was suggested to be a basis on which I should decline to believe it. However the circumstances themselves demonstrate that he ascertained the state of the Torrens register and relied on it.

By not lodging its documents for registration and by not lodging a caveat
Easyfind allowed the only source of information available to the public to continue, not for a short period but for over 10 months, to appear to show that the only encumbrance on the title was the first mortgage. Easyfind's omitting to take any such step enabled Mr and Mrs Yannacoulacos to enter into a transaction with another supplier which acted on the basis of inaccurate information furnished by Mr Yannacoulacos about what charges there were. By its inactivity Easyfind left the opportunity to behave in this dishonest way in the hands of Mr and Mrs Yannacoulacos. By October 1993 any period of time had passed for which it would be reasonable to make allowances for attending to such matters as completing documents, stamping them and lodging them at the
Land Titles Office. If those things are done with urgency they can be done in a few days. In the absence of any apparent need for urgent action (and there was no such apparent need) they can be done in a few weeks or a month or so, certainly they could have been done many months before October 1993.

For a creditor with a mortgage for a significant amount, lodging a caveat is neither a difficult nor an unusual measure; this is illustrated by the fact that the plaintiff and the third defendant actually did it; and the debts to them are in the order of one third of the debts to Easyfind. Further, it is not an exercise which need take very much time. It took about six weeks for the plaintiff's caveat to be lodged and about four months for Australian
Postal Commission's caveat to be lodged. By contrast, Easyfind did not lodge the caveat by late October, over 10 months after taking security, and although it eventually did lodge a caveat, this did not happen for a further 12 months.

There is nothing in the circumstances to indicate that Easyfind had any reason to fear that the Yannacoulacos would behave dishonestly; indeed Easyfind did not enter into evidence of what it knew of the propensities of the
Yannacoulacos. However well before October 1993 there had been indications to
Easyfind that the financial responsibility of the Yannacoulacos and Spadtan
Pty Ltd was a subject for some concern. The fact that a company with a subscribed capital of $2 bought a business for $270,000 on a deposit of $20,000 could not have been comforting. The fact that a cheque for stamp duty was not met on presentation should have prompted vigilance and by July 1993 there had been defaults which were sufficiently serious to call for correspondence. Then by 30 September there had been either a further advance or a capitalisation of money payable on default which brought the amounts secured up to a little over the original price. In these circumstances
Easyfind's inaction had become, by 28 October 1993, an unreasonable failure to attend to its own protection and security. If there had not been that failure,
Mr Yannacoulacos would have been quite unable to impose on Champion
Communications in the way in which he did, his assertion that he was giving
Champion Communications a second mortgage would have been falsified and his cheat would have been exposed to Mr Bowring.

Champion Communications behaved in ways which showed a reasonable degree of attention to their own protection and security. Mr Bowring saw to it that the plaintiff did not do the significant work (or even more certainly did not deliver the goods) until he had obtained a search paper and obtained an executed mortgage. The plaintiffs proceeded with reasonable expedition to stamp the mortgage and lodge a caveat. They let an unduly long time pass without lodging their mortgage for registration, and so far as appears in evidence, did not ever make the necessary approach to the first mortgagee for its consent and production of title. The experience of those who did make the approach suggest that was not a large practical difficulty. The failure to lodge the mortgage for registration is mitigated by the lodgment of the caveat, which would have notified anyone who had searched the register of the plaintiff's asserted interest.

The form of the plaintiffs' mortgage.

There is one significant demerit in the plaintiffs' position and it relates to the form of their mortgage. The mortgage is contained in one sheet of paper, on standard form RP25. As well as identifying the land, the lodging party, the names of the mortgagors and the names of the mortgagees it says in its operative parts that the mortgagor "mortgages to the mortgagee all the mortgagor's estate and interest in the land specified above and covenants with the mortgagee that the provision set out in Annexure ........ hereto 
Memorandum No. filed in the Land Titles Office are incorporated in this mortgage subject to the following encumbrances
Mortgage No. I38662 ..." 
There is space in the printed form for referring to an annexure or a memorandum filed in the Land Titles Office, but no annexure and no memorandum were incorporated. The practice, illustrated by two other mortgages in evidence, is to annex a document to form RP25 identifying, at the very least, what money or obligation is charged on the land; and incorporating any other conditions additional to those expressed or implied in the form. As an example, the mortgage taken by Australian Postal Corporation has Annexure A which says "For the consideration of Seventy Seven Thousand Four Hundred and
Forty Dollars ($77,440.00) the mortgagor hereby covenants with the mortgagee to repay that amount to the mortgagee on or before 17 February 1994." 
The mortgage taken by the plaintiff does not identify what debt or other obligation is charged upon the land, and does not set out what agreement was made for the time of payment. In my opinion the mortgage is defective in that it does not comply with the statutory provisions which require that interests in land be created or evidenced in writing. These provisions are now found in [s.23C](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s23c.html) and s.[54A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s54a.html) of the [Conveyancing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/), which take the place of [s.4](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s4.html) of the Statute of Frauds 1677. The provision of [s.23C](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s23c.html) now relevant is in para (1)(a):- "no interest in land can be created or disposed of except by writing signed by the person creating or conveying the same, ...". The relevant provision of [s.54A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s54a.html) is in subs.(1) "No action or proceedings may be brought upon any contract for the sale or other disposition of land or any interest in land, unless the agreement upon which such action or proceedings is brought, or some memorandum or note thereof, is in writing, and signed by the party to be charged or by some other person thereunto by him lawfully authorised." The effect is that an equitable interest in land, including an unregistered mortgage or charge, is not created effectively and is not enforceable unless it is created or evidenced by a written instrument which sets out its terms.

It is plain from Mr Bowring's evidence that there was an agreement between
Champion Communications and Mr and Mrs Yannacoulacos to grant a mortgage to support the liability which Spadtan was to incur, but the form of mortgage is not a complete memorandum of that agreement in that it did not record the term establishing what debt or obligation was to be charged on the land. Indeed it did not deal with that subject at all, and it is a subject with which it is essential that a mortgage should deal. If parties agree or appear to agree that land shall be mortgaged but do not agree about what obligation is to be charged on it, their agreement is illusory. For that reason the form of mortgage does not confer an enforceable charge on the plaintiffs. The plaintiffs' rights depend on their opportunity to bring some proceedings against Mr and Mrs Yannacoulacos to put the document into a form which could be enforced. It seems objectively possible that it could be shown (although evidence does not deal with this) that there was an accidental omission of a provision defining what it was that was charged on the land. That would lead to an order for rectification. Alternatively it may be that it could be shown that the plaintiff is entitled to an order for specific performance of the agreement to grant a mortgage to it. In a case such as this, where a mortgage loan has been advanced or the value for an agreed charge has been given, a mortgagee would be entitled to rely on Part Performance and would obtain an order for specific performance fairly readily, notwithstanding the difficulties exposed in ANZ Banking Group Ltd v. Widin <case>; [(1990) 26 FCR 21] at 33-37 in the judgment of Hill J. However what the plaintiffs bring into the competition of priorities with two other written equitable mortgages is a defective document and a claim, on its face a strong claim, for equitable relief under which their document would be perfected.

The deficiency in the plaintiffs' mortgage document was not produced or contributed to by any act or omission of Easyfind.

Australia Postal Commission and its mortgage.

Spadtan Pty Ltd using the name Easyfind made an Unaddressed Delivery Service Agreement with Australian Postal Corporation on 15 October 1993. This provided for delivery at a cheap rate of bulk unaddressed postage articles. Thereafter there were discussions about security for the bulk postage charge account, and these led to telephone discussion with Mr and Mrs Yannacoulacos' solicitor on 10 January 1994 and a letter from APC's legal officer Mr Brotherson in the name of its General Manager of 11 January 1994 to the solicitors stating that APC was prepared to accept a second mortgage from Mr and Mrs Yannacoulacos in respect to their residential property, subject to conditions. These were: (a) a letter from the first mortgagee confirming that the certificate of title will be produced to enable registration, (b) payment of stamp duty and registration fees, and (c) incorporation of standard clauses. The mortgage was to stipulate that all moneys were to be due and payable on or before 17 February 1994, which was the latest date when bulk postage charges were payable. The solicitors replied on the same day by fax message forwarding a draft mortgage with annexure for approval and saying "We note that you do not require registration to be effected before Australian Postal Commission continues with its obligations under the agreement of October 1993." The draft mortgage was on standard form RP75 with an annexure which I quoted earlier. Later on 11 January Mr Brotherson said that he had no objection to the proposed form of mortgage except that he asked for the annexure to be amended to show the amount as $96,800, which was the estimated mail charges. On 12 January the solicitors sent APC a fax message with a copy of the mortgage executed by Mr and Mrs Yannacoulacos (but not dated); this contained the first form of Annexure A showing the debt as $77,440.00. Later on the same day they forwarded a copy of a fax message on behalf of Perpetual Trustees Australia Limited consenting to a second mortgage for $77,440 and certifying the amount of principal and interest then outstanding; and agreeing to production of the certificate of title for registration subject to payment of costs. This consent was confirmed by a letter signed under power of attorney for Perpetual Trustees on 13 January. The mortgage was then completed and dated as of 14 January 1994; and Annexure A still showed $77,440.00, which was not what APC wanted, although it was what Perpetual Trustee had agreed to consent to. The mortgage was stamped, apparently by Australian Postal Commission, on 14 January 1994. So far as appears it has never been lodged for registration. By the time the caveat U257638 was lodged on 12 May 1994, the time for payment had passed.

Mr Brotherson produced with his affidavit a statement showing the progress of postings under the unaddressed delivery service agreement. Postings began on 4
January and continued on 5, 6 and 7 January. Then there were many more postings on 13 January; however the greater part of the account, which totalled $83,733.15, had been incurred before the assurance was given on 11
January that a mortgage would be provided. All of the account was incurred before the mortgage actually was provided. The mortgage did not secure the whole amount actually incurred.

The terms of the correspondence between Mr Brotherson and Mr and Mrs
Yannacoulacos' solicitors show that APC was given clearly to understand that what was being furnished was a second mortgage. In the letter of 11 January APC said that it was prepared to accept a second mortgage; the solicitors' reply did not comment on the status of the mortgage. The fax message from the solicitor of 12 January referred to the document as a second mortgage, while a later fax message referred to the first mortgagee's consent and the consent forwarded explicitly referred to APC's document as a second mortgage. Like the plaintiffs, APC was cheated about the priority of the mortgage given to it. It is remarkable that this occurred having regard to the involvement of Mr Guy Dawson solicitor, a consultant to the firm, in the earlier business in which a second mortgage was granted to Easyfind.

There is no evidence that APC made a search of the Torrens register at any time, and hence no basis for a view that it relied on the absence of a caveat or that it acted under the impression that the date of the Torrens register indicated that there was no interest such as Easyfind had. From this it follows that Easyfind's not having lodged a caveat or lodged its documents for registration had no influence on APC's conduct or on its claim to priority.
The same is true of the plaintiffs' not having lodged a caveat earlier than 20
January 1994.

Caveats and priorities of equitable interests.

The courts have not adopted the view that the order in which caveats are lodged establishes the priorities of the unregistered interests claimed in the caveats. To do so would be to treat lodging a caveat as a provisional registration of the interest claimed. The terms of the legislation and the function of caveats in it prevent this. The fact that a caveat has been lodged, or that no caveat has been lodged can have some influence on recognition of which competing interest is the better equity. Actual notice of an interest can be gained by searching the title and seeing the claim to the interest made in a caveat. The fact that no caveat has been lodged has sometimes been part of the circumstances in which priorities in point of time have been disturbed.

In Butler v. Fairclough & Anor <case>; [(1917) 23 CLR 78] the failure of an equitable mortgagee to lodge a caveat for one clear day - from 30 June to 2 July - brought about loss of priority over the holder of a competing equitable interest who had been misled by the result of a search. The majority in the High Court saw the matter in fairly simple terms; Griffith CJ at 91-92 and Isaacs J (with whom Barton J concurred) at 97.
Griffith CJ said: "In the case of a contest between two equitable claimants the first in time, all other things being equal, is entitled to priority. But all other things must be equal, and the claimant who is first in time may lose his priority by an act or omission which had or might have had the effect of inducing a claimant later in time to act to his prejudice." The Chief Justice went on to equate not lodging a caveat with leaving title deeds, under the old system, in the possession of the mortgagor. Isaacs J also dealt with the matter as a fairly simple one at 97: "In my opinion, in the absence of some clear explanation justifying or excusing this failure it is one which, at all events in so simple a case as an equitable mortgage, postpones a mortgagee to the person bona fide misled by the result of a search as in the present case. The protection given by the Act to an unregistered and, perhaps, unregisterable transaction is coupled with the price of diligence in guarding others against loss arising through ignorance of the transaction." The dissentients (Gavan Duffy and Rich JJ) did not regard it as necessary to express a view on this; see 101.

In J & H Just (Holdings) Pty Ltd v. Bank of New South Wales & Ors <case>; [(1971) 125 CLR 546] Barwick CJ reviewed this subject extensively and, as he spoke with the concurrence of
McTiernan and Owen JJ forming a majority, he spoke authoritatively. Some observations in the judgment of Griffiths CJ in Butler v. Fairclough were subjected to qualifying observations in J & H Just; see Menzies J at 557 and Windeyer J at 558-559. Barwick CJ made observations at 552 which show that he rejected the view expressed by Griffiths CJ to the effect that a caveat operates as notice to all the world that the registered proprietor's title is subject to the equitable interest alleged. These observations do not detract from the force of a caveat as notice to those who actually find it on search, or from the significance which there being no caveat may have in some chain of events which upsets priorities.

Barwick CJ at 553-554 reviewed Abigail v. Lapin <case>; [[1934] AC 491]; [51 CLR 58], in the Privy Council on appeal from the High Court in Lapin v. Abigail <case>; [(1930) 44 CLR 166.] It was a significant element in the facts of that case that there was no caveat to protect an interest which might have been the subject of a caveat, but as Barwick CJ showed at 554 observations on that subject were obiter dicta and the appeal was disposed of on another basis. The following passage at 554 and 555 shows that it was Barwick CJ's view that the failure to lodge a caveat, combining with other circumstances, may lead to loss of priority of the interest which a caveat could have asserted: "Whilst it may be true in some instances that `the register may bear on its face a notice of equitable claims', this is not necessarily so and whilst in some instances a caveat of which the lodgment is noted in the certificate of title may be `notice to all the world' that the registered proprietor's title is subject to the equitable interest alleged in the caveat this, in my opinion, is not necessarily universally the case. To hold that a failure by a person entitled to an equitable estate or interest in land under the [Real
Property Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/) to lodge a caveat against dealings with the land must necessarily involve the loss of priority which the time of the creation of the equitable interest would otherwise give, is not merely in my opinion unwarranted by general principles or by any statutory provision but would in my opinion be subversive of the well recognized ability of parties to create or to maintain equitable interests in such lands. Sir Owen Dixon's remarks in Lapin v. Abigail <case>; [(1930) 44 C.L.R. 166], at p.205 with which I respectfully agree, point in this direction.
 "Of course, there may be situations in which such a failure may combine with other circumstances to justify the conclusion that `the act or omission proved against' the possessor of the prior equity `has conduced or contributed to a belief on the part of the holder of the subsequent equity, at the time when he acquired it that the prior equity was not in existence' cf. per Knox C.J. in
Lapin v. Abigail (1930) 44 C.L.R., at pp.183-184. This is the relevant principle to apply if it is claimed that the priority of a prior equitable interest has been lost in competition with a subsequent equitable interest.
 `In general an earlier equity is not to be postponed to a later one unless because of some act or neglect of the prior equitable owner. In order to take away any pre-existing admitted title, that which is relied upon for such a purpose must be shown and proved by those upon whom the burden to show and prove it lies, and . . . it must amount to something tangible and distinct, something which can have the grave and strong effect to accomplish the purpose for which it is said to have been produced: per Lord Cairns L.C. in
Shropshire Union Railways and Canal Co. v. The Queen [(1875) L.R. 7 H.L.
](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281875%29%20LR%207%20HL%20496 "View LawCiteRecord" ), at p.507. The Act or default of the prior equitable owner must be such as to make it inequitable as between him and the subsequent equitable owner that he should retain his initial priority. This in effect means that his act or default must in some way have contributed to the assumption upon which the subsequent legal owner acted when acquiring his equity': Lapin v. Abigail per Dixon J. (193) 44 C.L.R., at p.204.
 "In my opinion, the failure to lodge a protective caveat cannot properly be said necessarily to be such an act or default. It could not properly be said to be so in the present case." 
In J & H Just the solicitor for the holder of a later interest had searched the register and found that there were no caveats or encumbrances, and then took what purported to be a first mortgage without obtaining the duplicate certificate of title or ascertaining how it came about that it was held by the Bank, which held it to support a registrable but unregistered mortgage which was prior in time. In my view the decision in J & H Just does not injure the authority of Butler v. Fairclough but shows that a decision on priorities must be made in view of all the relevant facts, which when complex may not produce the same result as in Butler v. Fairclough.

Heid v. Reliance Finance Corporation Pty Ltd <case>; [(1983) 154 CLR 326] was a strong case for the loss of an equitable interest which was prior in time in that the vendor who held interests including an unpaid vendor's lien handed over documents including an executed transfer and did not control the disposition of the certificate of title, putting the person in control of those documents in a position to mortgage the land elsewhere. The vendor's not lodging a caveat was a small part of his difficulties but it was noticed in the judgments; see Gibbs CJ at 338, Mason and Deane JJ at 342. Cf.
Australian Guarantee Corp (NZ) Ltd v. CFC Commercial Finance Ltd [[1995] 1
NZLR 129.] 
I was referred to several decisions which to my mind are applications of the relevant principles and do not operate to establish them: Clark v. Raymor
Pty Ltd [No.2] [[1982] Qd R 790], Jacobs v.
Platt Nominees Pty Ltd & Ors <case>; [[1990] VR 146.] 
In the presence of these authorities McLelland J in Person-to-Person
Financial Pty Ltd v. Sharari [[1984] 1 NSWLR 745] made observations which show the significance which in my opinion ought to be attributed to a failure to lodge a caveat. I respectfully share his Honour's view that the decision in Butler v. Fairclough continues to be of authority.
Priority which would otherwise exist according to time may be lost where some act or omission by the holder of the earlier interest has led the holder of a later interest to acquire his interest on the supposition that the earlier did not exist. Examples of those circumstances occur where the holder of a later interest searched the register, found no such information as lodgement of a caveat would have put there and acted in reliance on the apparent absence of any such interest. As is shown by J & H Just, where these circumstances exist they may not be the only significant circumstances, and they may be outweighed by other circumstances.

Competing equities: equitable interests and mere equities.

A distinction of great importance for competing priorities must be drawn between equitable interests and mere equities. This terminology which does not have a clear and well-settled meaning. The distinction which I make between an equity (or a mere equity) and an equitable estate (which could also be called an equitable interest) was stated with clarity by Upjohn J (as his Lordship then was) in Westminster Bank Limited v. Lee [[1956] 1 Ch 7] 
At p18 to 20 Upjohn J said "Now the bank's charge is equitable, and therefore it takes subject to all equities affecting the land whether it has notice of them or not, subject only to the following qualification. The Court of Equity has been careful to distinguish between two kinds of equities, first, an equity which creates an estate or interest in the land and, secondly, an equity which falls short of that. An equitable mortgagee takes subject to all prior equitable estates or interests in the land whether he has notice of them or not, but in relation to a mere equity it is otherwise; the defence of purchaser for value without notice may be available by the owner of an equitable estate against the owner of a prior equity. The principle was laid down by Lord Westbury L.C. sitting at first instance in Phillips v. Phillips <case>; [(1862) 4 De G.F. & J. 208](/cgi- bin/LawCite?cit=%281862%29%204%20De%20GF%20%26%20J%20208 "View LawCiteRecord" ); as the relevant passages in his judgment are set out and followed in a subsequent judgment of a great master of equity, Fry J., in Cave v. Cave [(1880) 15 Ch.D. 639], I propose to go straight to that case.
 "He said this (at p.646) `The case of Phillips v. Phillips <case>; [4
De G.F. & J. 208] is the one which has been principally urged before me, and that, as being the decision of a Lord Chancellor, is binding upon me, notwithstanding the subsequent comments upon it of Lord St. Leonards in his writings. That case seems to me to have laid down this principle, that, as between equitable interests, the defence will not prevail where the circumstances are such as to require that this court should determine the priorities between them. The classes of cases to which that defence will apply are other than that. Lord Westbury in the course of his judgment in that case said this (at p.215): "I take it to be a clear proposition that every conveyance of an equitable interest is an innocent conveyance, that is to say, the grant of a person entitled merely in equity passes only that which he is justly entitled to and no more. If, therefore, a person seised of an equitable interest (the legal estate being outstanding), makes an assurance by way of mortgage, or grants an annuity, and afterwards conveys the whole estate to a purchaser, he can grant to the purchaser that which he has, namely, the estate subject to the mortgage or annuity, and no more. The subsequent grantee takes only that which is left in the grantor. Hence grantees and incumbrancers claiming in equity take and are ranked according to the date of their securities, and the maxim applies, `Qui prior est tempore potior est jure.'
The first grantee is potior - that is, potentior. He has a better and superior - because a prior - equity." His Lordship then proceeded to explain the different classes of cases in which that defence is available, and the one which has been relied upon as bringing the case of the defendants within the decision of Lord Westbury is the third class, which is this, that (1) "where there are circumstances that give rise to an equity as distinguished from an equitable estate - as, for example, an equity to set aside a deed for fraud, or to correct it for mistake - and the purchaser under the instrument maintains the plea of purchase for valuable consideration without notice, the court will not interfere." `Now the question I have to determine is this, is the right of the parties to follow this money into the land an equitable estate or interest, or is it an equity as distinguished from an equitable estate?' That is the question I have to determine." 
Upjohn J recognised by saying (at 19) "... the defence of purchaser for value without notice may be available by the owner of an equitable estate against the owner of a prior equity" that equities (or mere equities) do not participate in competitions of priorities on the same basis as equitable interests; they may be defeated by equitable interests acquired for value without notice of them; yet they may prevail against equitable interests which are acquired with notice of them. The way in which they may prevail is illustrated by the judgment of Fry J in Bainbrigge v. Browne [[1881] 18 ChD ]
in the passage commencing (on p197) "I must therefore inquire whether the defendants Browne, Rogers, and Rock had notice or knowledge of the circumstances upon which the equity which is alleged against them arose?" to the end of the judgment. Although on the facts it was found that they did not have knowledge of the circumstances in which there was an equity to set aside a transaction for undue influence exercised over the plaintiffs by another defendant, it is evident that if Browne, Rogers and Rock had had such notice
Fry J would have treated them as bound by the plaintiffs' equity.

In my respectful view the law now relevant appears more clearly in the passage which I have cited from Westminster Bank v. Lee than from observations in
Latec Finance v. Hotel Terrigal, where decision was complicated by factors not present here. Kitto, Taylor and Menzies JJ gave judgments in Latec
Investments Ltd v. Hotel Terrigal Pty Ltd (in Liquidation) <case>; [(1965) 113 CLR 265.] They were each of high personal authority in this field and they did not speak with one voice; an indication of its difficulties. The distinction between equitable interests and mere equities was not the matter under decision. Their Honours' statements on the distinction were made on the path to decision and appear to express opinions which each of their Honours regarded as not open to debate. The conclusion which I base on their observations is that a mere equity, meaning a claim to have an equitable interest which can only be enforced by succeeding in some claim to a court for equitable relief (such as a claim for rectification, a claim to set aside a conveyance obtained by fraud or (as I think) a claim the enforcement of which depends on the doctrine of Part Performance) does not participate in competitions of priorities with equitable interests which have been acquired in good faith, for valuable consideration and in a manner which can be clearly shown without obtaining any decision of the court upholding them.

In the Latec case the mere equity was the claim of a mortgagor whose land had been sold and transferred in purported exercise of a mortgagee's power of sale to recover the land from the purported purchaser on the basis that there had been a fraudulent exercise of the power of sale. The significance of the difference between the views of Kitto J and Taylor J about the standing of an equitable estate which is subject to an impediment which there is a claim in equity to remove need not be established now and may not be great. Equitable estates which have difficulties of that kind can be left out of consideration for my present purposes. In my opinion each of their Honour's views shows clearly that an equity which requires the assistance of a court if it is to be established at all does not enter into a competition of priorities with an equitable interest which was obtained for value and without notice of it. A claim which depends on success under the doctrine of Part Performance is in my view a mere equity of the same kind as the illustration given of a claim which depends on success in a suit for rectification.

Conclusions 
I am of the view that the claim of the plaintiffs should be classified as a mere equity, and does not have any standing in the competition of priorities with the equitable interest of Easyfind. But for this matter, the plaintiffs should in my view have succeeded. If the plaintiffs had actually obtained a properly constituted and evidenced equitable mortgage in accordance with statute law, their reliance on the state of the register as shown by search, and the contribution made by Easyfind's not having registered its mortgage or lodged a caveat to Mr Yannacoulacos' opportunity to cheat the plaintiffs would have required the priority in point of time to be reversed in favour of the plaintiffs. 
APC, which did not rely on a search or know of the state the register, was not influenced by Easyfind's inaction and does not have a claim to higher priority than Easyfind.

Easyfind's priority in point of time remains undisturbed. I propose to give judgment for the first defendant.

Cases cited: 
ANZ Banking Group Ltd v. Widin <case>; [(1990) 26 FCR 21] 
Butler v. Fairclough & Anor <case>; [(1917) 23 CLR 78] 
J & H Just (Holdings) Pty Ltd v. Bank of New South Wales & Ors <case>; <case>; [[1934] AC 491]; <case>; <case>; [(1983) 154 CLR 326] 
Australian Guarantee Corp (NZ) Ltd v. CFC Commercial Finance Ltd [[1995] 1
NZLR 129] 
Clark v. Raymor (Brisbane) Pty Ltd [No.2] [[1982] Qd R 790] 
Jacobs v. Platt Nominees Pty Ltd & Ors <case>; [[1990] VR 146] 
Person-to-Person Financial Pty Ltd v. Sharari <case>; [4
De G F & J 208] 
Latec Investments Ltd v. The Hotel Terrigal Pty Ltd (In Liq.) <case>; [(1965) 113 CLR 265] 
Bainbrigge v. Browne [[1881] 18 ChD 188] * * * 
