

Balkin and Anor versus Peck Matter No Ca 40744/95 [1998] NSWSC 337 (24 July )

Last Updated: 9 September 1998 
MURIEL BALKIN & ANOR versus DAVID ARTHUR PECK 
CA 40744/95; EQ 4143/92 July 1998 
Mason P, Priestley JA, Sheppard AJA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: EQUITY DIVISON - COHEN J 
FILE NO/S: CA 40744/95; ED 4143/92 
DELIVERED: 24 JULY 1998 
HEARING DATE/S: 12 FEBRUARY 1998 
PARTIES: BALKIN & ANOR V PECK & ANOR 
JUDGMENT OF: MASON P; PRIESTLEY JA; SHEPPARD AJA 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: D J HAMMERSCHLAG; H S PACKER 
Respondent: M A PEMBROKE SC; A LEAPOLD 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: ROSENBLUM & PARTNERS 
Respondent: MALLESON STEPHEN JAQUES 
CATCHWORDS: 
Trusts and trustees - right of trustees to personal indemnity from beneficiaries 
Negligence - duty of trustees in their capacity as solicitors of the trust 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
NO OF PAGES: 27 
HEADNOTE 
Trusts and trustees - general principles - right of trustees to personal indemnity from beneficiaries - tax liability arising from retention of assets by trustees - trust assets distributed before tax liability paid by trustees 
Negligence - duty of trustees in their capacity as solicitors of the trust - whether failure to minimise tax payable on settlement 
Mr Rosenberg sought to provide income and a home in London for his sister, Mrs
Urquhart. In consequence, Mr Rosenberg settled property on trustees by Deed of
Settlement. The Trust Fund was settled upon trust to pay the income to Mrs
Urquhart during her life and thereafter upon trust for the children of Mr
Rosenberg, the Settlor. The Settlor had three daughters: Mrs Balkin, Mrs
Blumberg and Mrs Smirin ("the remaindermen"). Mrs Balkin and Mrs Blumberg (the appellants) resided in Australia. The original trustees were Mr Rosenberg and
Mr Bayer. When Mr Rosenberg died in 1975 he was replaced as trustee by Mr
Peck. Mr Bayer is now deceased leaving Mr Peck as the surviving respondent.

The fund settled upon the trust was used to purchase a flat in London which was the home of the life tenant between 1968 and her death on 2 February 1986.
In July 1986 the trustees sold the flat for 320,000 pounds and distributed the net proceeds of sale to the remaindermen. Under the Capital Transfer Tax Act (UK) there was a "chargeable transfer" in relation to the London flat consequent upon the life tenant's death. This liability was entirely overlooked by the Trustees between 1986 and 1989, when the British Internal
Revenue levied the tax upon the trustees. A request to the Settlor's daughters for funds to meet the tax was answered by Mrs Smirin but declined by the appellants. The trustees were forced to pay two-thirds of the tax liability out of their own funds together with interest.

Proceedings were commenced by the trustees against the appellants for reimbursement. In response, the appellants brought a cross-claim against the trustees for failure to re-structure the settlement in a manner "tax effective" to the beneficiaries. Cohen J found each of the appellants liable to pay a sum representing one-third of the tax and a proportion of the interest accruing on the tax liability. His Honour also dismissed a Cross
Claim against the trustees for negligence in their capacity as solicitors.

HELD, dismissing the appeal: 
A trustee has a right of indemnity in respect of liabilities incurred in favour of third parties provided that these liabilities are properly incurred.
This right of indemnity is of two types: a right of indemnity out of the trust property itself, and an additional right to proceed against a beneficiary personally for recoupment.

Such rights, unless grounded in contract or statute, derive from the unfairness of a person who gets all or part of the benefit of property or a legal transaction not bearing all or the proportionate part of the burden associated with it.

Hardoon versus Belilios [[1901] AC 118], approved. 
It was no objection to the availability of the right of personal indemnity that: 
Indemnity was sought from more than one beneficiary.

The beneficiaries did not request the trustees to make the payment in question.

There were successive interests in the trust, such as life interests followed by a remainder interest.

The liability was a tax liability.

The trust had come to an end when its corpus had been entirely distributed.

Re German Mining Co; Ex parte Chippendale <case>; [(1853) 4 D M & G 19], applied. 
The trustees, in their capacity as solicitors, did not breach the duty of care owed to the beneficiaries.

ORDERS
Amend the Minute of Judgment by adding "each of" before "the defendants" in para 1.
Appeal dismissed with costs.

JUDGMENT 
MASON P: In Hardoon versus Belilios [[1901] AC 118] at 124 the right of trustees to a personal indemnity from a beneficiary in respect of liabilities incurred by reason of retention of the trust property was described by Lord Lindley as "well established" and "one as old as trusts themselves". As beneficiaries, the appellants contend that this right was not available to the trustees of the Fritz Rosenberg Settlement for various reasons. If held liable, they seek damages for negligence from the trustees in their capacity as the Settlement's solicitors. The negligence is said to be the failure to re-structure the Settlement in a manner "tax effective" to the beneficiaries. 
FACTS 
Mrs Clara Urquhart was South African by birth. She came to live in the United
Kingdom in about 1955. She had a substantial income from business interests in
South Africa and Swaziland, but owned no property in nor received any income from the United Kingdom.

In 1968 Mrs Urquhart suffered a heart attack and required hospital treatment.
Her brother Mr Fritz Rosenberg told his solicitor Mr Bayer that he wanted to buy a home in London for Mrs Urquhart to live in. He later gave Mr Bayer instructions to set up a trust which could provide Mrs Urquhart with a home in
London during her lifetime. Mr Bayer was asked to be a trustee with Mr
Rosenberg, and because of his close friendship with the family he agreed. Mr
Rosenberg wanted the trust to be as simple as possible. At the same time he wished to avoid the imposition of tax or death duties on his estate arising out of it. He told Mr Bayer that he did not want to establish a trust outside
England.

In consequence, Mr Rosenberg settled property upon trustees by Deed of
Settlement dated 13 March 1968. The Trust Fund was settled (in the events which happened) upon trust to pay the income to the Settlor's sister Clara
Urquhart ("the life tenant") during her life and thereafter upon trust for the children of the Settlor. The Settlor had three daughters: Mrs Balkin, Mrs
Blumberg and Mrs Smirin. The first two reside in Australia and they are the appellants. The original trustees were Mr Rosenberg and Mr Bayer. When Mr
Rosenberg died in 1975 he was replaced as trustee by Mr Peck. Mr Bayer gave evidence at the trial but is now deceased. The respondent, Mr Peck, is the surviving respondent.

The fund of £30,000 that was settled upon the trust was used to purchase a flat at London House, Avenue Road, London. This was the home of the life tenant between 1968 and her death on 2 February 1986. Clause 4(d) of the Deed of Settlement gave the trustees power to permit any beneficiary to reside in any dwelling house which was subject to the trusts thereof. All of this was known to the three daughters of the Settlor in whom the remainder interest was vested.

Under the Capital Transfer Tax Act 1984 (UK) ("the Act") (now known as the
Inheritance Tax Act 1984) there was a "chargeable transfer" in relation to the
London flat consequent upon the life tenant's death. This tax was levied upon the trustees. A request to the Settlor's daughters for funds to meet the tax was answered by Mrs Smirin but declined by the appellants. The trustees were forced to pay two-thirds of the tax liability out of their own funds together with interest. These proceedings were commenced for reimbursement.

Cohen J found each of the appellants liable to pay a sum representing one- third of the tax together with certain interest accruing on the tax liability.
He held that the trustees could not recoup so much of the interest they had incurred as was attributable to delay flowing from their mistake. His Honour also dismissed a Cross Claim against the trustees for negligence in their capacity as solicitors.

UNITED KINGDOM CAPITAL TRANSFER TAX 
Section 1 of the Act provides that capital transfer tax ("CTT") shall be charged on the "value transferred" by a "chargeable transfer". A chargeable transfer is defined in s2 as "any transfer of value which is made by an individual but is not ... an exempt transfer". A transfer of value can be actual or notional: see generally, McCutcheon and Whitehouse, McCutcheon on
Inheritance Tax 3rd ed, 1988, §1-03. One such notional transfer occurs in relation to settled property in which a person has an interest in possession.
If a person dies entitled to an interest in settled property, the settled property in which the interest subsists is treated as having been comprised in the deceased's estate immediately before death: Id, p5.

The charging provisions relating to settlements subsequent to their creation are to be found in Part III of the Act (ss43-93). A person beneficially entitled to an interest in possession in settled property is treated for the purposes of the Act as beneficially entitled to the whole of the property in which the interest subsists (s49(1)). Section 52(1) provides in effect that a deemed transfer of value occurs upon the coming to an end of an interest in possession during the lifetime of a beneficiary. This includes the death of the beneficiary, because s4 treats the interest in possession as having been disposed of immediately prior to the death. Section 4(1) provides: "On the death of any person tax shall be charged as if, immediately before his death, he had made a transfer of value and the value transferred by it had been equal to the value of his estate immediately before his death." 
It was common ground that a tax liability arose by reason of the "value transferred" consequent upon the death of the life tenant (albeit that the transfer was deemed by s4(1) to have occurred immediately before death). In this event the persons that became liable for the tax were both the trustees at the time of death and the three daughters of the Settlor. This is because s200 relevantly provided: "Transfer on Death (1) The persons liable for the tax on the value transferred by a chargeable transfer made (under section 4 above) on the death of any person are - ...
 so far as the tax is attributable to the value of property which, immediately before the death, was comprised in a settlement, the trustees of the settlement; ...
 so far as the tax is attributable to the value of any property which, immediately before the death, was comprised in a settlement, any person for whose benefit any of the property or income from it is applied after the death." 
Section 237(1) effectively imposed a statutory charge over the property in favour of the Inland Revenue for unpaid tax.

As indicated, it was common ground at the trial that CTT was payable in accordance with the provisions which I have summarised. Unfortunately, this liability was entirely overlooked by the Trustees between 1986 and 1989, and disputed by the appellants between 1989 and the trial of these proceedings in .

In July 1986 the trustees sold the flat for £320,000. In October 1986 the whole of the net proceeds of sale were distributed to the life tenant's three nieces as remaindermen under the Settlement. Before doing this Mr Bayer, who was the active trustee at the time, took the advice of counsel in London.
Counsel was asked to advise whether the trustees would be liable for tax on the sale of the flat. Counsel confined himself to the precise question asked. He noted that a capital gain would arise on the sale of the flat and that this rendered the trustees prima facie liable to
UK capital gains tax in the hands of the trustees. He concluded nevertheless that the sale transaction was exempt from capital gains tax because there was in effect a disposal of a private residence. In so concluding, counsel addressed only the provisions of the Capital Gains Tax Act 1979 (UK). He did not discuss the issue of liability for CTT under the Capital Transfer Tax Act
His conclusion that "the gain on the disposal of the flat will be exempt from capital gains tax, and not liable to any other tax"(emphasis added) was literally correct. Unfortunately, it appears to have contributed to
Mr Bayer overlooking the question of liability to CTT which, as previously indicated, arose upon the death of the life tenant as distinct from the sale of her former residence. In his evidence at trial Mr Bayer made it clear that he was aware of the CTT regime at all times since its commencement in 1975.
CTT was introduced pursuant to the Finance Act 1975 (UK) which was later replaced by the Capital Transfer Tax Act 1984. Mr Bayer made no bones about the fact that he had been careless in overlooking the question of CTT both before and after distributing the net proceeds of sale of the flat to the remaindermen.

It was in 1989 that Mr Bayer's attention was drawn to this oversight. His entreaties to the British Internal Revenue that he and his fellow trustee should be relieved of their personal liability for tax fell upon deaf ears.

ISSUES IN THE APPEAL 
Neither at trial nor on appeal did the trustees base their claim upon the principles relating to payment of money under mistake. Such a claim would have focussed upon the beneficiaries' receipt of what would be regarded prima facie as an unjust enrichment, at least according to Australian law since David
Securities Pty Ltd versus Commonwealth Bank of Australia <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 353.] Rather, the case was conducted on the basis that any right of reimbursement to the trustees stemmed from the payment which they later made to the Inland Revenue (UK). The trustees argued that, since this payment had been properly made in response to a lawful demand and since it related to the trust, the trustees had a right of personal indemnity from the appellants.

A trustee has an established right of indemnity in respect of liabilities incurred in favour of third parties provided that these liabilities are properly incurred. This right of indemnity is of two types: a right of indemnity out of the trust property itself, and an additional right to proceed against a beneficiary personally for recoupment. (I have stated these propositions baldly.) When the trustees exhausted the trust assets by distributing them to the three sisters in October 1986 there ceased to be any trust property against which the former right could be exercised. Hence reliance upon the latter.

The authority usually cited in support of the right of personal indemnity is the Privy Council decision in Hardoon versus Belilios [[1901] AC 118.] Hardoon was an appeal to the Privy Council from a judgment of the Full Court of the
Supreme Court of Hong Kong which affirmed a judgment of non-suit in favour of the respondent. The appellant was the registered holder of shares in a company. He held them on trust for the respondent, who was the sole beneficial owner of the shares. The circumstances giving rise to the trust relationship were complicated, but it is sufficient for present purposes to note that they did not arise out of any dealings between the appellant and the respondent and that the respondent had not been the party who had initiated the steps which led to the creation of the trust. The shares were not fully paid up when the company went into liquidation. Judgment had been entered in favour of the liquidator against the appellant for calls made on him in respect of the shares. It was against this judgment that the appellant sought indemnity. His claim had failed in the courts below because there was no evidence of any contract by the respondent to indemnify. However, the appellant succeeded in the Privy Council.

It will be necessary to consider exactly what Hardoon decided and the principles lying behind it. For the moment it is appropriate to note that the appellants contended that personal indemnity was unavailable for one or more of the following reasons:
Indemnity was sought from more than one beneficiary.
The beneficiaries against whom indemnity was sought had not "requested" the trustees to make the payment in question. (The appellants were not the
Settlor of the trust and were ignorant of the tax payment by the trustees before it was made.)
There were successive interests in the trust, being a life interest followed by a remainder interest.
The tax liability in question was not a trust expenditure in the sense required by the principle in Hardoon.
The trust had come to an end when the net proceeds of sale of the flat were distributed in October 1986.
The appellants had special defences to the trustees' claim, based upon the trustees' failure: to "take the Trust offshore" before the death of the life tenant, thereby avoiding the tax liability which fell due on the deceased's death; and to advise the appellants of the tax liability at the time when the trust assets were distributed.
 (There was no suggestion on the evidence that either appellant had acted to her detriment on the faith of the payment to her. Such a defence had been pleaded but it was not pressed.) 
The appellants also challenged the trial judge's dismissal of the Cross Claim against the solicitors. And, by a Supplementary Notice of Appeal they disputed the costs order made below.

The concept underlying Hardoon 
Lord Lindley commenced his analysis of the legal issues in Hardoon by considering "on what principle an absolute beneficial owner of Trust property can throw upon his trustee the burdens incidental to its ownership". His response (at 123) was that: "the plainest principles of justice require that the cestui que trust who gets all the benefit of the property should bear its burden unless he can shew some good reason why his trustee should bear them himself. The obligation is equitable and not legal, and the legal decisions negativing it, unless there is some contract or custom imposing the obligation, are wholly irrelevant and beside the mark. Even where trust property is settled on tenants for life and children, the right of their trustee to be indemnified out of the whole trust estate against any liabilities arising out of any part of it is clear and indisputable; although, if that which was once one large trust estate has been converted by the trustees into several smaller distinct trust estates, the liabilities incidental to one of them cannot be thrown on the beneficial owners of the others. This was decided in Fraser versus Murdoch (6 App Cas ), which was referred to in argument. But where the only cestui que trust is a person sui juris, the right of the trustee to indemnity by him against liabilities incurred by the trustee by his retention of the trust property has never been limited to the trust property; it extends further, and imposes upon the cestui que trust a personal obligation enforceable in equity to indemnify his trustee. This is no new principle, but is as old as trusts themselves." 
It was considered "quite immaterial" that there was no contractual relationship or that the respondent had never requested the appellant to become his trustee (ibid).

It is understandable why Lord Lindley emphasised the equitable basis of the right in a trustee context. However, the notion of a right to contribution, recoupment or indemnity is not peculiar to equitable relationships. Such rights, unless grounded in contract or statute, derive from the unfairness of a person who gets all or part of the benefit of property or a legal transaction not bearing all or the proportionate part of the burden associated with it. Lord Lindley described this concept of correlative benefit/burden as "the plainest principle of justice" in Hardoon (at 123). In Causly v Countryside (No 3) Pty Ltd, Court of Appeal, unreported, 2 September 1996 this Court approved the statement of McGarvie J in J W Broomhead (Vic) Pty
Ltd versus J W Broomhead Pty Ltd <case>; [[1985] VR 891] at 936 that "the basis of the principle is that the beneficiary who gets the benefit of the trust should bear its burdens unless he can show some good reasons why the trustee should bear the burdens himself". See also Mahoney versus McManus <case>; [(1981) 180 CLR 370] at 388; Paul A Davies (Australia) Pty Ltd versus Davies [[1983] 1 NSWLR 440] at 450. Many later authorities have preferred to use the concept of unjust enrichment to describe the same basal principle: cf Pavey & Matthews Pty Ltd versus Paul <case>; [(1987) 162 CLR 221] at 256-7. Whatever its label, it is a concept that informs doctrines of equitable and legal contribution (Dering versus Earl of
Winchelsea (1787) 1 Cox 318, [29 ER 1184]; Albion Insurance Co
Ltd versus Government Insurance Office  <case>; [(1969) 121 CLR 342] at 350-2), marshalling (Ramsay versus Lowther <case>; [(1912) 16 CLR 1] at 23-4) and recoupment by varieties of sureties against those principally liable (Moule versus Garrett [(1872) LR 7 Ex 101] at ).

This concept has been applied to tax liabilities, where the person made liable to pay the impost did not enjoy any or all of the beneficial interest in the property attracting the tax: Brook's Wharf and Bull Wharf Ltd versus Goodman
Brothers [[1937] 1 KB 534]; Armstrong versus Commissioner of Stamp Duties [(1967) SR 38.] In Armstrong (which involved contribution) Walsh JA applied the principle deriving from Brook's Wharf (an indemnity case), which he stated (at 45) as: "Where complete indemnity is sought on the ground that, although both plaintiff and defendant were liable to pay the debt, the defendant was, as between himself and the plaintiff, primarily liable, such a claim can be sustained where the debt is created by a revenue law." 
This principle has direct application in the present appeal, insofar as the liability to pay United Kingdom capital transfer tax was imposed upon both the trustees and remaindermen of the Trust by s200(1)(b) and (d) of the Capital
Transfer Tax Act (UK) (supra).

THE APPELLANTS' SUGGESTED LIMITATIONS ON HARDOON V BELILIOS 
I return to the way in which the case was argued here and below, by reference to Hardoon as a principle of the law of trusts. I have endeavoured to demonstrate the underlying rationale for the specific right declared by Lord
Lindley. To understand that rationale is to reject the appellants' attempt to preclude application of Hardoon to multiple beneficiaries, beneficiaries who had not requested the payment in question, or beneficiaries who are remaindermen: see generally Hughes, "The Right of a Trustee to a Personal
Indemnity from Beneficiaries" [(1990) 64 ALJ 567.] 
The principle in Hardoon has been applied to multiple beneficiaries on several occasions: see Re German Mining Co; Ex parte Chippendale <case>; [(1853) 4 D M & G 19] (cited in Hardoon at 125); Matthews versus Ruggles-Brise [[1911] 1 Ch ];
J W Broomhead; Metcalfe versus NZI Securities Australia Ltd, Federal
Court of Australia, Full Court, unreported, 5 March 1996; Causley v
Countrywide (No 3) Pty Ltd, Court of Appeal, unreported, 2 September 1996.
The requirement of a requested payment was rejected as long ago as Dering v
Earl of Winchelsea (1787) 1 Cox 318, [29 ER 1184] and was regarded as "quite immaterial" in Hardoon (at 123). And there is an express statement justifying the application of the principle in relation to property settled on tenants for life and children in the passage set out above from
Hardoon (at 123-4). The present case does not involve beneficiaries who are not sui juris, or entitled to a limited interest in the trust property, such as a life estate. (Whether that should be determinative can be left until a proper case arises.) It is true that a statement of Lord Lindley (at 127) reserves the situation touching shares held "for tenants for life", but I read this as addressing the issue of indemnity against life tenants; and certainly not casting doubt upon the application of Hardoon to a situation such as the present where the remainder interest has vested in possession by the very act giving rise to the liability sought to be recouped.

The submission that the CTT tax liability incurred by the trustees fell outside Hardoon must also be rejected. It was argued that Hardoon only applies to trustee liabilities arising from the "mere fact of ownership" (per Lord Lindley at 125); and that the tax liability here arose as a consequence of the trustee's relationship with the life tenant imposed by the settlor. I confess to having difficulty in reading this expression of Lord
Lindley as indicating some limitation on the right earlier expounded as deriving from the benefit/burden (or unjust enrichment) concept. See also
Armstrong. Be that as it may, the liability imposed on the trustees here was a direct incident of an inevitable aspect of the settled property vested in them, ie the death of the life tenant. And an "ownership-based" liability is underscored by the statutory charge over the property for the unpaid tax .

Similar reasoning disposes of the submission that the liability was not incurred for the appellants' benefit. It is difficult to pinpoint the nub of the submission. After all, the property was at all times held on trust for the appellants. And it was the very transfer of "value" to the remaindermen, consequent upon the death of the life tenant, that attracted the tax liability. Had the tax not been paid, the statutory charge would have subsisted, as would the beneficiaries' personal liability to pay the tax. The fact that the appellants did not request the trustees to pay the tax is quite irrelevant, so long as the liability is a proper trust expense. A trustee's right of personal indemnity is not confined to cases where there is request or implied contract.

Nor is it to the point that the flat was sold and the net assets distributed in late 1986. The trustee's liability to pay the tax arose earlier, upon the death of the life tenant. In July 1989 the appellants were approached by the trustees seeking indemnity, but were met with a prompt refusal based upon denial of any tax liability. But it is no longer in dispute that the trustees were obliged to pay the tax if the British revenue authorities pressed them to meet it. It is interesting that, while United States trust law does not recognise a general right equivalent to that established in Hardoon, a trustee there will have a claim to indemnity from a beneficiary personally if the trust estate has been conveyed to that beneficiary overlooking an obligation (such as a tax obligation) which the trustee was later required to pay: see Scott on Trusts 4th ed §§249, 249.1; Equitable Trust Co v
Kingsley 197 NY Supp 267 (1922), affd 201 NY Supp 900 (1923), affd [144 NE ] (1924).

It is no answer to the trustees' personal right of indemnity with respect to a proper trust expense to say that the trustees could have or even should have recouped the liability out of the trust property when it was in their hands.
The personal right is distinct from the right of indemnity out of trust assets. It is not necessary to list all of the special defences to the right of indemnity to be able to say that nothing in the present case attracts any such special defence. The trustees might have pursued the beneficiaries before settling with the British revenue authorities: cf Rankin versus Palmer <case>; [(1912) 16 CLR 285] at 290-1; Wren versus Mahony <case>; [(1972) 126 CLR 212] at 225-6. But they were not bound to do so on pain of loss of their right. There was demand before proceedings were commenced, and absence of change of position. The distribution of what were believed to be the net trust assets in 1986 involved, in all probability, a payment made under mistake of law which was received by the appellants in Australia. However the law in Australia or England is to be regarded in the period prior to the High
Court's decision in David Securities in 1992, the distribution certainly raised no equity against the trustees. It did not represent a breach of trust.
Nor did it represent an accord and satisfaction.

The alleged failure of the trustees to "take the trust offshore" before the death of the life tenant, thereby avoiding the tax liability which fell due on the deceased's death, represented no breach of trust causative of loss to the trust estate or the appellants. I strongly doubt whether it involved any breach of trust, in the light of the "absolute and uncontrolled discretion" vested in the trustees as to retention of trust investments in their original form: see clauses 4(a) and 5 of Settlement. It certainly was not causative of any loss in the light of the findings on causation referred to below. Indeed it was entirely appropriate conduct on the trustees' part, for reasons addressed in the next portion of this judgment. It cannot operate to preclude the trustees' right of indemnity otherwise arising.

THE APPELLANTS' CROSS CLAIM FOR DAMAGES AGAINST THE SOLICITORS 
The Settlor was domiciled outside the United Kingdom, which meant that, had the property in the settlement been situated outside the United Kingdom, no capital transfer tax would have been payable. However, the settlor's original instructions were to establish the trust in England. Evidence was given by a tax expert that, following the Finance Act 1975 (UK), it would have been possible to avoid ultimate CTT liability on the death of the life tenant by transferring the flat to the ownership of a company incorporated in, say, one of the Channel Islands or the Isle of Man. On the basis of this evidence the appellants claimed that the solicitors were in breach of their duty of care and were liable in damages for the amount of tax for which they sought recoupment.

I am in entire agreement with what Cohen J has written on the issue of the appellants' Cross Claim against the trustees in their capacity as solicitors.
I respectfully adopt it. It may be summarised as follows.

Cohen J assumed that the solicitors owed a duty of care to the beneficiaries of the trust and that this duty extended to one of advice as to benefits and possible disadvantages, if any, which might arise from transferring ownership of the flat to an offshore company. Reference was made to Ross v
Caunters <case>; [[1995] 2 AC .] 
The learned judge posed the question whether the failure to tell the beneficiaries of the effect of the statutory changes in 1975 or thereafter could amount to negligence from which any damages could flow. This question was answered in the negative, having regard to (1) expert evidence about the doubtful effectiveness of the proposed tax-avoidance scheme, including problems for the trustees in relation to their obligation to maintain ultimate control over trust assets; and (2) the serious risk that the scheme would have provoked close scrutiny by the United Kingdom revenue authorities of the increasingly debatable proposition that the life tenant retained a domicile outside the United Kingdom. Mr Bayer had actually turned his mind to this risk, and it was a real one. If the revenue authorities had determined that the life tenant acquired an English domicile, there would have been very serious adverse consequences to the life tenant's income tax position and in relation to the tax or duty payable upon her death. Had these risks come home, the appellants and their sister would have suffered, because they were the ultimate beneficiaries of the life tenant's estate. These risks meant that it was highly improbable that the beneficiaries and the life tenant would have opted to take the trust offshore had they been offered the prospect of doing so. Indeed it was held likely that the life tenant would have opposed this, with the probable consequence (whatever the views of the nieces) that the trustees would have exercised their very broad discretions under the trust instrument by adhering to the status quo.

The solicitor trustees had to act impartially in considering whether to exercise any power to restructure the Settlement: see Re Zimpel [[1963]
WAR 171] at ; Re Campbell [[1973] 2 NSWLR 146.] Of necessity, this meant that they did not have to prefer the interests of the residuary beneficiaries over that of the life tenant. And they were entitled to have regard to their express powers. It was also highly relevant that the three sisters were the residuary beneficiaries of the life tenant and, as such, their financial interests were vitally linked with those of the life tenant.

COSTS BELOW 
The trial judge ordered the defendants to pay the costs of the plaintiffs of the claim and the cross-claim. I see no error in this. The appellants submit that some offset should have been made in relation to their success in limiting the trustees' claim to interest. Given the comparatively small amount of time apparently devoted to this issue, no appealable error is shown.

ORDERS 
During the argument in the appeal it was noticed that the judgment entered does not reflect the trial judge's reasons in one obvious respect. The parties agreed that it should be amended by adding "each of" before the words "the defendants" in para 1 of the judgment.

I would therefore propose the following orders: (By consent) amend the Minute of Judgment by adding "each of" before "the defendants" in para 1.
Appeal dismissed with costs.

PRIESTLEY JA: For the reasons given by Mason P I agree that the facts of the present case fall in the area of trust law and equitable concepts of which Hardoon versus Belilios [[1901] AC 118] is a leading example. That means that the appeal against the order made by Cohen J in the proceedings commenced by the trustees must fail. 
I also agree, again for the reasons given by Mason P that Cohen J was right in dismissing the appellant's cross claim against the trustees.

I agree with the orders proposed by Mason P.

SHEPPARD AJA: In this matter I have had the advantage of reading the judgment to be delivered by Mason P. I am in agreement with his Honour's reasons and conclusions, and with the order which he proposes. * * * 
