

R E Stubbs versus Victims Compensation Fund Corporation and Anor [1996] NSWSC (24 October 1996) 
R E STUBBS versus VICTIMS COMPENSATION FUND CORPORATION & ANOR /96 DC 6381/94 
THURSDAY 24 October 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
CLARKE JA, GILES AJA, ABADEE AJA 
CATCHWORDS: Administrative Law - Refusal by Victims Compensation Tribunal to extend time - Appeal to District Court - Whether claimant was denied procedural fairness - Judicial silence - Whether reasonable apprehension of bias arising from question asked of counsel by trial judge.

EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Ex Tempore 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed 
JUDGMENT 
CLARKE JA: I will ask Abadee AJA to give the first judgment.

ABADEE AJA: The claimant, by summons, seeks an order in the nature of certiori to remove into this Court the record of proceedings in the District Court heard on 7 and 8 November 1995 before Downs DCJ, with judgment being delivered on 8 November 1995, and for an order quashing the judgment and the order made. 
The claimant also seeks a declaration that Downs DCJ when entertaining an appeal under <case> of the Victims Compensation Act ("the Act") erred in law in a number of respects thereby denying the claimant procedural fairness, and that his Honour conducted the proceedings in such a way as to give rise to a reasonable apprehension of bias against her.

THE FACTUAL CIRCUMSTANCES 
The application arises out of an appeal by the complainant under <case> of the
Victims Compensation Act against a decision of the Victims Compensation
Tribunal ("the Tribunal").

I now turn to consider the factual matters. On 15 September 1994 a claim was lodged on the applicant's behalf under the Act. This was accompanied by an application for leave to bring her claim for compensation out of time. The claimant (date of birth 19 September 1969) claimed that when she was aged nine and ten years she had been sexually assaulted by her father during a period in the latter half of 1978. She alleged that in consequence of these sexual offences she has suffered trauma and related psychological dysfunction.

On 23 September 1994 the Tribunal advised the claimant that her request for leave to apply for compensation out of time was refused. The Tribunal in fact dismissed the matter under <case>(b) of the Act as being out of time. The
Tribunal, in making the order, also declined to extend the time for lodgment under <case>(d) of the Act.

Section 17(2)(d) of the Act provides that applications for compensation shall be lodged "within two years (or within such longer period as the Tribunal may, in a particular case, allow) after the relevant act of violence or injury".

On 21 November 1994 the Tribunal was served with a copy of the Notice of
Appeal to the District Court.

An appeal to the District Court may be brought by an applicant for compensation from "any determination of the Tribunal in respect of the application" (see <case> of the Act). An appeal to the District Court is a hearing "de novo" and further evidence may be received. In this case further evidence was put before the District Court. The hearing was also conducted in accordance with part 6 division 7 of the District Court Rules. As to the relevant provisions and rules, see Goldsmith versus Victims Compensation
Tribunal & Anor [(1993) 30 NSWLR 410]; and
Torrealba versus District Court of New South Wales & Anor (Court of
Appeal, 6 September 1996, unreported). In the latter case it was held that when the Tribunal declined to extend the time within <case>(d) of the Act, the claimant had a right of appeal from that decision to the District Court pursuant to the provisions of <case> of the Act. The appeal, as I have said, came on for hearing before Downs DCJ. At the hearing of the claimant's appeal the claimant's counsel appears to have put before his Honour a copy of the file of the Victims Compensation Tribunal. This file included a police statement of the claimant dated 8 August 1993 setting out the offences; a police statement of the claimant's mother dated 1 September 1993; a copy of the claim for compensation dated 9 September 1994; a report of Rhonda Gleeson, a counsellor with Macquarie Health Services, dated 2 September 1994; and a report of Lynette Lewis, psychologist, dated 20 August 1994.

In her report Dr Lewis considered that the claimant was then suffering from a severe case of post traumatic disorder. An affidavit of the claimant's solicitor dated 17 January 1995, which was filed in the District Court proceedings, was also tendered, together with an affidavit of the claimant sworn on 17 January 1995. In addition, a report of Dr Clark, a forensic psychiatrist, dated 6 June 1995, together with a report of Dr Lewis, psychologist, dated October 1995, was tendered in those proceedings. In her report Dr Clark diagnosed a post traumatic stress disorder, lingering depression, or a chronic dysthymic disorder.

The actual hearing time of the application appears to have been relatively brief, although considerable evidentiary material was put before Downs DCJ. In addition, his Honour also had the benefit of having placed before him comprehensive written submissions from the claimant. It should be noted there was no appearance before Downs DCJ on behalf of the Victims Compensation Fund
Corporation ("the Fund"), although some written submissions had been filed which did not really address the question of leave, but rather the consequences of leave were such to be granted by his Honour.

In the proceedings before this Court an affidavit from counsel appearing at the trial has been tendered before the Court. That affidavit annexed certain material, including part of the transcript of proceedings before Downs DCJ on and 8 November 1995. The transcript of 8 November 1995 reveals Downs DCJ stated that he read all of the material placed before him by the claimant on the previous day.

On 8 November 1995 his Honour entertained extensive submissions advanced on behalf of the claimant by her counsel. He then adjourned the proceedings until pm when he delivered short reasons for judgment.

So far as is relevant his Honour's judgment, which was very brief, was as follows: "On 23 September 1994 the Victims Compensation Tribunal refused Raylene
Elizabeth Stubbs leave to apply for compensation out of time and dismissed the proceedings. This is an appeal, a hearing de novo, from that decision. Mr
Bartley of counsel appears for the appellant.

During September and October 1979 the appellant's natural father committed three acts of indecency upon the appellant. Each act lasted a matter of seconds rather than minutes. After hearing about a neighbour's child who had been touched by a boy, the appellant first mentioned the incident to a friend and to her mother in 1991. Early in 1993 she first heard about victim's compensation from a counsellor. In March 1993 she wrote to her father requesting that if he paid her $3000 she would not have him charged. On 16
September 1994 her father was sentenced to imprisonment for a minimum term of nine months and an additional term of 18 months. Those, briefly stated, are the facts upon which I am to consider the application that is before me.

The relevant section of the Victims Compensation Act provides section 17(2)(d) as follows: 'An application shall be lodged with the Registry of the Clerk of the Local
Court within two years (or within such longer period as a tribunal may in a particular case allow) after the relevant act of violence, etc.' 
The facts here disclose that more than sixteen years have passed since the acts of violence were committed. They were short acts which did not extend over a long period and only one of them involved minimal physical injury.

The appellant was twenty-one before she said anything about them to anyone and, although she first became aware of victim's compensation in early 1993, it was not until the latter part of 1994 that she lodged her application.
There is a report from a psychiatrist, Dr Clark. who qualified himself in
April of this year. Although he considered on the history given to him that the appellant was suffering from post traumatic disorder as a result of the assaults, I am satisfied that having regard, firstly, to the many years that have passed since the alleged incidents. Secondly, the appellant's delay in lodging her application, even though it has been in the hands of a solicitor for some months. And thirdly, the obvious prejudice to the Tribunal for not having had an opportunity to examine her or any parts of her history over many years that leave should not be granted. I dismiss the appeal. I affirm the orders of the Tribunal. I make no order as to costs of the appeal. The exhibits may be returned." 
It is not for me to say whether I agree with this judgment or not. It is not for this Court to determine whether Downs DCJ was right or wrong in his decision.

In the proceedings before us it was claimed that his Honour, prior to his judgment, did not draw to the attention of counsel for the claimant a number of considerations said to have been of importance to his Honour's conclusion and judgment. It was submitted that these matters were so unusual and unrelated to the evidence as to suggest a lack of procedural fairness. Indeed, it was also submitted by Mr Porter QC that by reference to the reasons that his Honour decided the case on matters that could not have been anticipated by counsel appearing at the trial for the claimant. These matters were said to be the claimant's failure to mention the sexual assaults committed against her to anyone until she was twenty-one years of age (when such assaults occurred at ages nine and ten years); that the incidents were of sexual abuse which did not extend over a long period, and that only one of them involved a minimum physical injury. There was nothing said to counsel to indicate such findings could or might be made.

The chronology furnished to his Honour by counsel for the claimant in fact suggested that the three acts occurred over two months, in September and
October of 1978, when the claimant was aged nine years. It was also said that the matter of prejudice referred to by his Honour was not mentioned, and that in fact there was no obvious prejudice to the Fund, contrary to his Honour's findings.

As I understand it, these arguments were advanced in order to demonstrate that there had been procedural unfairness in the proceedings. They were not advanced in terms suggesting error on the face of the record. See Craig v
State of South Australia <case>; [(1994-1995) 184 CLR 163] as applied by this Court in the decision in Torrealba. They suggested errors that were not, nor could they be, errors on the face of the record.
However, as Craig demonstrated, in respect of a claim of procedural unfairness, the Court may take account of "any relevant material placed before it" including "the reasons for judgment" (see Torrealba per Cole JA at page 9).

Before us it was submitted that it was somewhat strange for his Honour to describe forced fellatio, digital vaginal penetration and rubbing an erect penis between the claimant's buttocks in the terms used by his Honour.
However, even assuming (and it is not for this Court to make such a finding of fact) that Downs DCJ misdirected himself in relation to these matters, such error would ordinarily be one within jurisdiction and is not an error of law on the face of the record. To avoid or circumvent this consequence, it is asserted that prior to making these findings, his Honour was required by the rules of procedural fairness to indicate or foreshadow to counsel that such findings were within his contemplation, or that he proposed to make them.

In addition, complaint was made that his Honour was in error in placing reliance upon the failure of the claimant to say anything about the matter to anyone, being a matter not raised with counsel then appearing for the claimant.

Thus, it was said, by reason of his Honour's omission to specifically raise these matters, counsel was denied the opportunity to present counter arguments.

These submissions should be rejected. In the instant case his Honour had the opportunity of considering the extensive submissions advanced on behalf of the claimant. Such occurred on the second day after his Honour had the benefit of considering all the extensive material. Indeed, during submissions made on 8
November 1988, his Honour, inter alia, indicated that the evidence was "fresh in his mind".

There were no counter arguments or evidence advanced on behalf of the Fund, which in fact did not appear before his Honour. There is some evidence that a written submission was put before the Tribunal by the Fund, but nothing turns on that matter.

This is not the type of case where, for example, during submissions his Honour foreshadowed or indicated that certain findings would or might be made, and then make findings contrary to such views without giving counsel a right to be further heard: (see Stead versus State Government Insurance Commission <case>; [(1986) 161 CLR 141.] In that case a submission made that evidence of a witness should not be accepted was stopped by the Judge, who later accepted that evidence. Indeed, as that case also suggests (page 145), not every departure from the rules of natural justice will entitle the aggrieved party to a new trial. Stead does not suggest that procedural fairness imposes any general obligation, to use my expression, to flag possible findings in advance of the judgment.

The present case is totally different to that of Torrealba, where this
Court held that there was a denial of natural justice on the facts because the
Judge had called into question the claimant's credibility as part of his reasons, yet she had not been required to attend court for cross-examination as permitted by part 6 of the District Court Rules; nor had an opportunity been given to explain any deficiency in her truthfulness. Further, in that case before the District Court, counsel appearing for the Fund had put a submission that if a particular doctor's unchallenged view was accepted, there was sufficient evidence to establish that the claimant was a secondary victim who had suffered a relevant injury. For the Court to have made, as it did, a contrary finding was also said to be a denial of procedure fairness.

No support is to be found, in my view, in Torrealba for the claimant's submissions. We have also been referred to the decision of the High Court in
Vakauta versus Kelly <case>; [(1989) 167 CLR 568.] The appellant relied on that decision as suggesting disapproval of the model of the silent judge in the circumstances of a case such as the present. However, I see nothing in that case that supports a claim that procedural fairness required the Judge in the instant matter to comment or speak out before making the findings that he made in a case such as the present. In my view, without deciding whether, and if so, when judicial silence during the running of a case may amount to procedural unfairness, this was not an occasion where silence by his Honour represented any departure from the principles of natural justice. Indeed, Vakauta is a case concerned, not with procedural fairness, but with reasonable apprehension of bias.
Further, it is difficult to see how, speaking generally, mere silence during submissions can be elevated to procedural unfairness.

The claimant also asserts that the solicitors delay in lodging the application could not have caused prejudice. I do not see what this claim has to do with a suggestion of a lack of procedural unfairness. Even if a misdirection, constituting error - and I express no view on this possibility - occurred, at most it is an error within jurisdiction and would not ordinarily constitute jurisdictional error. In any event it would seem to me that at most it would be an error of fact. I would add that the issue of prejudice generally was in fact a matter canvassed by counsel for the claimant before his Honour. It seems to have been the last submission that was advanced by counsel for the claimant to Downs DCJ before he reserved his decision, which he delivered on the afternoon of that day. I now turn to the next submission. The claim is made that in the circumstances the claimant or the public might entertain a reasonable apprehension that Downs DCJ might not have brought an impartial and unprejudiced mind to the resolution of the matter on 8 November 1995, having regard to several matters. The first matter and the particular matter relied upon is that on the first day of the appeal his Honour asked a question as to the claimant's sex. On page 3 of the transcript the following appears: "HIS HONOUR: Most kind of you. And you think it's a sound law right throughout, do you? 
BARTLEY: Yes your Honour, it survived the seminar without damage, about 50 practitioners were there. Well, to briefly open, the acts of violence were sexual assaults involving intercourse on the extended definition in two of the three cases. There were three acts of violence committed against the appellant by her father when she was aged nine and ten years. The appellant is behind me in the blue shirt.

HIS HONOUR: The appellant is female? 
BARTLEY: Yes your Honour. And, your Honour, the matter is traversed in the evidence to. I regret I have a lot of documents to tender, I might tender them in order in which reading might assist the Court. So firstly, I tender a chronology.

HIS HONOUR: Do I understand you correctly, I don't have to consider the fact that she's out of time, is that what you're saying? 
BARTLEY: No your Honour. Before I can proceed further, your Honour needs to be satisfied it would be appropriate to allow further time to appeal." 
The claimant asserts that her name was obviously female and, that whilst the question asked by his Honour no doubt was not meant to be insulting, nevertheless at the time it was asked it gave rise to a reasonable apprehension of bias against her. I consider this submission without merit.

With respect, the claimant reads more into the question than its language reasonably permits. Reading the question in context, it appears to be innocuous and that his Honour's enquiry was a legitimate enquiry. His Honour was seeking to clarify a matter, as he was entitled to do.

Further, the transcript at page 1 reveals the particular matter was not the only one in his Honour's list. Indeed, it appears to have been the final matter in the list of matters before Downs DCJ on 7 November. When his Honour asked the question written evidence in the case was also still to be tendered on behalf of the claimant. At the time of the question or remark was made by his Honour it would seem to me that his Honour had but a limited knowledge of the nature of the matter. In any event, in a list of cases, his Honour could readily have forgotten what was the sex of the claimant who was appearing before the Court. It seems to me that the enquiry does not bear any meaning other than an innocent connotation, and did not suggest bias. , Such is also made clear by the failure on the part of counsel for the applicant to immediately object or complain or ask for his Honour to disqualify himself with any degree of promptness. He merely appears to have answered the question. (see Vakauta; Varga versus Scigliano (Court of Appeal, 6
February 1995, unreported, per Kirby P). Indeed, no complaint was made at any time during the hearing about the matter. The failure by counsel to the claimant to act promptly in asking for the Judge to disqualify himself would suggest that the question did not cause any deep anxiety, and that the matter really is one of after thought. (see Varga, Vakauta at page 572).
Further, saying nothing, in my view, rather suggests the claimant waived any right thereafter to object.

Next, I do not consider that the question asked by his Honour could give rise to a reasonable apprehension of bias on the part of Downs DCJ. In any event, there is no evidence put before this Court that the claimant was indeed offended. In his affidavit counsel for the claimant has said (in paragraph 5) that when the question was asked by his Honour he felt somewhat embarrassed for the claimant. His embarrassment was not translated into any comment, remark or application to the trial judge.

In Webb versus Regina <case>; [(1994) 181 CLR 41] per Mason CJ and McHugh J at pages 47 to 49, many of the relevant decisions on the subject are to be found. The "reasonable apprehension test" is an objective one with the standard to be observed in its application being that of an hypothetical fair-minded and informed lay observer. Deane J dealt with the reasonable apprehension of bias test at pages and 69 when he said: "In a series of recent cases, the Court has formulated the test to be applied in this country in determining whether a judicial officer ("a judge") is disqualified by reason of the appearance of bias, as distinct from proved actual bias. That test, as so formulated, is whether, in all the circumstances, a fair-minded, lay observer with knowledge of the material objective facts 'might entertain a reasonable apprehension that (the Judge) might not bring an impartial and unprejudiced mind to the resolution of the question' in issue. The quoted words in that statement of the test are taken from the judgment of the Court in Livesey versus NSW Bar Association [(1983) CLR 293.] In that case, and in a number of other cases, the test was stated in terms of an apprehension on the part of 'the parties or the public'.
So stated the test directly reflects its rationale, namely, that it is of fundamental importance that the parties to litigation and the general public have full confidence in the integrity, including the impartiality, of those entrusted with the administration of justice. However, the test is an objective one and the standard to be observed in its application is that of a hypothetical fair-minded and informed lay observer. That being so, it is convenient to frame the test itself in terms of reasonable apprehension on the part of that particular inhabitant of the common law." 
In my view the statement could not have given rise to a reasonable apprehension of the type that has been urged upon us by Mr Porter QC on behalf of the claimant.

Essentially for the reasons already given, in my view this further submission also lacks substance.

I would propose that the summons be dismissed and that the claimant should pay the Fund's costs.

CLARKE JA: I will ask Giles AJA to give the next judgment.

GILES AJA: I will not repeat facts described in the reasons of Abadee AJA. With reference to those facts I can briefly state my own reasons for agreeing with the orders proposed. 
Whether Downs DCJ was right or wrong in dismissing the appeal from the
Tribunal does not arise. The complaints concerning his Honour's reference to the passing of time before the claimant said anything about the assaults, his description of the acts as lasting a matter of seconds rather than minutes, as being short acts which did not extend over a long period, and as only involving minimal physical injury in one case, were matters which, if involving error at all, did not involve failure to exercise jurisdiction or error on the face of the record (see Craig versus State of South Australia <case>; [(1995) 184 CLR 163).] The questions in the appeal to this Court are whether the claimant was denied procedural fairness and whether his Honour's dismissal of the appeal from the
Tribunal should be set aside because of a reasonable apprehension that he was prejudiced against the claimant.

The denial of procedural fairness was principally said to lie in his Honour's failure to make known to the claimant's counsel, prior to giving judgment, that he was inclined to view the acts as lasting as a matter of seconds rather than minutes, as being short acts which did not extend over a long period, and as only involving minimal physical injury in one case. It was submitted that these were not matters which would readily have occurred to the claimant's counsel (at another point it was said that they could not have conceivably occurred to the claimant's counsel), that they treated the case as trivial and with no permanent result, and that procedural fairness required that they should be made known so that counsel could present counter arguments.

The claimant's counsel put extensive evidence before his Honour and made detailed submissions, including as to the nature of the acts. I do not agree that the manner in which his Honour referred to the acts was so far removed from an available view of the facts that it was incumbent upon him to indicate a provisional view so that counsel would respond to it. That dialogue between
Bench and Bar may be helpful (see Vakauta versus Kelly <case>; [(1989) 167 CLR 568] at 571) does not mean that, in the absence of dialogue, there is procedural unfairness and a judge does not have to indicate the way his mind is tending on the matters put before him and to him. Where the claimant's counsel had every possibility to put submissions there was, in the circumstances of this case, no denial of procedural fairness. Torrealba v
District Court of New South Wales (Court of Appeal, 6 September 1996, unreported), on which the claimant relied, was a quite different case of a decision turning on an adverse view of an applicant's credit when her evidence was unopposed and no opportunity was given to explain an absence of truthfulness first asserted in the judgment.

The claimant relied also on a failure to give notice of the possible relevance to his Honour's decision of the fact that the claimant was twenty-one years of age before she said anything about the assaults, but at least in the written outline of submissions in muted terms as a matter to be "considered in the context of all the other matters". It was said the only significance of delay could be to cause doubt as to the occurrence of the acts, that there was no doubt as to the occurrence of the acts because the claimant's father had acknowledged them by his plea of guilty, and that the claimant's counsel should have had an opportunity so to submit. I do not think his Honour treated this matter as a delay going to whether the acts occurred. What he said is to be contrasted with what he said about delay in lodging the application. The passage of time as part of the history was not irrelevant, it was treated by his Honour, rightly or wrongly, as going to prejudice in connection with opportunity to examine the claimant, and the claimant's counsel addressed on the question of delay and prejudice from delay. In my view this additional matter does not alter what I have just said, or independently establish procedural unfairness.

The appearance of prejudice - and it was made plain that the prejudice alleged was not actual prejudice but the appearance of prejudice - was said to arise from the question, "The appellant is female?", considered in the light of the judgment. The light was that shed by what was described as "a surprising judgment" relying upon the matters earlier mentioned being undisclosed prior to judgment. The claimant did not say she had a apprehension that his Honour was prejudiced against her, whether from the particular question or more generally. The evidence in this Court was that her counsel before his Honour said when the question was asked he "felt very embarrassed for her". It was acknowledged that the test to which I will later refer was an objective test.

I do not think that, whether alone or in the light of the judgment, the question had or was capable of having the significance attributed to it. When his Honour came to the appeal, he referred to it as "the final matter of
Raylene Stubbs". There was discussion with the claimant's counsel extending for more than two pages of the transcript in relation to the nature of the appeal and the approach to be taken to it. There was reference to "her father" shortly before the relevant question. The claimant was sitting behind her counsel, within his Honour's view, with a short haircut and wearing jeans and a plain top. The claimant had a lesbian lifestyle, although there was no reason for his Honour to have known that, and it was submitted that there would have been embarrassment to the extent of reasonable apprehension of prejudice because the question was, although unintended as such, a gratuitous insult by drawing attention to what the submission called her masculine appearance. I am unable to agree. In my opinion his Honour's question was, and was reasonably to be seen as, no more than a passing remark, perhaps provoked by momentary failure to take in the name and appearance as he sought to focus on the facts of the particular case. I do not think that, alone or in combination with the result of the appeal and the reasons given for that result, the test for reasonable apprehension of prejudice is satisfied. The test was stated in Re JRL Ex Parte CRL <case>; [(1986) 161 CLR 342] at 351, as whether the parties or the public may entertain a reasonable apprehension that the Judge might not bring an impartial and unprejudiced mind to the matter. It was stated in Livesey versus New South Wales
Bar Association <case>; [(1983) 151 CLR 288] at 293-4 as whether fair-minded people might reasonably apprehend that the judge was prejudiced. Whichever formulation of the test be taken, I do not think that the present circumstances fall within it.

For those reasons, therefore, I agree with the orders proposed.

CLARKE JA: I agree in general with the judgments given by Giles and Abadee AJA and what they propose. I do, however, wish to emphasise that there is no appeal to this Court from Downs DCJ's decision in this matter. The approach to the Court is for relief akin to that previously given by prerogative writs. Amongst the instances in which relief may be given is where there is an error of law on the face of the record. Relief cannot be given where what is demonstrated is an error of fact, nor is relief available where there is an error of law, but that error does not appear on the face of the record. In this respect the reasons for the decision do not constitute part of the face of the record (see Craig versus State of South Australia (1995) 69 ALJR. 
Accordingly, whilst, with respect, there are features of his Honour Downs
DCJ's reasons which I find troubling and which suggest to me that his Honour failed to appreciate the significance of a great deal of evidence before him,
I am not able to set aside the judgment on the basis that his Honour erred in the exercise of his discretion.

As I agree with their Honours' conclusions that no procedural unfairness nor perceived bias was established, the orders proposed by Abadee AJA should be made.

The orders of the Court will be that the summons is dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
