

Sellers Fabrics Pty Limited and Anor versus Hapag-Lloyd Ag Matter No 12/96 [1998] NSWSC 644 (15 October 1998) 
Last Updated: 17 December 1998 
SELLERS FABRICS PTY LIMITED & ANOR versus HAPAG-LLOYD AG /96 October 1998 
Rolfe J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division Admiralty List 
Name of Case: SELLERS FABRICS PTY LIMITED & ANOR versus HAPAG-LLOYD AG 
Proceedings: 12/1996 
Dates of Hearing: 12, 13, 14, 15 October 1998 
Date of Interlocutory Judgment: 15 October 1998 
Counsel for Plaintiffs: Mr P E King 
Solicitors for Plaintiffs: Withnell & Hetherington 
Counsel for Defendant: Dr M White QC/Ms A J Silink 
Solicitors for Defendant: Norton Smith & Co 
SELLERS FABRICS PTY LIMITED V HAPAG-LLOYD AG 
RE THE SHIP "ENCOUNTER BAY" 
JUDGMENT - On tender of reports of Captain Bozier. See page 146 of transcript.

HIS HONOUR: Mr King seeks to tender two reports of Captain Bozier dated 10 October 1996 and 22 October 1996. He does so in circumstances where he does not propose to call Captain Bozier and he relies for the tender upon [section 69](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s69.html) of the [Evidence Act 1995](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/). Dr White opposes the tender on various grounds, to which I shall refer. 
Sub-section (1) of [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s69.html), which provides an exception to the hearsay rule, provides that the section applies to a document that either is or forms part of the records belonging to or kept by a person, body or organisation, in the course of or for the purposes of a business, or was at any time such a record and contains a previous representation made or recorded in the document in the course of or for the purposes of the business. The dictionary to the Act provides that a "Previous representation" is a representation "made otherwise than in the course of giving evidence in the proceeding, in which evidence of the representation is sought to be adduced".

I am satisfied that the clear inference from the documents is that they were prepared and formed part of the records of P&O Containers Pty Ltd or perhaps one of the other P&O companies, and accordingly that they fall within sub-section (1) as being records. That satisfaction stems from simply a perusal of the documents.

Sub-section (2) provides that the hearsay rule does not apply in certain circumstances which, for present purposes, as I understand the submissions put to me, only has relevance in one respect, it being accepted that the representation was made at least pursuant to or in conformity with sub-section .

Sub-section (3), however, provides that sub-section (2) does not apply if, relevantly for present purposes, the representation was prepared or obtained for the purpose of conducting or for or in contemplation of or in connection with an Australian proceeding.

An Australian proceeding is, clearly enough, an Australian legal proceeding, and it seems to me that the only sensible meaning that can be attributed is one to which the owner of the business record is a party. I should note that in the dictionary it may be open to argument that it is any proceeding because, "Australian or overseas proceeding" is defined as meaning, "a proceeding (however described) in an Australian court or a foreign court."
However, in my view, that must mean a proceeding to which the party, otherwise entitled to the document, is a party.

The question then is whether the hearsay rule does not apply by force of sub- section (3) because the reports were prepared for the purposes specified in sub-section (3).

The present proceedings, being proceedings between the plaintiffs and the defendant Hapag-Lloyd AG, were commenced on 21 June 1996, that is, some time before these reports were prepared. The reports were not, so far as the evidence disclosed, commissioned by Hapag-Lloyd and in fact the evidence before me is that Captain Read was the marine surveyor retained by Hapag-Lloyd and Captain Bozier was the marine surveyor retained by P&O. In order for the reports to fall within sub-section (3)(a), it would be necessary to establish that they were prepared or obtained by P&O for the purpose of conducting or for or in contemplation of or in connection with the present proceedings. No such evidence has been tendered.

The submission has been made by Dr White that for all I know these documents may have been prepared in relation to other contemplated proceedings in respect of other damage, but in my opinion the evidentiary onus rests upon the defendant to establish the exclusionary provisions of sub-section 3(a).

The two reports of Captain Bozier dated 10 and 22 October 1996 will become
Exhibit J.
 * * * 
