

Regina versus White Matter No Cca 60450/97 [1998] NSWSC 274 (29 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 12 August 1998 
REGINA versus GREGORY CHRISTOPHER WHITE 
CCA 60450/97 May 1998 
Studdert J, Black J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
STUDDERT J: The applicant, Gregory Christopher White, pleaded guilty before his Honour, Judge Job QC, upon the presentation of an indictment charging him with nine offences of stealing from a person. The earliest of the offences charged occurred on the 5 May 1997 and the latest of them on the 22 May 1997. His Honour was also asked to take into account four further offences scheduled pursuant to <case> of the Criminal Procedure Act. 
The learned judge sentenced the applicant to a total sentence of seven years penal servitude on each count and fixed a minimum term on each count of five years commencing upon the date of the applicant's arrest on 22 May 1997 and expiring on 21 May 2002. His Honour then set an additional term in relation to each offence commencing on 22 May 2002. In imposing those sentences, to be served concurrently, his Honour indicated that he was taking into account the various scheduled sentences.

The applicant seeks leave to appeal against the sentences imposed. Each of the stealing offences attracted a maximum penalty under <case> of the Crimes Act of fourteen years penal servitude. The last of the stealing charges in point of time, to which the ninth count in the indictment related, was the one which led to the arrest of the applicant.

The nature of the offence in each of the nine counts charged was similar and can loosely be described as bag snatching. The offence of the 22 May was committed in Georgetown. The applicant's seventy-one year old victim was walking along the street carrying her handbag which contained $1690 in cash together with her pension card, her husband's pension card and other papers.
The applicant rode his bicycle up to the victim and pulled the bag from the victim's shoulder. An immediate police search was carried out and the applicant was arrested in possession of the money taken. He told the police where he had thrown the handbag and the papers and these were later recovered.

Upon interview the applicant then admitted to having stolen handbags from other elderly women and it was his admissions which led to the further eight charges expressed in the indictment.

I do not then propose to go through the detail of the events to which the other charges related but as his Honour observed some of the victims suffered injuries in the commission of the crime and each of them expressed in the statement offered the understandable impact of the crime upon her.

The scheduled offences consisted of two offences of stealing pushbikes and at least one of those was used in the commission of a bag snatching offence. The remaining two scheduled offences concerned the possession of cannabis leaf and cannabis resin found in the applicant's possession at the time of his arrest on 22 May 1997.

His Honour correctly described these offences as being "nine cowardly attacks on elderly, defenceless women", which attacks had "a serious effect on all of them so that their enjoyment of life has been greatly diminished".

It is not strictly accurate to categorise, as his Honour did, that the victims were all elderly. Two were in their eighties, three in their seventies, three in their sixties and one forty-seven year old. Nevertheless that inaccuracy does not detract in my view from the objective gravity of the offences. All the victims were defenceless and all lawfully going about their own affairs when attacked.

The Court has been referred to the unreported decision of this court in R v
Ranse (unreported, CCA, 8 August 1994) . In that case Chief Justice Gleeson remarked: "One of the primary purposes of the system of criminal justice is to keep the peace. In this connection the idea of peace embraces the freedom of ordinary citizens to walk the streets and to go about their daily affairs without fear of physical violence. It also embraces respect for the property of others.
Offences of the kind committed by the present respondent are not trivial instances of disrespect for private property. They are serious breaches of the peace. They are direct attacks upon the security of person and property which the law exists to protect".

Those observations have particular relevance in this case. The circumstances in which the offences were committed were aggravated because the applicant committed the offences whilst he was on parole. The applicant has a poor record which goes back to 1997 when he first came to notice as a juvenile.

The applicant was not quite twenty-four years old when he was sentenced, having been born on 8 October 1973. However, notwithstanding his relative youth, he had committed a number of offences as an adult and of particular significance were the offences for which he was sentenced in the District
Court on 28 August 1996. He was convicted then of fourteen counts of break enter and steal, two counts of break and enter with intent to steal, two counts of stealing and a single count of stealing from a dwelling.

In respect of the break enter and steal counts he was sentenced on each count to a minimum term of eight months penal servitude expiring on 4 March 1997. An additional term of sixteen months commencing on 5 March 1997 and expiring on the 4 July 1998 was imposed. It follows that the burst of criminality that brought him before Judge Job in August 1997 occurred just over two months after the applicant had been released from prison.

The sentences imposed undoubtedly amounted to stern punishment. The question, however, is whether this Court should view the punishment as being so stern as to be outside the range of appropriate sentencing discretion.

The applicant gave evidence before his Honour. He explained that he lapsed into drug abuse following his release in March 1997 after he suffered a number of setbacks. He had met a person in prison who had offered him a position in his motel at Coffs Harbour and after his release the applicant went to that motel seeking work. His quest was unsuccessful and indeed when he inquired for the offeror at that motel he was told that that person was not known there. A further setback was that his former girlfriend was not interested in resuming her relationship with him, and, thirdly, a cousin of the applicant died from a drug overdose.

Whilst the applicant would have faced a very strong prosecution case for the last of the bag snatching offences, he was nevertheless entitled to favourable consideration for his plea of guilty in relation to that matter. In relation to the other matters not only was there the plea of guilty in his favour but there was also the assistance which he gave to the authorities without which his conviction in relation to those matters would have been anything but inevitable. It certainly could not have been assumed that the other eight victims would have been able to identify the applicant as the person who stole from them. Certainly the statements given to the police officers by those victims would not indicate that they would all have been able to identify the applicant. Some of them were able to offer no description of the person who attacked.

This court in Ellis [(1986) 6 NSWLR 603] at 604 expressed the principles concerning the disclosure of otherwise unknown guilt and how this impacted upon the sentencing process in the following much cited passage from Street CJ: "This Court has said on a number of occasions that a plea of guilty will entitle a convicted person to an element of leniency in the sentence. The degree of leniency may vary according to the degree of inevitability of conviction as it may appear to the sentencing judge, but it is always a factor to which a greater or lesser degree of weight must be given.

When the conviction follows upon a plea of guilty, that itself is the result of a voluntary disclosure of guilt by the person concerned, a further element of leniency enters into the sentencing decision. Where it was unlikely that guilt would be discovered and established were it not for the disclosure by the person coming forward for sentence, then a considerable element of leniency should properly be extended by the sentencing judge. It is part of the policy of the criminal law to encourage a guilty person to come forward and disclose both the fact of an offence having been committed and confession of guilt of that offence.

The leniency that follows a confession of guilt in the form of a plea of guilty is a well-recognised part of the body of principles that cover sentencing. Although less well-recognised, because less frequently encountered, the disclosure of an otherwise unknown guilt of an offence merits a significant added element of leniency, the degree of which will vary according to the degree of likelihood of that guilt being discovered by the law enforcement authorities, as well as guilt being established against the person concerned".

The applicant gave evidence that he was serving his sentence on protection not because of any one of these offences but because of something that had happened earlier in his life. The circumstances in which the sentence was to be served was a material matter in arriving at an appropriate sentence.

Whilst the applicant had been quick to lapse back into drug abuse when he was released in March 1997, by the time he came before Judge Job he had again sought help for his substance abuse and there was a favourable report from Mr
Rennie, an alcohol and other drugs worker at the Parramatta Correctional
Centre, together with a letter from Odyssey House indicating that that institution was ready to take him into the Odyssey House programme.

The learned sentencing judge recognised the need that the applicant would have following his ultimate release for assistance to deal with his drug problems and his lack of education as well. His Honour found special circumstances although he expressly recognised that in the mix of minimum and additional terms he was not giving a great deal of adjustment for that.

His Honour did not specifically refer to the applicant's evidence that he was in protection at the time that he was giving evidence before the judge in
August 1997. However, I would not infer that his Honour overlooked that evidence and generally I would observe as to his Honour's remarks on sentence that they do not indicate any error in the approach taken by this experienced
District Court judge. His Honour made specific reference, taking into account the pleas of the applicant and his admissions to the police concerning the other eight offences referred to in the indictment.

Mr Andrews, who has appeared for the applicant and has said all that could possibly be urged on behalf of his client, has drawn the Court's attention to statistics provided by the Judicial Commission covering the period from
January 1990 to October 1997. Those statistics, he submitted, indicate that this sentence was at the top of the range for offenders who were sentenced to full-time imprisonment and he submitted that clear weight had to be given for the applicant's plea but, more importantly, for his disclosure of his earlier criminality and the fact that he was serving the sentence on protection.

He submitted it was also a very material matter that by reason of the applicant having admitted his guilt and having told the police of his involvement in the earlier eight offences, he had put those victims in a position where they no longer needed to fear that they might again be attacked. That, it was submitted, was a relevant consideration and undoubtedly it was. Mr Andrews submitted over all that, factoring all those features into the case, leads to the conclusion that the sentence was manifestly excessive.

It seems to me that the sentencing statistics have to be treated here with a deal of caution, particularly when one has regard to the number of offences committed by the applicant, the circumstances of them and the feature that they were committed shortly after the applicant was released upon parole.

Statistics can only provide, as McInerney J observed in Caldwell's case (unreported, CCA, 2 September 1996) a very rough guide on sentencing. I would refer also to what was said in this court as to the usefulness of statistics in the unreported decision of Prior (7 October 1997).

I find myself unpersuaded that the sentence that was passed upon the applicant in this case was outside the range of a proper exercise of sentencing discretion. Indeed, I conclude to the contrary. I would therefore propose that leave to appeal be granted but that the appeal be dismissed.

BLACK J: I agree. 
STUDDERT J: The orders of the Court in this matter then will be those that I have outlined. * * * 
