

Regina versus Frederick George Rix [1997] NSWSC 129 (11 April 1997) 
REGINA versus Frederick George RIX /96 
Friday, 11 April 1997 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, STEIN JA, SMART J 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: I will ask Smart J to deliver the first judgment.

SMART J: Frederick George Rix seeks leave to appeal out of time against his conviction of imposition under s29B of the Commonwealth [Crimes Act 1914](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/) and defrauding the Commonwealth under s29D of that Act. The Commonwealth has not objected to the Court hearing the appeal out of time.

The first charge related to the period 14 February 1980 to 24 October 1984 and the imposition alleged was that with a view to obtaining an unemployment benefit he untruly represented that his name was Frederick Ash, a person entitled to receive unemployment benefit as he was working and in receipt of income in the name of Frederick Rix. The maximum penalty was two years imprisonment.

The second charge related to the period between 25 October 1984 and about June and alleged that Mr Rix defrauded the Department of Social Security by obtaining unemployment benefit in the name of Frederick Ash to which he was not entitled as he was working and in receipt of income in the name of
Frederick Rix.

This latter offence was introduced in 1984 by an amendment to the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/) so that
Social Security fraud could be punished more severely. The maximum penalty is ten years imprisonment.

The appellant conceded that he had defrauded the Department by obtaining unemployment benefit in the name of Frederick Ash between 5 October 1989 and June 1990.

There was an unemployment claim form of 14 February 1980, Income Statement and
Application for Continuation of Benefit forms from 1981 to 1990 all in the name of Frederick Ash. The claim form contained a declaration by a man calling himself "Frederick Ash" that he had last worked in October 1979 and was unemployed and that he had no income from any other source. The various application for continuation forms contained statements to the effect that he and his wife had not worked or received any income. The Crown established that the amount of $85,675 had been paid to "Frederick Ash" over the ten years.

According to the police, the appellant on being questioned made significant admissions of guilt. There was also an admission made to an officer of the
Department, Mr Cheshire, and an offer to repay the benefits received.

A bank account was opened in the name of Ash with the ANZ Bank and Social
Security cheques were paid into this account. The appellant was observed operating on this account. He did not deny that he alone operated the account under the name of "F. Ash".

On execution of the search warrant at the appellant's home, documents were obtained relating to the claims for unemployment benefit in the name of Ash and to the receipt of income in the name of Rix. Since about 1990 the appellant had been operating a post office box at Potts Point in the name of
Ash.

From 1979 until shortly before the trial, the appellant had a contract with
Mirror Newspaper Limited, and News Limited, as a distributor of their publications in the Waterloo area. The appellant had to ensure that the deliveries were made but did not have to deliver them personally. There was also evidence that he was registered and operated as a chiropractor. The evidence that the appellant was self-employed and received income was very strong.

The Judge told the jury, without objection, that the principal issue was whether the Crown had proved beyond reasonable doubt that there was no relevant Mr Ash who applied for Social Security benefits. The appellant suggested that "Frederick Ash" had gone to Victoria. Evidence was adduced that an electoral role search revealed that there was only one "Frederick Ash" in
Victoria. He gave evidence and had nothing to do with the matter.

Sergeant Hurrell, a police handwriting expert, took as specimen documents the pay and wages book found in the appellant's custody, one Quill account book, one Collins journal and one ANZ Bank Authority for Operations form. He compared the writing on these with that on the disputed documents. There were six or seven documents in the disputed category which Sergeant Hurrell regarded as being definitely in the handwriting of the person who had written in the specimen documents, namely, the appellant. There were other disputed documents which Sergeant Hurrell said were very probably in the handwriting of the person, the appellant, who wrote in the specimen documents. Sergeant
Hurrell was unable to say whether any of the signatures of "F Ash" were those of the appellant but that would not have been critical given the identification of the handwriting.

The appellant needed to deal with the admissions which the police attributed to him. He explained them by saying that after he arrived home from the newspaper distribution at about 4.30am, he took three to four tablets of
Rohypnol. That was a very strong dose. He stated that when the police awoke him he was in a state of stupor and shock and could not answer questions properly. His faculties were not working. He said that at the police station he did not want to inform on "Fred" or "Jarra Ash" as he was in fear of that fellow. He wanted a bit of time to try and sort things out and find him. The appellant said that he was still in shock and that what was said at the police station was a "bit of a blur". The appellant had known "Ash" for many years especially through horse racing. According to the appellant, "Ash" had a formidable reputation. He was not a man to cross. About twelve months prior to taking over "Ash's" dole entitlements, "Ash" became indebted to the appellant. Perhaps it was a slightly longer period.

The appellant was beset by ill health during the years 1980 to 1990 being involved in two serious motor vehicle accidents and another two accidents. The appellant said that the 1989 accident put him right out of business. The injuries were serious. He could not run the business because he could not drive. He and his wife had no money and were in financial straits. He saw "Ash" at the races and in effect asked him to give him some money. "Ash" promised to make over his dole payments to the appellant and did so.

The appellant received them for about eight months and that is why he pleaded guilty in respect of the period, October 1989 to June 1990.

The appellant said that he was also unable to practise as a chiropractor for a period because he had injured his wrist which had not recovered.

The appellant stated that he received very little out of the newspaper delivery contract. The wages of his employees and the expenses which he had to pay cancelled out any income. He had to provide the delivery vehicle.

The police alleged that the appellant told them that in about 1980 he had been involved in a car accident and been incapacitated. This entitled him to unemployment benefits. He found that the expenses of running his business left him with insufficient means so he filled in the forms and received the benefit. He said that he was too embarrassed to use his right name.

With a delivery contract, the payment of wages to staff to drive seven days per week would absorb a lot of income. The profitability may well depend on the contractor being able to drive and do a lot of the work himself. That was what Mr Rix told us on this appeal.

The appellant told the jury, in general terms, of the attempts which he had made to find "Ash". They were unsuccessful.

In his submissions to this court the appellant has written that his appeal "rests entirely on the phrasing and meaning of the word 'working' in the indictment". The indictment alleged that he was "working" when he received the unemployment benefit. The appellant contended that he did not and could not work between 1980 and 1990.

This appears from his submissions to rest on these matters. General supervision was not work. The actual delivery was done by others and after he paid wages to employees and expenses there was nothing left for him and his wife. His practice as a chiropractor had been singularly unprofitable. He had not been paid for most of the work which he had done, he had overheads and he had lost money.

The indictment alleged that Mr Rix was working and in receipt of income. The claim form covers self-employed persons and the receipt of income. It also covers any form of working and supervising a contract is working as is practising as a chiropractor.

Mr Rix relied on the result of the proceedings before the magistrate subsequent to these matters but the issues appear to have been somewhat different.

Mr Rix has stressed that he became penniless through his four accidents. He was incapacitated and unable to work. He submitted that he should not have been convicted of the two offences and that the charge should have been making a false statement. In the circumstances revealed in the evidence such a charge would not be a minor matter. Mr Rix contended that he had been found guilty of the crime because he had not cancelled his contract with News Limited and instead had attempted to preserve it for a member of his family.

Both in the claim form and initial interview with the Social Security officer
Mr Rix did not disclose the true position including the contract with News
Limited. As a result he was paid unemployment benefits.

It was not up to Mr Rix to adopt a broad approach of his own roughly equating income and expenditure. Mr Rix submitted that vital evidence was never raised at the hearing. This was as to his inability to work, the "break even" position with the News Limited contract and the expenses of Mr "Ash". Those matters were touched upon but not investigated in detail. This is understandable. In the circumstances of this case they would not have provided a defence.

Mr Rix has invited the Court to take a broad view of his position and to take into account factors such as his pride and the embarrassment which he suffered in having to seek the assistance of Social Security. This explains why he did not make a full disclosure of his position. He made his own assessment of that position, determining that as the outgoings roughly equalled his income on the
News Limited contract, and he was unable to do physical work, including practising as a chiropractor, he needed assistance. He decided that he was entitled to Social Security payments.

The Act does not permit a party to make his own assessment. The Judge in his remarks on sentence was unable to accept that Mr Rix's need was as pressing as he claimed.

It is not easy to reconcile the case advanced at the trial by Mr Rix with that which has been advanced before us. I have treated the case before this court as being one in the alternative. Mr Rix said that he just assisted "Ash" and received very little.

Once the Department was deceived by false statements deliberately made by an applicant as to a material aspect of that person's financial affairs and, as a result, pays Social Security benefits there has been a defrauding of the
Department.

While it may be relevant on penalty that an applicant is or may be entitled to assistance on some other basis, that usually will not mean that the Department has not been defrauded. Benefits have been obtained by deception.

During the hearing of the appeal Mr Rix told us of how he and "Jarra Ash" had matched signatures and assisted each other to obtain benefits from the
Department. This, of course, amounts to a further crime. According to Mr Rix, "Jarra Ash" was engaged in a variety of activities some of which were of a dubious nature. They were designed to provide income but may have been unsuccessful. Many of Mr Rix's arguments seem to boil down to an assertion he was entitled to sickness benefits but he claimed and was paid unemployment benefits. Even on the claim for sickness benefits the income of the applicant is a relevant factor with full and frank disclosure being required. There is no warrant for taking a broad brush approach. There is no substance in the ground that Mr Rix had incompetent legal representation at the trial.

Having carefully considered the sufficiency and quality of the evidence it could not be said that the verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory. There was abundant and cogent evidence to support the conviction.

This Court has stressed the need for full and frank disclosure and the
Department being able to rely on what it is told as being true.

I would grant leave to appeal out of time but dismiss the appeal.

GLEESON CJ: I agree.

STEIN JA: I agree.

GLEESON CJ: The order of the Court will be as proposed by Smart J.
 * * * 
