

D G Goodwin versus T F Duggan and Ors [1996] NSWSC 363 (20 August 1996) 
DEBORAH GAI GOODWIN versus TANNIEL FIONA DUGGAN & ORS /95 ED 3900/94 
Tuesday 20 August 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
HANDLEY, POWELL, BEAZLEY JJA 
CATCHWORDS: TRUSTS AND TRUSTEES -Co-trustees - Circumstances in which trustee entitled to indemnity by co-trustee - Where defaulting trustee has received benefit of the breach.

EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: ALLOWED IN PART 
TRUSTS AND TRUSTEES - Express trust - whether trust vested immediately upon grant of probate.
 
TRUSTEES - Co-trustees - Joint and several liability - Whether trustee entitled to benefit of set-off for just allowance granted to a co-trustee.
 
The appellant and the second respondent were appointed executors and trustees of the estate of their deceased sister, Jan Lynette Duggan. The first respondent, the youngest daughter of the deceased, was a beneficiary of that trust. The Will also provided that the second respondent, who was the brother of the deceased, have sole custody and guardianship of the first respondent, who was aged 11 years old at the death of her mother. The first respondent lived with the second respondent and his wife, the third respondent, for a period of just over three years, for which the trial judge held the second respondent was entitled to a sum of $12,792 by way of just allowance for maintenance of the first respondent.

On 9 July 1990, on the written authority of the appellant and the second respondent, a substantial proportion of the estate funds were paid to the second respondent and his mother. The trial judge held that the first respondent's entitlement was traceable into a property at Karana Downs,
Queensland, and upon sale of that property, into a second property, both purchased by the second and third respondents.

The trial judge held that the second respondent's use of the trust funds was in breach of trust. In respect of the appellant, his Honour held her to be jointly and severally liable with the second respondent because of her own breaches of trust as trustee, which included improper delegation of administration of the trust to her co-trustee; failure to exercise reasonable care to prevent her co-trustee from committing the breaches of trust that he did, and failure to take action to compel the co-trustee to reinstate the misappropriated trust property.
 
Four main issues were raised on the appeal. Firstly, the appellant challenged the trial judge's findings that she was guilty of breaches of trust, and contended that his Honour erred in refusing to grant relief under s [Trustee Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/). Secondly, the appellant submitted that the trust created by the will vested immediately upon grant of probate, with the result that the appellant was not a trustee at any relevant time. Thirdly, the appellant submitted that she was entitled to a complete indemnity from the co-trustee second respondent. Fourthly, the appellant asserted an entitlement to the benefit of the set-off for the just allowance which was declared in favour of the second respondent.

HELD: (1) The first ground of appeal in relation to the trial judge's findings that the appellant had committed breaches of trust fails as they were findings of fact made after his Honour had carefully considered the evidence.
 the trust did not vest upon grant of probate, both as a matter of law and as a matter of construction of the terms of the will. It expressed no intention that either of the beneficiaries were entitled to their share of the estate prior to their majority.

The appellant trustee has an equity to be indemnified by the second respondent co-trustee who personally received trust funds and converted them to his own use. 
The judgment against the appellant should reflect any existing set-off available against the beneficiary from another trustee, just as it should reflect any part payment by such trustee.

ORDERS 
The Court declares that:
Appeal allowed in part.
Judgment against the appellant reduced to $59,535.50. Appeal against the orders in favour of the first respondent otherwise dismissed.
Appellant to pay first respondent's costs of the appeal.
Declaration 4 set aside, and in lieu declare that the appellant is entitled to be indemnified by the second respondent against her liability to the first respondent under the judgment for $59,535.50. Liberty is reserved to the appellant to apply to the Equity Division for further relief against the second respondent.
The second respondent is to pay the appellant's costs incurred in the appeal against the order affecting the second respondent.

JUDGMENT 
HANDLEY AND BEAZLEY JJA: This is an appeal from a decision of Simos J in the Equity Division of this Court, in which his Honour held that the appellant breached her duty as a trustee of the Estate of the late Jan Lynette Duggan (the deceased) of which the first respondent (the plaintiff in the court below) was a beneficiary.

Relevant findings of trial judge 
The deceased died on 30 September 1989. She had two daughters, the oldest of whom was 17 years at the date of death and the first respondent, who was 11 years at the date of death. The deceased made her last will and testament dated 19 July 1989. The will was a simple handwritten will whereby the deceased appointed the second respondent (her brother) and the appellant (her sister) as executors and trustees. The will then provided: "I GIVE DEVISE AND BEQUEATH 
THE WHOLE OF MY ESTATE WHATSOEVER AND WHERESOEVER SITUATE BOTH REAL AND
PERSONAL UNTO SUCH OF MY CHILDREN WHO SHALL SURVIVE ME AND IF MORE THAN ONE IN
EQUAL SHARES SHARE AND SHARE ALIKE AS TENANTS IN COMMON ABSOLUTELY. IN THE
EVENT OF MY DEATH I GIVE SOLE CUSTODY AND GUARDIANSHIP OF MY CHILDREN TO MY
BROTHER [THE SECOND RESPONDENT]." 
Probate was granted to the appellant and second respondent on 20 March 1990.
The estate was valued at $115,525.19 for probate purposes. The major assets in the estate were a home unit, valued at $100,000 and a superannuation fund valued at $46,218.

From the time of the deceased's death until 25 October 1992, the first respondent resided with the second and third respondents in Queensland. The third respondent is the second respondent's wife. The second and third respondents provided for the first respondent's care during this time. The trial judge ordered that the second respondent was entitled to the sum of $12,792 by way of just allowance for maintenance of the first respondent during this time. There is no issue in respect of this allowance.

On 9 July 1990, estate funds in the amount of $95,573.99 were paid to the second respondent and his mother by cheque drawn by the estate's solicitors.
The solicitors acted upon an authority, signed by the appellant and second respondent, to pay the funds to the second respondent and his mother. His
Honour held that the first respondent's entitlement in the estate could be traced into property at Karana Downs, Queensland, purchased by the second and third respondents and later into the proceeds of sale of that property and subsequently into the purchase of a further property by the second and third respondents.

His Honour held that the second respondent's use of the first respondent's trust funds was in breach of trust, not being authorised by the will of the deceased, by the [Trustee Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/) , by any other statute or by the general law.

His Honour found that the appellant was jointly and severally liable with the second respondent because of her own breaches of duty as a trustee. Those breaches included the improper delegation of the administration of the trust to the second respondent, the failure to exercise reasonable care to prevent the second respondent from committing a breach of trust and a failure to take proper action to compel the co-trustee to redress the breach of trust.

Issues raised on appeal 
A number of issues were raised on the appeal. First, the appellant challenged the trial judge's finding of breach of trust and his consequent findings in relation to her liability in respect of the loss of the trust funds. This challenge was based, in the first instance, on the contention that the appellant was not guilty of breach of trust on the facts as found by his
Honour. It was further contended that the trust created by the will vested immediately upon the grant of probate and that the appellant was not a trustee at any relevant time. Secondly, the appellant contended that his Honour erred in failing to grant relief to the appellant under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/s85.html) of the [Trustee
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/). Thirdly, the appellant contended she was entitled to a complete indemnity from the second respondent in respect of her liability for breach of trust.

In our opinion, the appeal must fail in so far as it challenges the findings of breach of trust and in so far as it is alleged that his Honour erred in not ordering that the appellant was entitled to the benefit of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/s85.html) of the [Trustee
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/). In his judgment, his Honour carefully considered the evidence and made findings of fact. His Honour reviewed the relevant law and correctly applied that law to the facts. No purpose is served in restating what his Honour said on these issues. However, there are three matters which require consideration by this
Court. They are: whether the trust vested immediately notwithstanding that the first respondent was a minor at the time of her mother's death; whether the appellant is entitled to a complete indemnity from the second respondent in respect of the amounts for which they are liable for breach of trust; and whether the appellant was entitled to the benefit of the set off for the just allowance which his Honour declared in favour of the second respondent.

Whether trust vested immediately upon grant of probate 
Counsel for the appellant submitted that the trust created by the will vested immediately upon the grant of probate so that, when the monies came into the hands of the second respondent, they did so in circumstances where he was the testamentary guardian of the first respondent and thus held those monies, as sole trustee, on a new trust for the first respondent. It followed, on this submission, that any breach of trust was a breach of the new trust of which the second respondent was the sole trustee. This ground had not been argued in the Court below. If it was to be raised in this Court, leave of the
Court was required. Counsel for the first respondent opposed the grant of leave. The Court refused leave on the ground that the point raised was hopeless and indicated it would give its reasons in its judgment on the matter.

The point raised by counsel was short. He submitted that upon the proper construction of the will, there was no intention to create a trust subsisting until the children reached their majority. Reliance was placed upon Mears v
Mears (1905) 5 SR 140. In that case, the testator had bequeathed a sum of money to his granddaughter "to be paid to her on her arrival at the age of 21 years provided she shall not then have married out of the Jewish faith or on her marriage before that date to a member of the Jewish faith". The beneficiary married within the Jewish faith before the age of 21 and called for her legacy. A.H. Simpson, CJ in Eq, stated the relevant principle at 141 in these terms: "...the test in all these cases is what was the testator's intention. Where a donor or settlor evidently contemplated that, notwithstanding incapacity, the beneficiary should be able to receive a legacy or execute a power, that intention was to be carried into effect." 
His Honour concluded, as was clear from the express terms of the will in question, that the testator's intention was that, on the happening of a given event, namely, marriage within the Jewish faith, even during the beneficiary's minority, the legacy was payable. That is not the case here. The deceased's will fell into two distinct parts. The first part dealt with the disposition of the estate. It expressed no intention that either of the beneficiaries were entitled to their share of the estate prior to their majority. Further, neither beneficiary was capable of giving a receipt to the executors so as to discharge the trust until her majority: see Saunders versus Vautier <case>; [(1841) CR & PH 240]; [49 ER 282.] The first respondent did not reach her majority until after the commencement of these proceedings, by which stage the trust funds had been lost due to the breaches of trust found by his Honour. The second part of the will dealt with the custody and guardianship of the deceased's children. The two parts of the will were separate and independent. There is no basis, either as a matter of law or from the terms of the will, upon which the second part can be construed as specifying or indicating the deceased's intention as to the first part.
 
Claim for indemnity 
The trial judge found that the appellant was entitled to 50% contribution from the second respondent but was not entitled to a complete indemnity for the losses sustained by the trust estate. The trial judge accepted that the appellant was an honest but passive trustee who failed to discharge her active duties. His Honour further found that it was: "probable that the [first respondent] would not have suffered the losses which she has in fact suffered if [the appellant] had not also been guilty of the various breaches of trust...including, in particular, but not limited to her failure to seek advice as to her legal duties as an executor and trustee and to secure joint control with the [second respondent] of the trust funds".
 
His Honour's finding correctly expresses the fundamental principle that where two or more trustees commit a breach of trust, though one may appear more active than the others, and one alone has actually received the trust money, or has finally obtained and misapplied it, all trustees are equally liable to their beneficiaries. Thus a trustee, by signing a cheque and allowing the proceeds to get into the hands of a co-trustee without seeing to their due application, commits a breach of trust: Trutch versus Lamprell <case>; [(1855) 20 Beav 116], [52 ER 546.] In a statement which is particularly apposite to the facts of this case, Romilly MR said in that case at 547: "This is one of those painful cases which, unfortunately, this Court has constantly to deal with, where trustees, innocent of any desire to benefit themselves, have failed to perform their duties, and the Court is compelled to make them responsible. ... It is a contradiction in terms to say that a trustee who acts is not an active trustee; by taking upon himself the office of trustee, and acting, he becomes, in that transaction at least, an active trustee, and is bound properly to perform all the duties appertaining to his office." 
See also Wentworth versus Tompson (1859) 2 Legge 1238.

To like effect is the earlier decision in Lingard versus Bromley ( <case>; [1812) 1 V & B 114]; [35 ER 45], which involved three co-trustees, only one of whom took an active role in the affairs of the trust. That trustee committed a breach of trust and reimbursed the trust estate for the loss. He then commenced proceedings against the other trustees for contribution. They argued that the active trustee was the principal actor and that they relied upon his representations and advice. They produced evidence of the plaintiff's declarations that he would take on the management of the trust himself. One of the co-trustees gave evidence that, having expressed to the plaintiff that he wanted nothing to do with the legal duties of being a trustee, the plaintiff had assured him that he would be indemnified.

In declining to grant an indemnity to the co-trustees, Grant MR stated at 46: "The Defence is of a Kind, which a Court of Justice is very unwilling to listen to: that, having undertaken a Trust, they abdicated all Judgment of their own in the Performance of it; and did whatever the Plaintiff desired: "without examining" (as they say in so many Words) "into the Matter, or
Ground, of the Proceeding." Nothing could be more mischievous than to hold, that Trustees may thus act; and avoid Responsibility by throwing the Burthen upon the Person, in whom they have reposed this blind Confidence".

The Master of the Rolls further stated at 46, in ordering contribution: " ... there are, no doubt, many cases in which persons may be all liable, severally as well as jointly, to indemnify a third party, and yet ought not in equity to bear the burthen equally among themselves. But what are the circumstances of distinction between these persons? It is not alleged that the plaintiff derived any exclusive benefit from the acts in which he concurred with the defendants. Their refusal produced loss to others, but no advantage either to him or them". (emphasis added) 
In Belemore versus Watson [(1885) 1 TLR 241], Brett MR stated, at 242, that whilst fraud or fraudulent misrepresentation may make one trustee liable to innocent and ignorant co-trustees, "it would be otherwise if he gave them the opportunity of preventing the advance and coming to a conclusion as to it". Brett MR also referred to Lingard versus Bromley and the principle that the duty of each co-trustee is owed directly to the beneficiaries to exercise caution in the investment of trust funds and that nothing done as between the trustees themselves could relieve them of that duty. Cotton LJ stated, at 242, that to hold the active trustee solely liable "would be to give a premium to trustees to be idle, as the most active trustees would be the most responsible." 
A statement to the same effect is to be found in Booth versus Booth <case>; [(1838) 1 Beav 125]; [48 ER 886.] A co-trustee, who took no active part in the trust's administration, allowed his co-trustee to carry on the family business, which was the principal trust asset, until the business failed. The inactive co- trustee had accepted the position out of "inadvertence and over good nature" and he "did not consider that, by proving the will, he had undertaken any duty, or incurred any responsibility". The widow of the testator had also assured him that he had not undertaken any responsibility. However, Lord
Langdale, MR, stated at 888: "It is important that it should be understood that no one can safely act in that manner, and that the law will not permit a party to neglect the duty which, by proving the will, he has undertaken. I am of the opinion that he became liable for the performance of the trusts, and for any consequences arising from a breach of them".

See also Styles versus Guy <case>; [(1849) 1 Mac & G 422];
Robinson versus Harkin [[1896] 2 Ch 415.] In Robinson v Harkin the passive co-trustee was held not to be entitled to a complete indemnity from his co-trustee as it was found that he had failed to take "the same precautions as an ordinary prudent man of business would have taken with regard to his own affairs." That finding was made after the Court gave due allowance for the youth and inexperience of the trustee seeking indemnity. As
Stirling J stated at 425: "...for the purposes of the rule one trustee is treated as in pari delicto with his co-trustee, although the latter may have taken the more active part in the conduct of the particular business which led to the loss." 
In Bacon versus Camphausen [(1888) 58 LT 851], trustees of a marriage settlement invested a sum on mortgage on insufficient security. One trustee had been resident abroad. She had an arrangement between herself and the other trustees that she should not be troubled about the trusts and in fact she did nothing. Stirling J, relying on the statement of Cotton LJ in
Bahin versus Hughes [(1886) 31 Ch.D 390] at 852, held that this was no bar to contribution on her part. His Honour stated that where one trustee acts honestly though erroneously, the other trustee who by doing nothing neglects his duty, is not entitled to indemnity.

The cases to which we have referred so far were all cases in which the active trustee, although the immediate cause of the loss to the trust estate, did not personally benefit from being in receipt of the trust funds. However, the authorities indicate that there are limited circumstances in which a trustee will be entitled to a complete indemnity from a defaulting co-trustee. This was averted to by Grant MR in the passage we have emphasised above. In Bahin v Hughes, Cotton LJ stated at 394-395: "...there are very few cases in which one trustee, who has been guilty with a co-trustee of breach of trust and held answerable, has successfully sought indemnity as against his co-trustee...Of course, where one trustee has got the money into his own hands, and made use of it, he will be liable to his co- trustee to give him an indemnity. Now I think it wrong to lay down any limitation of the circumstances under which one trustee would be held liable to the other for indemnity both having been held liable to the cestui que trust, but so far as cases have gone at present, relief has only been granted against the trustee who has himself got the benefit of the breach of trust, or between whom and his co-trustees there has existed a relation, which will justify the Court in treating him as solely liable for the breach of trust." (emphasis added) 
His Lordship further said at 396: "It would be laying down a wrong rule to hold that where one trustee acts honestly though erroneously, the other trustee is to be entitled to indemnity, who by doing nothing neglects his duty more than the acting trustee." 
The cases which Cotton LJ cited were cases where the trustee, who was held to be entitled to a right of indemnity, had been misled by a co-trustee, who in each case was the solicitor to the trust and had been found guilty of negligence. Those cases are not relevant here. However, his Lordship was clearly of the view that indemnity would be available to a trustee where a co- trustee has got the benefit of the breach.

Bowen LJ, whilst professing little familiarity with such matters of trust law, indicated a preference for the view that when a passive trustee had allowed the trust monies to come into the hands of the co-trustee on the faith of her assurance that she would not part with them without notice, that trustee ought to be entitled to an indemnity from the trustee guilty of the wrong doing.

However, Fry LJ stated at 397-398: "...there is no authority for [a] distinction [between active and passive breaches of trust] and I can see no principle in law for such a distinction", and added at 398 that any such doctrine would be "against the policy of the
Court in relation to trusts". However, he had earlier agreed with the judgment of Cotton LJ and we do not read these passages as denying an innocent trustee's right of indemnity against a co-trustee who has converted trust property to his own use.

Wentworth versus Tompson (1859) 2 Legge 1238 provides another example where indemnity was ordered. In that case, it was held that an innocent trustee had taken "no active part" in the breach in circumstances where he had left the country and had appointed the defaulting co-trustees as his attorneys in relation to the administration of the trust. However, the court's decision must be viewed in light of the further fact that although there was a breach of trust by all three trustees, the Court held there was also a breach of trust by the two active trustees against the absent trustee, as they stood in a fiduciary relationship to him.

There are a number of obiter statements in old authority which support the right to indemnity where the co-trustee has not only been the immediate cause of the loss to the trust estate, but has also received a benefit from the breach.

In the course of argument in Greenwood versus Wakeford <case>; [(1839) 1 Beav 576]; [48 ER 1064], Langdale MR said at 578; 1065: "Can there be any doubt that if two persons concur in the breach of trust, and one alone derive the profit, the other has a right of relief against him?" 
Similar principles have been applied where one trustee has been held entitled to relief against another who received the proceeds of a breach of trust. See Powlet versus Herbert <case>; [(1791) 1 Ves 297]; [30 ER 352]; Baynard versus Woolley <case>; [(1855) 20 Beav 583] at 585-6; <case>; [52
ER 729] at 730; May v Selby <case>; [(1842) 1 Y & CCC 235]; [62 ER 869]; Butler versus Butler [(1877) 5 Ch D 554.] In
Butler versus Butler, Fry J said, at 557: "... this is not, it must be observed, an attempt to make one trustee primarily liable to the extent of the trust monies reaching his hands ..." 
On appeal James LJ said at 119: "If two trustees will sell out stock and hand the money over to one, no doubt that one can be made to repay ...." 
Thesiger LJ said at 121: "Several cases have been cited ... but ... all of them with the exception of
Fuller versus Knight were cases in which the plaintiff and defendant being co- trustees have misappropriated a portion of the trust funds, and either the trust property itself or the proceeds of that trust property had found their way into the hands of the defendant. Under those circumstances a clear equity arose enabling the plaintiff to recover either the trust property or the proceeds of that trust property from his defaulting co-trustee".

Chillingworth versus Chambers (1896) 1 Ch 685 involved an unsuccessful claim for contribution by a trustee-beneficiary who had derived a personal benefit from the breach of trust. North J said at 690-1: "... the investment thus was made for (the plaintiff's) benefit. It was an improper investment made for the purpose of getting a larger rate of interest than otherwise could be received; and therefore in point of fact he was bound to indemnify his co-trustee to the extent to which a benefit had been received".
 
On appeal Lindley LJ said at 696: "It sometimes occurs, though not often, that one co-trustee is bound to indemnify the other against all loss. Whether he is or is not depends on what is just, as between the two, and this depends on what they have respectively done: see Bahin versus Hughes ...and the cases there cited". 
Kay LJ said at 701-2: "It seems to be essential to this claim for equal contribution that the trustees should be equally to blame for the breach of trust, and that neither of them should have derived an exclusive benefit from the breach of trust ...
The (plaintiff) derived a benefit from the breach of trust and if the co- trustee did not, the plaintiff, according to Lingard versus Bromley ... would be primarily liable as between himself and his co-trustee".

In Wynne versus Tempest [[1897] 1 Ch 110], Chitty J was in no doubt about the rule. That case involved a solicitor/co-trustee who misapplied trust funds and thus would fall into the particular category of solicitor cases referred to by Cotton LJ in Bahin versus Hughes. However, in dealing with the availability of an indemnity generally, his Lordship said at :
 "A right to indemnity may arise under an express or implied contract, or by reason of an obligation resulting from the relation of the parties. Such an obligation arises in equity from the relation of the parties where two trustees are liable for a breach of trust and one has applied the trust fund to his own use: in that case the trustee who has so misapplied the fund is liable to indemnify the co-trustee." 
The right of an innocent co-trustee to indemnity from a fraudulent co-trustee who has converted trust funds to his own use is recognised by Jacobs on
Trusts, 5th ed, 1986 at 600 and by Scott on Trusts, 4th ed, 1988 vol IIIA paras 258.1, 258.2.

A trustee therefore has an equity to be indemnified by a co-trustee who personally received trust funds and converted them to his own use. Where the trust funds remain in the hands of the co-trustee the other trustee has an equity to follow such funds and require them to be repaid to the trust thereby securing a practical indemnity at least in part. The equity to relief in specie may be lost where the funds cannot be traced, but in our opinion there remains a personal equity against the trustee who received the funds which renders him primarily liable, as between the trustees, to make good the loss.

In our opinion the appeal should be allowed to this extent and a declaration made that the appellant is entitled to be indemnified by her co-trustee.

Set off 
The trial judge declared that the appellant and her co-trustee were jointly and severally liable to pay the plaintiff the sum of $52,676.61 plus simple interest until payment, subject in the case of the first defendant only to a set-off in the sum of $12,792. Pursuant to this declaration judgment was entered against the brother for $59,535.50 and against the appellant for $75,582.99. Order 4 declared the co-trustees to be entitled to contribution from each other without regard to the set-off available to the brother. The effect of the set-off on the liability of the appellant was not raised in the notice of appeal or argued at the hearing, but it directly affects the form of the declaration as to the rights of contribution between the trustees. In these circumstances the Court considered that it should act under SCR [Pt ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/index.html#p51) r 15 and review the orders below insofar as they dealt with the question of set-off although they had not been challenged. The matter was raised with counsel who were given an opportunity to make submissions on the point.

The liability of trustees for breach of trust is joint and several and gives rise to an equitable debt. Each trustee is liable for the whole amount, and a judgment against the trustees may be enforced against one of them without regard to any rights to contribution or indemnity that trustee may have. If the appellant had been sued alone it is possible that she could not have relied on a set-off available only to her co-trustee. See Bowyear versus Pawson [(1881) 6 QBD 540] and R Derham "Set-off" (1987) at 152-3. However both trustees were sued and the brother established his set-off.

Owen versus Wilkinson <case>; [(1858) 5 CB (NS) 526] especially at 527; 213 establishes that the set-off found for the other defendant should have operated for the benefit of the appellant who was jointly and severally liable for the same debt. See also Derham at 152-3.

However if one of the trustees becomes bankrupt, a beneficiary who has obtained judgment against the trustees may be able to prove for the full amount without giving credit for later part payments by other trustees until full satisfaction has been received. See Edwards versus Hood-Barrs [[1905] 1 Ch ], although this decision has been persuasively criticised by Glanville Williams in "Joint Obligations" at 160-1, and compare Re Houlder [[1929] 1 Ch .]
The appellant is not bankrupt. Equity follows the law, and the judgment against the appellant should reflect any existing set off available against the beneficiary from another trustee, just as it should reflect any part payment by such trustee. See Glanville Williams (above), at 92-4. This variation in the judgment does not affect the proper order for costs, as the appeal against the first respondent otherwise failed.

In our opinion the following orders should be made:
Appeal allowed in part.
Judgment against the appellant reduced to $59,535.50. Appeal against the orders in favour of the first respondent otherwise dismissed.
Appellant to pay first respondent's costs of the appeal.
Declaration 4 set aside, and in lieu declare that the appellant is entitled to be indemnified by the second respondent against her liability to the first respondent under the judgment for $59,535.50. Liberty is reserved to the appellant to apply to the Equity Division for further relief against the second respondent.
The second respondent is to pay the appellant's costs incurred in the appeal against the order affecting the second respondent.
 
POWELL JA: I have read in draft form the Judgment which has been prepared by Handley and Beazley JJA. Although I agree with the Declaration and Orders which their Honours propose, and although, in the light of that Declaration and these Orders, the comments which I make below will not affect the rights and liabilities inter se of the Appellant and the Second Respondent, I think it appropriate to add some short comments upon the effect of the set-off of the "just allowance" which was given effect to by Simos J.
In a case such as this was, where each of two trustees has acted in breach of his or her duty to the beneficiaries and the beneficiaries have suffered loss, the trustees are jointly and severally liable to recoup that loss.
However, as there is but one loss, any payment made by either of the trustees to the beneficiaries goes to reduce the loss and, to that extent, enures for the benefit of the other trustee as against the beneficiaries.
if, in proceedings brought by the beneficiaries against the trustees seeking to have the trustees recoup the loss, one of the trustees raises a set-off which is given effect to, then that, as it seems to me, is to be regarded as equivalent to a payment pro tanto of the amount of any loss (see, for example, Owen v. Wilkinson 1); if, however, proceedings were brought against one only of the trustees, and that trustee was not, although the other trustee was, entitled to raise a set-off, that would not avail the trustee who was sued (see, for example, Bowyear v. Pawson 2); in a case in which a set-off had been raised and given effect to, the amount of that set off would, as it seems to me, need to be brought to account in any proceedings brought by one trustee against the other for contribution; the cases (Edwards v. Hood-Barrs 3; re Houlder 4) referred to by
Handley and Beazley JJA are both cases concerning proof of debts in bankruptcy, an area of the law in which some rather special, and quite technical, rules - especially relating to the rights and obligations of parties to negotiable instruments and of sureties (see, for example, Ex parte Stephens 5; Ex parte Hanson 6; Vulliamy v. Noble 7; Byles on
Bills of Exchange [8]; Chitty on Bills of Exchange [9]) - have developed; the nett result of those rules, however, is that while, in an appropriate case, the creditor may seek to prove for the full amount of the debt, and, as well, seek to recover the debt from anyone who is also liable for it, until he receives the full amount of the debt, once that stage has been reached he cannot retain any surplus for himself as, if he were to do so, that would amount to doubt satisfaction (see, for example, Ex parte Wyldman 10; Byles [11]; Chitty <case>; <case>; [(1805) 11 Ves. 24]; <case>; [(1811) 18 Ves. 232]; [34 ER 205] {1817} <case>; 3
Mer. 592; [36 ER 228](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=36%20ER%20228 "View LawCiteRecord" )
 [8] 26 Ed. (1988) 468 [9] 11 Ed. (1878) 462-463  <case>; (1750) 2 Ves. Sen. 113; [28 ER 74]; [11] ibid [12] ibid * * * 
