

Regina versus Evan Collier [2001] NSWSC 1334 (16 September 2001) 
REGINA versus Evan COLLIER /96 
Monday 12 May 1997 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
SMART J, BRUCE J 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: Evan Bradley Collier has applied for leave to appeal against the severity of the following sentences: break enter and steal between 1 and 7 October 1995, concurrent fixed term of twelve months; robbery by stealing a handbag from a lady, bag snatched on 16 October , minimum term of three years and an additional term of two years; obtain benefit by deception, four counts, 18/19 October 1995, use of victim's Bankcard, concurrent fixed term of six months on each count; attempt to obtain benefit by deception on 23 October 1995 by use of victim's Bankcard, concurrent fixed term of six months.

The Judge applied the principle of totality in imposing the sentences. The offence of break, enter and stealing involved breaking and entering a house and stealing a computer and associated equipment. The robbery involved snatching the bag of a sixty-five year-old lady in a public street, knocking her to the ground and dragging her when she attempted to hold onto her handbag. He took her credit card and used it to obtain goods. There can be no doubt that the lady would have been grossly upset at the incident and probably suffered some injuries.

The offender, who was born in 1972, had a poor record. It includes a number of dishonesty offences but the most serious entry relates to kidnapping and armed robbery.

The materials before us reveal that while the applicant participated in the events which occurred, he was very much the minor player and indeed tried to save the victim, and succeeded, from some of the worst excesses of his co- offender.

Judge Newton imposed a minimum term of two years with an additional term of one year. Obviously the applicant should not have been driving the car but it is obvious from the victim's statement, that the applicant acted as a restraining influence on the co-offender. It does not appear that the Judge had the advantage of this material.

The Judge took into account the applicant's remorse and his plea of guilty.
The Crown case against the applicant on identification was not a strong one.
The applicant made admissions to the police when interviewed.

A call to 000 was put in place. Subsequently the call was traced back to the applicant's residence and the applicant was interviewed. Given the difficulties of identification, the admissions made by the applicant to the police were of importance to the Crown. The applicant did not attempt to disguise the role he had played.

Since the commission of the offence the applicant had obtained a position as a cutter. He was a good worker. He also endeavoured to obtain an understanding of his problem with alcohol but the Judge doubted whether he appreciated the extent of his problems. He had been attending weekly counselling sessions. He was, however, still drinking at weekends but this reduced very much in extent.

The Judge accepted the views of Dr Olav Nielssen, a psychiatrist, that the priority for treatment for Mr Collier was continued drug and alcohol counselling. Dr Nielssen thought that the applicant's feelings of depression and anxiety were likely to improve further if he reduced his alcohol intake.

I interpolate that the applicant and his girlfriend had had serious disagreements and that the applicant contended that this was at least part of the reason why he returned to alcohol. Dr Nielssen was of the view that continued employment and an improved social life would also assist the applicant but that it was likely that a full-time custodial sentence would have a detrimental effect on the applicant's health. Dr Nielssen thought that the applicant was suffering from a more chronic form of depressive illness which is not as severe as major depression and not as likely to respond to treatment with anti-depressant medication. The applicant was also suffering a post traumatic stress disorder following an assault in gaol.

The subject offences occurred at a time of significant depressive symptoms and some despair by the applicant over his future. Dr Nielssen thought that the onset of the applicant's criminal activity was a probable consequence of his parents' separation. Alcohol was also playing a large part.

Mr Collier appears to have strong support from his father and some support from his two brothers. His mother has pursued her own activities. The Judge took into account the applicant's background as set out in Associate Professor
Hayes' report and had particular regard to the applicant's pattern and history of drinking. The Judge accepted that the applicant suffered from moderate anxiety and was moderately depressed. The Judge thought this was associated with his fear of returning to the prison system.

The materials indicate that the applicant will need a great deal of support and supervision on his release from prison. He will need employment and some social life and to be steered away from resuming drug and alcohol consumption.
I record that the applicant was in breach of parole and on 26 September 1996 the Offenders Review Board sentenced the applicant to serve the balance of the additional term of nine months and twenty-six days, from 26 September 1996 to July 1997.

The applicant was twenty-four years of age at the time of the offences and it appears that subsequent to the offences he embarked upon a course of rehabilitation. That comprised the employment mentioned and the counselling previously mentioned.

The offences were undoubtedly serious and there can be no question that ladies are entitled to walk the streets without fear of having their bag snatched and being knocked over and ill-treated. The seriousness of the offences is a paramount consideration but in the case of a young man rehabilitation is also of importance.

The subject offences occurred a relatively short period after the applicant's release on parole.

The applicant's father has strongly supported his son's application and he assisted in the rehabilitation process which commenced after these offences by providing accommodation for his son, stability and general support. The sentences do not place sufficient weight on the rehabilitation aspect. The applicant will need considerable supervision on his release and a substantial additional term is necessary.

I propose that leave to appeal be granted, the appeal be allowed, that the sentence imposed on the robbery by stealing count be quashed and that, in lieu of the sentence imposed, the applicant be sentenced to a period of five years comprising a minimum term of two years and three months penal servitude to commence on 17 September 1996 and to expire on 16 December 1998 with an additional term of two years nine months, to commence on 17 December 1998 and to expire on 16 September 2001.

BRUCE J: I agree.

SMART J: The orders will be as proposed. All other sentences are confirmed.
 * * * 
