

Regina versus Bill Jarjoura [1997] NSWSC 120 (9 April 1997) 
REGINA versus Bill JARJOURA /96 
Wednesday 9 April 1997 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
SIMPSON J, HIDDEN J 
JUDGMENT 
HIDDEN J: Bill Jarjoura seeks leave to appeal against sentences passed upon him in the District Court by his Honour Judge Rummery after he had pleaded guilty to four charges of falsifying documents as a clerk under <case> of the Crimes Act, and a charge of obtaining financial advantage by deception under <case> of the Act. The applicant asked his Honour to take into account, on a Form 2, three further charges of obtaining financial advantage by deception, and four charges of obtaining money by a false statement under <case> of the Act. Each of these offences carries a maximum sentence of five years penal servitude.

On the first count in the indictment, and taking into account the matters on the Form 2, his Honour sentenced the applicant to penal servitude for four years, consisting of a minimum term of two years to commence on 23 February , and an additional term of two years. On the other four counts his Honour passed concurrent terms of two years each, comprising a minimum term of twelve months, also to commence on 23 February 1996 and an additional term of twelve months. The effective sentence overall was one of four years, consisting of a minimum term of two years and an additional term of two years.

The facts are set out in a comprehensive statement of facts prepared by Det
Snr Const Bramah in relation to the matters on the indictment, and are sufficiently set out in the Form 2 document itself as to the matters in that document. It is unnecessary to examine the detail of them. It is sufficient to say that at the relevant time the applicant was an officer of the Commonwealth
Bank and by various devices over a period of about two years between 1992 and , he milked the accounts of some of the bank's customers of amounts totalling in excess of $300,000.

His Honour rightly characterised the offences as serious involving, as they did, a substantial sum of money and the abuse of a position of trust on the part of the applicant as an officer of the bank.

When he was arrested in relation to these matters he initially declined to be interviewed on legal advice. However after his arrest, and after having been charged with the offences on the indictment, he authorised his solicitor to reveal some further defalcations totalling about $37,000, and these are the matters which appear as items 6 and 7 on the Form 2. There was a paper committal but the applicant pleaded guilty on his arraignment in the District
Court, which his Honour accepted as evidence of genuine remorse. He indicated a willingness to pay compensation, which his Honour also accepted as genuine, although he considered it unlikely that the applicant could ever pay any meaningful amount. Before the offences came to light, the applicant sought a redundancy package from the bank hoping thereby to obtain some capital to try and make good, at least in part, his defalcations, and his Honour considered him entitled to credit for good motivation in that regard.

The applicant has no prior convictions. He is now aged thirty-one. He was born in Lebanon, a member of a large family. Some of the family came to this country in 1977, including the applicant. Here he obtained the Higher School
Certificate. He commenced working for the Commonwealth Bank in 1986 and worked there until his resignation in mid-1994, again before these matters had come to light. There was evidence that he had been valued at the bank as a reliable and honest employee.

The unusual feature of the case is the circumstances in which the offences came to be committed. They were the result of a gambling addiction. That, of itself, is perhaps not all that unusual. The relevance of a gambling addiction to sentence for offences of this kind has been considered by this Court on a number of occasions, and I need not repeat the principles enunciated in those cases. What is unusual, and what is tragic, is the circumstance which itself led to that gambling addiction.

That was explained in evidence from the applicant himself, and was ventilated in a pre-sentence report before his Honour and a psychiatric report of Dr
Allcock. It seems that in 1990 the applicant's younger brother, Ibrahim, died of a brain disease. The applicant had been very close to his brother and the material suggests that he never came to terms with his brother's death. It was his grief over that death which seems to have destabilised him and led him into the destructive pattern of gambling which was the background to his commission of the offences. His Honour quoted a passage from Dr Allcock's report in which the doctor said that "the stress of dealing with the situation and grief following the brother's death was obviously the essential point as to throwing his mood state and his normal controls out of line, and may well have created the environment for these uncharacteristic actions to follow." 
Uncharacteristic was indeed the word. The applicant's lifestyle had been entirely satisfactory prior to his involvement in this criminality, and he had no prior convictions.

Weighing up all the circumstances, his Honour felt compelled to impose a fulltime custodial sentence, and he assessed the effective sentence of four years with an eye to the totality of the applicant's criminality. He found special circumstances in the applicant's age, his previous good character, his addiction to gambling, his still unresolved grief in relation to the death of his brother, and his need for ongoing counselling in relation to that grief and the gambling problem arising from it.

The applicant has been unrepresented in this Court. He furnished some submissions in writing, to which he spoke before us this morning. Some of his submissions relate to written submissions provided by the Crown prosecutor to the sentencing judge in the court below. No more need be said about them because, as the Crown prosecutor before us has rightly pointed out, it was his
Honour's reasons for sentence to which the applicant must direct his attention, not submissions which were made to him and which he may or may not have accepted.

The applicant's submissions before us are to the effect that his Honour gave inadequate weight to the state of depression which his brother's death had caused him, and to the fact that it was his brother's death which was the genesis of his gambling addiction. The applicant submitted also that his
Honour gave inadequate weight to other favourable subjective circumstances, including the fact that he was a first offender and the fact that there were strong prospects of rehabilitation, particularly with appropriate counselling.

It does not seem to me that his Honour failed to give the appropriate weight to those matters. This is indeed an unusual and tragic case, but the tenor of his Honour's remarks on sentence demonstrate that is how his Honour also viewed it.

The applicant made a specific submission that his Honour failed to have regard to his voluntary return to Australia from Lebanon in 1994. I should explain briefly the situation to which that submission is directed. It seems that, after the applicant resigned from the bank in about mid-1994, he travelled to
Lebanon but later in the year he returned to Australia. He gave evidence, and there is no reason why his Honour would not have accepted it, that when he returned to Australia he expected his criminality to be found out and to face charges over it. That indeed happened, but it must be said not through any action taken by him. His criminality came to light in late 1994, I gather because of some enquiries that some of the customers made about the state of their accounts, and it was not for quite some months after his return to
Australia that he was spoken to by police and charged.

His Honour mentioned the applicant's return to Australia, without mentioning in terms the fact that he did so anticipating that he would have to face responsibility for his criminal actions. The fact that his Honour did not specifically make reference to that does not persuade me that his Honour was not conscious of the evidence which the applicant had given about that matter, and in any event the matter is not of such significance as to persuade me that the sentence ought be reviewed in the light of it.

I am not persuaded that his Honour has failed to give appropriate weight to all the matters in the case which were favourable to the applicant. Indeed, as
I have said, his Honour's remarks demonstrate a considerable degree of sympathy for him. It is clear that it was with reluctance that his Honour felt compelled to impose a custodial sentence, but that it was his Honour's duty to do so is beyond doubt. Nor am I persuaded that the sentence as a whole, or the minimum term in particular, are manifestly excessive such as to warrant the intervention of this Court.

For those reasons, and not without some anxious consideration on my own part,
I have concluded that the appeal must be dismissed.

SIMPSON J: I agree. The orders of the Court are that the appeal must be dismissed.
 * * * 
