

Powell versus Powell [1996] NSWSC 241 (1 July 1996) 
POWELL versus POWELL /96 
Wednesday 26 June 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
Brownie J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This case comes before me today in these circumstances. On 14 June Young J heard the matter and declined to grant the plaintiff an interim injunction. He ordered that a particular caveat, which the plaintiff had lodged, be removed within seven days. Yesterday, 25 June, the defendant file in court a Notice of Motion seeking various interlocutory orders, in particular, an order that the plaintiff immediately vacate the relevant land.

I was told that the urgency of the matter was that the defendant had exchanged contracts to sell the land and that it was hoped to complete the conveyancing transaction next Monday, 1 July. At the same time the plaintiff referred to a
Notice of Motion said to have been filed in the Registry on Friday 21 June, returnable 28 June.

The plaintiff sought to have both Motions heard on Tuesday 25 June. I was told that it was not known precisely where the plaintiff was. It was thought that she had left Wellington on her way to Sydney but her precise whereabouts were not known. At the same time the plaintiff showed me documents intended to be filed in the Court of Appeal seeking leave to appeal from the decision of
Young J and seeking a stay of his Honour's orders. I was told that because the plaintiff's whereabouts were then unknown the affidavit of the plaintiff in support of that Motion had not been sworn.

In the event I stood the matter down in the list whilst the parties approached the Court of Appeal. I understand that the President considered the matter and said in substance that on the material then before him he did not think it was appropriate for the Court of Appeal to do anything immediately.

The matter then came back before me and I adjourned it until today in order to see whether the plaintiff could be found. In all the circumstances it seemed better to adjourn the matter for a day so that she might have the opportunity to be present. If she were not present my feeling yesterday was that I should act upon her unsworn draft affidavit.

This morning the matter was listed again and over the defendant's objection adjourned until this afternoon in the hope that the plaintiff would arrive.
She has in fact arrived and is present in court now. The plaintiff now seeks an adjournment until Tuesday 9 July in order that the matter can be dealt with in the Court of Appeal on Monday 8 July. The defendant objects to the adjournment and protests that in substance the plaintiff is asking me to do what amounts to the granting of an appeal from the order of Young J that the plaintiff withdraw the caveat in question within seven days from 14 June.

I think that that is in truth what the plaintiff is asking me to do. His
Honour ordered that the caveat be withdrawn in effect by 21 June. It does not seem to me that another Judge in one of the trial divisions of this court can (or, if the Judge can, should) entertain what amounts to an appeal from the decision of another Judge. It seems to me that an application of that kind ought to be made only to the Court of Appeal.

What I am minded to do for the moment is to entertain the defendant's application, and if I am persuaded that I should make some order on the defendant's application, to then stay proceedings until say 2 pm next Monday in order to give the plaintiff an opportunity to go back to the Court of
Appeal. As presently advised I do not see why she should not be expected to do that in the Motion list next Monday in the Court of Appeal.

I therefore reject the plaintiff's application for an adjournment until 9
July. I propose to proceed to deal with the defendant's Motion filed in court on 25 June and the defendant's application to bring forward the hearing of the
Motion presently returnable on 28 June.
 [Judgment re: Notices of Motion] 
The defendant asks me to deal with paragraphs 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7 and 8 of the
Motion dated 25 June. In relation to paragraphs 6 and 7 he seeks orders rather than undertakings. He also seeks that I deal with paragraphs 1, 3 and 4 of the
Motion filed in court today. It does not seem to me to be appropriate to deal with all that material now. If the Court of Appeal grants leave to appeal from the decision of Young J, and if the Court of Appeal upholds that appeal then it will obviously be inappropriate for any Judge in a trial division of the court to have dealt with the matters referred to in paragraphs 1, 3 and 4 of the notice of Motion dated today.

I accept the submission madeon behalf of the plaintiff that there is no evidence to support the making of an order for the security of costs at this stage, but in any event it does not seem to be appropriate to deal with that now. Since Young J has made an order that the caveat in question be removed I do not see any advantage in making a further order to that effect. All that is really appropriate, it seems to me, is to make an order under Pt 42 r9(1)(a) appointing the Registrar to execute the necessary document on behalf of the plaintiff.

In relation to the claims made in paragraphs 6 and 7 of the notice of Motion dated 25 June, having regard to the order made by Young J and the absence of any evidence from the plaintiff in opposition, I think I should make those orders. I should make it clear that all the orders I make now will be stayed until 2 pm on Monday next 1 July in the expectation that the plaintiff will move the Court of Appeal on Monday morning for relief and that the Court of
Appeal will by 2 pm have made some order. I do that because I have been told without objection that the defendant hopes to complete the sale of the property next Monday.

At the moment the position is that Young J has given judgment and made orders, and it seems to me I should treat those orders as valid so long as they remain undisturbed by any order of the Court of Appeal. All that I am really being asked to do and propose to do, it seems to me, is to deal with the incidental or mechanical aspects of perfecting his Honour's order and providing for it to be complied with.

I note the usual undertaking as to damages given by the defendant by his counsel. I make the following orders:
I direct the Registrar to execute all documents and do all the things necessary to be done by the plaintiff in order to comply with the orders made on 14 June .
I order the plaintiff to forthwith give possession of the property mentioned in paragraph of the Notice of Motion dated 25 June 1996.
I order the plaintiff not to interfere in any way with completion of the contract of sale of that property.
I stay each of the orders now made until 2.15 pm on Monday 1 July 1996.
I record that if the Court of Appeal has not been able to deal with the matter by then the matter may be referred back to me at or after 2 pm on 1 July 1996 and I will extend the stay until such time as then seems appropriate. I consider that the balance of the Motions now before me should be adjourned to a date to be fixed after the Court of Appeal has dealt with the matter.
I therefore stand them over generally with liberty to either party to restore to the list upon two days notice to the other.
I reserve the question of costs at this stage.
I vacate the hearing date of the Motion said to be 28 June 1996.

POWELL versus POWELL /96 June 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
Brownie J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The motion which is before me now is the motion which was originally returnable at 2 o'clock yesterday, 27 June 1996. The plaintiff has now delivered to the defendant's lawyers a withdrawal of the caveat mentioned in paragraph 3 of that Notice of Motion. All that the defendant now seeks is orders in terms of paragraphs 4 and 6 of that motion.

The sequence of events relevantly seems to be that on 14 June Young J ordered the withdrawal of what I will call the first caveat, that is to say, one relating to part of the property in question. On 20 June the plaintiff lodged a second caveat over the whole of the property. On 25 and 26 June there were further proceedings before me, which were summarised in my reasons for judgment 26 June.

At 9.30 pm on 26 June the defendant told his solicitor that he had received notice of the lodgement of the caveat of 20 June. Presumably that followed from his receipt of a letter of notification in the mail that day.

At 8.30 am yesterday, 27 June, the defendant faxed a copy of the caveat to his solicitor. At 9 am yesterday morning there was a conversation between the plaintiff's solicitor and the defendant's solicitor. The plaintiff's solicitor said that he did not then know of the second caveat. The defendant's solicitor said the defendant would be moving the court for an order that the caveats be removed and that the registrar be authorised to sign the withdrawal on behalf of the plaintiff. The plaintiff's solicitor rang back some ten minutes later to ask that the defendant not act until noon, so as to enable the plaintiff's solicitor to contact the plaintiff. At about 11.30 am the plaintiff's solicitor telephoned the defendant's solicitor to ask for more time, and he sought an extension of time until 5 o'clock.

There is a dispute between the solicitors as to what followed. Since neither has given evidence I cannot hope to resolve that dispute. Nobody asks for an adjournment. At about 12.30 pm yesterday the plaintiff telephoned her solicitor and gave him instructions to withdraw the caveat. At about 1 pm the plaintiff's solicitor telephoned the defendant's solicitor to pass on those instructions. It was agreed between the solicitors that the withdrawal of the caveat would be delivered in court this afternoon, that is say, Friday 28
June. At about 2pm yesterday the defendant's counsel appeared and filed the
Notice of Motion which is presently before me. I was told that there had been some conversation between the counsel for the parties, and by consent I adjourned the motion until 2.30 pm today. Unfortunately, what it was that happened between 1pm and 2pm yesterday is not established .

The plaintiff submits that the motion ought not have been brought. I do not agree. If ever a litigant asked for trouble it was the plaintiff. She filed the second caveat without telling her solicitor or barrister, either at the time or later until the defendant was in a practical sense compelled to act.
The conveyancing transaction was due for settlement next Monday , 1 July. I had already made orders calculated to preserve the existing position until the
Court of Appeal had the opportunity to deal with the matter next Monday morning. The plaintiff was at that stage in apparent contempt of the order made by Young J. For that matter, she apparently still is. That is to say, it seems to be common ground that she has not complied with the order. It seems to me that in the circumstances the defendant acted quite reasonably in bringing the motion on.

I consider that generally speaking the defendants are entitled to the costs of the motion. I do not consider that an entitlement to indemnity costs has been made out. That, in my view, is an order which should be made only rarely and the present circumstances do not constitute such a case. It was said that order 3, made by me on 26 June, whilst prospective and not retrospective in effect, operated to prevent the plaintiff from lodging a further caveat. I agree that the order might be construed that way, but that was not what I thought I was ordering at the time. It was not in the ordinary form of an order made when someone seeks to prevent another person from lodging a caveat.
The form of the order came from paragraph 7 of the Notice of Motion, dated 25
June. Plainly enough, if one looks back to that Notice of Motion and the affidavit in support of that Motion, the order sought and the order made were directed to a different problem altogether.

It seems to me that in all the circumstances I should make an order in terms of paragraph 4 of the Notice of Motion, omitting the word "permanently".
Furthermore, it seems that I should make an additional order in similar in terms to order 1, made of 26 June, so as to save the parties from having to come back to court if it should be that there is a third caveat lodged or one which may be lodged in the future.

I make the following orders:
I make an order in terms of paragraph 4 of the Notice of Motion returnable June 1996, omitting the word "permanently".
I order that the plaintiff pay the defendant's costs of 25 and 26 June and of this Motion, but not on an indemnity basis.
In addition I order the plaintiff to withdraw any further caveats which have been lodged, or might in the future be lodged, in respect of the property known as "Willunga".
I direct the registrar to execute all documents and do all things necessary to be done by the plaintiff in order to comply with these orders.
I stay the present orders until 2.15 pm on Monday, 1 July 1996.
 * * * 
