

The Council of the Municipality of Woollahra versus Sved and Anor Matter No Ca /98 [1998] NSWSC 600 (30 September 1998) 
Last Updated: 9 December 1998 
THE COUNCIL OF THE MUNICIPALITY OF WOOLLAHRA versus GEORGE SVED & ANOR 
CA 40136/98 September 1998 
Mason P, Sheller JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
MASON P: The transcript will show the matters raised and debated in this application. I am not persuaded that the prospects of overturning the decision on costs bear a sufficient prospect of success to merit the grant of leave. It is accepted that the principles were correctly stated by Giles J. He was dealing with a broad area of discretion in relation to costs. His Honour gave reasons to which may be added the inference one draws from the fact that the Council included in its 1996 appeal a challenge to the dismissal of its cross claims against the parties referred to as the successful defendants. 
I would also refuse the application on the basis that there was default in compliance with the Registrar's direction which, as indicated in the judgment
I gave on 24 July, merely reflected proper practice. I quite accept Mr
Gibbons' evidence that he was misled as apparently was junior counsel who provided him with the advice. Nevertheless the Registrar's direction was, in my view, quite clear, and it reflected the practice of the court. The matter was reinforced by the exchange that occurred as recorded at p 34 of the transcript of argument on 18 May.

I do not consider there has been a satisfactory explanation for the failure to file the application for leave to appeal in relation to the costs order, particularly the default that occurred from the time the Registrar gave the directions that he gave.

I would dismiss the summons and order the claimant to pay the costs of the opponents, Mr and Mrs Sved, and the costs of Mr Goddard for whom Mr Thomas appears today.

SHELLER JA: I agree. 
MASON P: The orders of the court will be as proposed. 
MOTBEY: Would your Honours entertain an application that the Sved's have their costs on an indemnity basis. 
MASON P: I would entertain it but for my part I would not grant it. * * * 
