

Niagos versus Peter Argyropoulos trading as Pmt Demolition and Excavation
Matter No Ca 40300/98 [1998] NSWSC 479 (6 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 9 November 1998 
NIAGOS versus PETER ARGYROPOULOS TRADING AS PMT DEMOLITION AND EXCAVATION 
CA 40300/98 July 1998 
Sheller JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
SHELLER JA: The claimant, Mr Peter Niagos, was the owner of a property at 40A Homer Street, Earlwood. He was licensed as an owner builder. The opponent, Mr Peter Argyropoulos, was an excavating contractor. 
The opponent began proceedings in the District Court to recover an amount for excavation work done on the property for Mr Niagos. The excavation work was apparently a step in the process of building a house on the site. Mr Niagos cross claimed to recover damages for damage alleged to have been done by the opponent while he was carrying out the excavation work. The work was done as long ago as 1988.

The proceedings came before Seery ADCJ. The hearing, I have been told, took thirteen days. On 16 April 1998 Seery ADCJ delivered his reasons for judgment and made findings, in accordance with which he found a verdict for the opponent against the claimant in the claimant's cross claim. He found a verdict for the opponent in his claim in the sum of $29,340 plus interest from May 1988. His Honour said that "in view of the claimant's delaying the resolution of the dispute by filing a defence and cross claim which had no merit in law or in fact I order the defendant to pay the plaintiff's costs of the action and cross action on an indemnity basis." His Honour also referred to an offer of compromise.

The claimant filed a notice of appeal from this decision. In the papers available to me today there is an amended notice of appeal and it is the grounds contained in that document which was filed on 1 July 1998 which are now relied upon by the claimant in the appeal. On 14 May 1998 the claimant filed a notice of motion for an order that Seery ADCJ orders be stayed pending determination of the appeal or further order. It is that application that is before the Court today.

In support of it, there is an affidavit by Mr Niagos in which he states his assets and liabilities and income. There is also an affidavit by Mr
Argyropoulos in which he sets out his financial position.

A good deal of the argument before me today was devoted to the merits of the appeal. The first ground of appeal is that the primary judge was wrong in depriving the defendant of procedural fairness by failing to disqualify himself for bias. I have been informed from the bar table that this application was made to the trial judge during the course of the hearing and refused on that occasion and on that application Mr Niagos was represented by senior counsel.

The judgment of his Honour refusing the application is not apparently available nor is the transcript of that application. However, I am assured by
Mr Parker QC, who appears for the claimant, that this ground of appeal has substance.

The other grounds of appeal relate in various ways to his Honour's reasons for judgment, both on the claim and the cross claim. A substantial part of that argument was directed by Mr Parker to what is said to be an absence of logical reasoning process leading to the conclusions to which his Honour arrived on these matters.

During the luncheon adjournment I had the opportunity to read through the reasons for judgment. It is to be observed that his Honour took the view that there were two agreements between the parties, one in writing, the original agreement for excavation work, and a subsequent oral agreement relied upon by the opponent for additional excavation work that was done. His Honour accepted that there was a subsequent oral agreement for extra work. As I understand it, the amount due under the original agreement was indeed met, it was the amount said to be due under the oral agreement which was the subject of the hearing.

I observed that his Honour took an unfavourable view of the claimant's credit and a favourable view of the opponent's credit. His honour said of the opponent that, in his mind; "......the way he gave evidence created an atmosphere for me whereby honesty appeared to pervade the court and I had no difficulty in accepting the evidence which was relayed to me by the interpreter." 
The reverse situation applied to the claimant, the defendant.

His Honour said: "I am confirmed in my view as to the defendant because I came to the conclusion during the course of his evidence that he was an evasive witness and a witness who could not be relied upon." 
On the basis of findings made by his Honour of the existence of an oral contract, these findings on credibility inevitably make the chances of the appeal succeeding more difficult. Similarly, when his Honour came to consider the cross claim he observed that the claimant had prepared a list of damages.
At the conclusion of the evidence his Honour said there was no probative support for the list of damages. He did not accept the claimant's assertion that he could not remember and had no record of the persons who did the work for him. However this may be, having read the judgment and listened carefully to the submissions that have been made to me, I do not find the grounds for appeal relied upon and developed to the extent they were particularly persuasive.

The onus is upon the claimant to demonstrate a proper basis for a stay that will be fair to all the parties. One particular principle that must be borne in mind is whether there is a risk that the appeal will prove abortive if the claimant succeeds on it and a stay is not granted. Another of course is whether if a stay is refused the claimant will be unable to pursue the appeal.

In the present case, having seen the evidence that has been put on by the parties it seems to me that on that evidence there is no risk that if the appeal succeeds it will prove abortive nor do I see that the refusal of a stay would stand in the way of the appeal being pursued.

I have been told from the bar table that in addition to the amount of the verdict which I have stated a similar amount was awarded by way of interest and that these two amounts with costs ordered on an indemnity basis will add up to something in the order of $180,000.

The evidence of the claimant is that with his wife he owns the house at 40A
Homer Street which he values at $700,000. There is a mortgage liability of approximately $15,000.

The opponents evidence is that he has assets consisting of shares in the family home, a farm property, a commercial property and a vacant block of land which are worth, adjusted in a manner I was told of from the bar table, approximately $864,000. He has other interests which he has referred to which seems to take his total asset value to something over $2½ million. None of these figures were challenged by either side.

The claimant, through his counsel, informed me that he was prepared to give an undertaking to the court not to sell, charge or mortgage or otherwise encumber the interest of himself and his wife in the property at Earlwood. I note the availability of this undertaking in considering how I should resolve this application.

In my opinion, and having carefully considered the material before me the claimant has not discharged the onus of satisfying me that a stay should be granted. Accordingly, the application will be dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
