

Regina versus Graham Andrew Cassel [2003] NSWSC 1277 (12 April 2003) 
REGINA versus Graham Andrew CASSEL /95 
Friday 14 March, 1997 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES CRIMINAL DIVISION 
CORAM: BRUCE J 
SENTENCE 
HIS HONOUR: 
The prisoner (Graham Andrew Cassel) was charged with the murder of Michael
McPake at La Perouse on 13 April, 1995. He pleaded that he was not guilty of murder but guilty of manslaughter. That plea was accepted by the Crown in full satisfaction of the indictment for murder. The plea was offered by the prisoner and accepted by the Crown on the basis of the prisoner's diminished responsibility.

The prisoner was also charged with maliciously wounding Adrian Anthony Harden at the same place on the same date. He pleaded guilty to that charge.

In order to understand the events of 13 April 1995 and the matters to be considered in determining the appropriate sentences to be imposed it is necessary to trace the life and experiences of the prisoner and the events leading up to the commission of the offences on 13 April, 1995. The relevant facts are as follows..

The prisoner was born on 10 February 1969 at Fairfield and was aged twenty-six at the time of the offences. He attended a series of schools and left after completing year 10 in 1984 . He first obtained employment at Waltons for two or three months and then at the Department of Main Roads as a clerk for about three years. He then worked for Penrith City Council for about one year before joining the army. He was in the army for about one year before he was discharged on medical grounds.

After leaving the army he worked for Parramatta City Council for six months to a year before commencing employment at the University of New South Wales
Recreational Centre where he worked for about three years. In the period before the offence he was attempting to develop a business as a personal trainer.

The evidence given of the times of his various employments is imprecise but gives a general indication of the course of his employment history.

In about 1990 the prisoner formed a relationship with a young girl, Georgia
Sycamore, and they had a child Ashleigh in 1993. The prisoner and Ms Sycamore separated in November 1994 and on 12 January 1995 she took their child to
Brisbane to live.

The prisoner's home life had been dysfunctional throughout his life as his mother had had frequent periods of institutionalisation during his formative years for what was diagnosed in 1990 or 1991 as manic depression. She had attempted to commit suicide on a number of occasions. These circumstances had significant effects on the prisoner and he has himself been diagnosed as suffering from severe depression. I shall deal with the medical evidence relating to his condition later.

The relationship with Ms Sycamore was stormy and on one occasion the prisoner struck her breaking her jaw. Before the birth of his daughter the prisoner occasionally engaged in binge drinking but he says that he gave that up after her birth and indeed that he gave up drinking. He was also a user of illicit drugs to some extent and used steroids obtained apparently both legally and illegally. It was said that steroids were used to allow the prisoner to train, to booster his confidence and to give him a sense of wellbeing. It is not suggested that, save for the consumption of wine prior to the commission of the offences, alcohol or chemical substances played any part or other than a trivial part in the commission of offences.

The separation from Ms Sycamore and his daughter had significant emotional effects on the prisoner. He attempted to reconcile with Ms Sycamore up until the commitment of the offences. At the beginning of March 1995 she came to
Sydney with their daughter for a short time and the prisoner was upset at their failure to reconcile their differences. He visited her in Brisbane shortly after she returned and again between 26 March 1995 and 2 April 1995.
These visits failed to reconcile their differences. He then began telephoning her about three times a day.

Ms Sycamore said he was extremely upset.

During the time before the offences the prisoner was living at various places, with a friend at Maroubra, with his parents at Berrima and immediately before the offences he stayed at another friend's home at Maroubra. He says he was depressed to a point where the depression was controlling him and he was having suicidal thoughts which were getting stronger and stronger. He said he had tried to do as much as he could to fix up his relationship with Ms
Sycamore but felt totally helpless and just couldn't carry on.

He says that he had attempted suicide approximately two weeks before the offences by drinking alcohol and holding a knife to his throat. He said that when he woke there was blood running down his neck and dried blood on the sheets. This does not appear to have been a serious attempt to end his life although he may well have been having suicidal thoughts at the time.

During the period before the offences the prisoner said that he telephoned crisis support centres several times a day. He also said that he had attempted to locate a priest for help and when this had been unsuccessful he consulted a general practitioner who recommended counselling. He said he was unable to find the counsellor recommended and then sought help from Dr Menzies a consulting psychiatrist This was apparently quite a difficult step for the prisoner to take as he had determined not to seek psychiatric treatment because of his perception of the course of his mother's life..

On 6 April 1994 the prisoner saw Dr Menzies. Dr Menzies reported that he was concerned about the prisoner's level of depression and the possibility of him committing suicide but he did not believe that the prisoner could have been hospitalised involuntarily. Dr Menzies requested the prisoner to telephone him the next day and he did so. He confirmed an appointment with Dr Menzies at .50 a.m. on 11 April, 1995. Dr Menzies said the prisoner sounded less depressed than he had appeared the previous day.

On 10 April, 1995 the prisoner telephoned his father to borrow money to go to
Brisbane again.

The prisoner telephoned Dr Menzies' rooms on Monday 10 April 1995 to confirm the appointment for the following day but at 8.15 a.m. on 11 April 1995 he left a message on Dr Menzies' answering machine cancelling the appointment.

The prisoner said he intended to go back to see Dr Menzies but did not because he could not afford to do so.

Exhibit "A" contains a number of handwritten notes made by the prisoner which were found in his room by his father the day after the offences were committed. Those notes, without detailing their contents, show the deep anguish which the prisoner was suffering as a result of the loss of his partner and child.

On Monday 10 April, 1995 the prisoner saw a friend, Leonie Talbot. He appeared to be terribly distressed. He had dinner at her home and talked about having suicidal feelings as well as feelings of loss over the ending of his relationship with Ms Sycamore. In the course of the conversation he said: "It would be really easy to let myself fall on one of those knives" referring to a number of knives which he had which he had previously requested Ms Talbot to have sharpened for him. The prisoner slept on Ms Talbot's couch that evening and again the following evening.

On Wednesday 12 April 1995 the prisoner came to the conclusion that he would not be able to ever resume his relationship with Ms. Sycamore after a telephone call which he had with her. Apparently he told her that he was contemplating suicide. The following morning she contacted his father and told him what had been said.

After the telephone call I have referred to Ms Talbot returned to her home to find the prisoner crying and very distressed. He was pacing up and down and became very distressed when Ms Talbot tried to talk to him. He then walked out of her home saying he was going to Queensland.

At 11.30 a.m. the prisoner phoned Ms Talbot and was very agitated and irrational. He hung up on her. Ms Talbot then phoned the prisoner's family home at Berrima and the prisoner answered. She said he was very quiet and said: "I have packed and I am taking off for a couple of days".

Ms Talbot later unexpectedly saw the prisoner at about 3.45 p.m. at the
University where they both worked.

On Wednesday evening he stayed at Ms Talbot's home again and left at 7.30 a.m.
the next morning. Ms Talbot had the impression the prisoner was really disturbed but was trying not to show it.

On Wednesday evening and Thursday morning the prisoner wrote a series of notes and letters which are part of Exhibit "A". Those documents show his great feeling of loss and his intention to end his life as well as some confused, aimless thoughts.

On Thursday, having resolved to kill himself, he set out to do so. He says it was his intention to wedge some knives in such a manner that he could fall on them and take his life.

At about 10.00 a.m. on Thursday 13 April, 1995 the prisoner telephoned Ms
Sycamore asking to speak to his daughter and said words to the effect that after that he would be "out of your life". He was very emotional and crying and Ms Sycamore hung up on him.

On Thursday morning the prisoner was a sad, forlorn man who had decided to end his life because he felt he could not go on in the circumstances in which he found himself. The prisoner drank two bottles of wine to "make sure I could go through with it." He drove to various places and then parked his vehicle at La
Perouse. He then sought a private place to commit suicide.

In the course of this endeavour the prisoner encountered Mr Nicholas Nicolaou who was swimming at the beach.. The prisoner was holding a knife in his right hand with which he threatened Mr Nicolaou and said that he wanted to talk. Mr
Nicholaou said he wanted to go but was intimidated into staying. The prisoner lamented the loss of his partner and child. He was sobbing and irrational.
After talking with Mr Nicolaou the prisoner walked off into the bush. Mr
Nicolaou then ran to a cafe and telephoned the police.

The victims of the offences to which the prisoner has pleaded guilty were two of three workmates who had decided to have a day's fishing after working the night shift the night before. They launched their boat at Cooks River Boat
Ramp in the morning and spent the day fishing at various places in the Georges
River, Botany Bay and then near La Perouse.

At about 2.00 p.m. they brought their boat ashore at Little Congwong Beach. Mr
McPake and Mr Harden probably both got out of the boat when it reached the beach. Mr Floyd stayed with the boat. Mr McPake went up the beach straight in front of the boat into the bushes to relieve himself.

Mr Harden and Mr Floyd give significantly different versions of what occurred next but the fact is that the prisoner for some unknown reason attacked Mr
Harden. It seems that the prisoner wished to obtain use of the boat to go somewhere but there is no explanation of his conduct or of what he actually wanted to do, if indeed he had any formulated intentions.

In the course of his attack on Mr Harden the prisoner had his arm around Mr
Harden's throat and held a knife to his throat. He was shouting things like "be still, lie down." He threatened in effect to slit Mr Harden's throat.

The prisoner said to Mr Floyd: "Whose boat is that?" Mr Floyd replied: "Mine".
The prisoner said various things and then something like: "We're going some place, get the boat in the water." 
Mr Floyd says he then began pushing the boat off the sand although Mr Harden says that Mr McPake also assisted in this.

Mr Harden then broke free of the prisoner and during this altercation he was cut by the prisoner very seriously on the right hand. That injury required some six hours of microsurgery. This injury is what gives rise to the second charge against the prisoner. Mr Harden ran along the beach toward the rocks after he had broken free from the prisoner.

Mr Floyd says Mr McPake then emerged from the bushes and ran towards the prisoner. Mr Harden says Mr McPake ran from the boat where he had been helping
Mr Floyd push it into the water towards the prisoner. There were statements tendered from a number of independent witnesses. They are somewhat confusing but do not cast any doubt on the conclusion that the actions of the prisoner were totally without justification.

The prisoner waved his knife from side to side at Mr McPake and slashed him in the stomach fatally wounding him. Mr McPake bent forward, put both hands on his stomach, turned and ran along the beach to the rocks where he died as a result of the serious wound inflicted by the prisoner. Mr Harden attended him on the rocks but was unable to do anything to help him. Mr Harden then went to the golf course sheds which were above the coastline and the police were called.

Mr Floyd swam away from his boat and the prisoner climbed into the boat and yelled at Mr Floyd repeatedly: "Come back here to the boat or I'll kill you".
Mr Floyd yelled at him: "Turn the key and it will start." 
The prisoner was apparently unable to start the boat. He then jumped out of the boat, took his clothes except his underpants off and ran up the beach into the bushes. Mr Floyd then swam ashore. Mr Floyd started the boat and searched for his companions but could not see them. He then found another boat with a mobile phone and had the driver telephone the police.

The prisoner was later apprehended by police in the car parking area above the beach and charged with the murder of Mr McPake and the offence against Mr
Harden for which he is now being sentenced.

The prisoner told the police that: "this bloke (Mr McPake) came out of the trees. I just used the knife like I had been taught." When asked why he had used the knife the prisoner replied: "He just got in the road." 
The reason for the senseless acts which occurred on the beach and which resulted in the senseless death of an innocent young man with a partner, a young child and a family and in the serious wounding of Mr Harden is wholly unexplained. The prisoner had never met Mr McPake or his companions and had no reason to engage them other than it appears some wish to use their boat for some unexplained purpose. The victim Mr McPake was going about his business and did nothing more than seek to protect his friends with some courage. His courage cost him his life in the tragic circumstances of this case.

After his arrest the prisoner was interviewed and the interview was recorded.
I have viewed the video of that interview and it shows a deeply disturbed man who is unable to cope with the situation in which he finds himself.

Since his arrest the prisoner has attempted suicide on two occasions.

He has received a significant level of psychiatric treatment in goal by both medication and psychotherapy 
The prisoner has recently been examined by three psychiatrists Dr Bruce
Westmore, Dr Brian Boettcher and Dr Christopher Canaris for forensic purposes.

In the histories which he gave to those psychiatrists the prisoner disclosed virtually no recall of the events giving rise to the charges against him.

He told Dr Westmore of his anger at himself for the failure of his relationship and of his fear of the consequences of his illness for his daughter. He said that thoughts of self-harming behaviour developed until they were occurring daily. He said he intended to kill himself on the day of the offences.

Dr Westmore concluded that the prisoner was suffering from a major depressive illness at the time of the offences and it was unlikely that he would have given any thought to the wrongfulness of his conduct. He also expressed the view that the prisoner does not now represent a risk to the community either in the short or long term and that his progress in relation to reoffending was favourable. He reported that the prisoner had indicated that he now recognised his depression and knew how to handle it.

Dr Boettcher reported that the prisoner was treated in the prison hospital for three months after his arrest and during that time his depression gradually eased.

Dr. Boettcher said that the prison hospital notes support his belief that the prisoner was suffering from a major depressive episode and that he was extremely suicidal even in prison. The notes record that the prisoner had impaired cognitive function, concentration, attention and memory and that his judgment and inner sight was clouded by his emotional state. The prisoner was admitted to the prison hospital after he attempted to hang himself.

Dr Boettcher concluded, as I have said, that this prisoner was suffering a severe major depression disorder and that at the time the offences were committed his thinking was confused and his judgment impaired as a result of a severe major depressive episode that had reached psychotic intensity. Dr
Boettcher also said that the effect of alcohol worsened his cognitive impairment. He said that the prisoner had no recall of the offences and only vaguely recalls some of the other people and incidents at the time.

Dr Boettcher said that in his view there was no likelihood of any repeat of the prisoner's behaviour as he has gained considerable insight into his feelings of low esteem and has been treated for his major depressive episode.
Dr Boettcher was of the view that it is likely the prisoner will suffer major depression in the future and that he will need to see a psychiatrist quickly to prevent full development of the depressive symptoms.

Dr Canaris examined the prisoner on behalf of the Crown. He reported that the prisoner had made a number of attempts to kill himself after his arrest and concluded that it was very possible that the prisoner was suffering from major depression at the time he committed the crimes. In his view the depression would have substantially interfered with the prisoner's judgment. He also formed the view that the alcohol consumed by the prisoner and which was directly related to his depression would have further interfered with his already impaired judgment.

Dr Canaris agreed with the opinions expressed by Dr Westmore and Dr Boettcher as to the potential danger of the prisoner and of the likelihood of him reoffending.

The prisoner was also examined by Dr Alex Gilandas, a Clinical Psychologist.
Dr Gilandas concluded that there was clinical evidence of depression and that the prisoner is an excellent candidate for rehabilitation. He also concluded that the prisoner is unlikely to reoffend for a number of reasons including his belief in the extent of the prisoner's remorse as indicated by his serious suicide attempts. Dr Gilandas was of the opinion that when the offences were committed the prisoner was deeply depressed and suicidal with genuine plans to kill himself.

The views of these medical experts are totally consistent and I accept them entirely.

The Chaplain at the Long Bay Correctional Centre, Reverend Ron Watts gave evidence of his experience of the prisoner during the time since his arrest.
He said that the change in the prisoner was as dramatic as any he had seen in his time in the ministry.

Reverend Watts said that the prisoner participates in courses run by him and has expressed deep remorse, contrition and a sense of guilt and shame over the events of 13 April, 1995. Reverend Watts said he had no degree of scepticism at all of the degree of the prisoner's remorse.

Peter Henderson-Brooks, a clergyman whose ministry includes Long Bay Gaol had seen the prisoner weekly since his discharge from D Ward. He said the prisoner was instrumental in the establishment and conduct of a programme to bring offenders and victims of crime together known as Evolve. He said the prisoner's contribution to the creation of this programme came from his own desire for forgiveness and reconciliation. He also said the prisoner was, in his view totally remorseful and he had matured and grown during his time in custody.

During his time in custody he has been a model prisoner and has participated in activities for the wellbeing of himself and other prisoners. He has also participated in educational programs available to prisoners and has taken courses in Land and Environment Management and Bible Studies as well as courses in Horticulture, Numeracy and Mathematics and Reading and Writing.

On behalf of the prisoner glowing references were tendered from a range of prison chaplains, welfare workers and staff which commended him highly.

The prisoner gave evidence of his remorse for his actions and for the hurt he has caused and of his commitment as a Christian. I accept his evidence as being truthful and of reflecting his state of mind.

He now has an appreciation of his crime and of his illness and of how he must deal with it.

The sentence to be imposed upon a prisoner for manslaughter based upon diminished responsibility is dependent to a large extent upon the degree of impairment of the prisoner's mental responsibility for his actions.

The actions of the prisoner in taking the life of an innocent stranger in the course of conducting himself in a violent manner are of the utmost objective seriousness and in the ordinary course would be deserving of the imposition of a very lengthy term of imprisonment. However the Crown has quite properly in the circumstances of this case accepted a plea of guilty of manslaughter on the grounds of diminished responsibility.

In R versus Blacklidge (Court of Criminal Appeal 12 December, 1995, unreported) Gleeson CJ said: "It has long been recognised that the circumstances which may give rise to a conviction for manslaughter are so various, and the range of degrees of culpability is so wide, that it is not possible to point to any established sentencing tariff which can be applied to such cases. Of all crimes, manslaughter throws up the greatest variety of circumstances affecting culpability." 
In this case the offence was, as I have said of the utmost objective seriousness but the sentence which must be imposed must reflect a proper assessment of the degree to which the reduction is the prisoner's capacity for self control which results from his abnormality of mind diminishing the prisoner's responsibility.

This Court has imposed a wide range of sentences for persons convicted of manslaughter based on the grounds of diminished responsibility ranging, so far as I am able to discover, from a minimum term of two years upwards in the
Court of Criminal Appeal and two years and six months and upwards at first instance. Because of the widely varying factual situations individual sentences are of little assistance in determining the sentence which is appropriate in any particular case.

In the present case the psychiatric evidence adduced on behalf of both the
Crown and the prisoner establishes a significant degree of reduction in the subjective seriousness of the offence in respect of the prisoner. There is no rational explanation for the actions of the prisoner and there is no evidence of premeditation to do harm to anyone except himself. He was preparing for his own death and there is nothing in the material before me which leads to the conclusion that on the day of the offences, or at any other time, he intended harm to any other person.

It has been clearly established that at the time of the offences the prisoner was suffering from a major depressive episode with significant emotional factors. I accept that he was unlikely to have turned his mind to controlling his actions even though he was said to be capable of doing so if he had sought to do so. The prisoner was for all intents and purposes out of control emotionally and bent on ending his life.

The consumption of alcohol does not, in the present case, aggravate the offence as the evidence of Dr Canaris established that the consumption of alcohol on the day of the offence was part of the condition from which the prisoner suffered.

The prisoner has no criminal record and although he has used illicit substances on occasions and has been involved in a degree of domestic violence he has conducted himself adequately bearing in mind his upbringing and his condition.

He has manifested contrition and remorse to a considerable degree and is conducting himself in a way which supports the honesty of his behaviour.

The maximum sentence prescribed for manslaughter is twenty-five years. In the circumstances of this case which I have elaborated above I propose to impose a total sentence of penal servitude for eight years.

I am of the view that special circumstances within the meaning of [s.5(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/) have been established which justify me varying the ratio between the minimum and additional terms which that section provides.

The prisoner suffers from a significant psychological problem. He has received substantial treatment and support while in goal and now has an appreciation of how to deal with his problem. Upon his release he should be able to avail himself of the support and assistance and supervision which is available from the Probation and Parole Service to assist him in dealing with his condition and with fitting back into society when he is released on parole. I am satisfied that his rehabilitation will be assisted by a longer than usual additional term so that the minimum term must be correspondingly reduced.

The prisoner has been in custody since his arrest on 13 April 1995 and his sentence will commence on that date.

Graham Andrew Cassel for the manslaughter of Michael McPake I impose a total sentence upon you of penal servitude for eight years, consisting of a minimum term of five years and an additional term of three years. The minimum term commenced on 13 April,1995 and will conclude on 12 April, 2000. The additional term will commence on 13 April, 2000 and conclude on 12 April, 2003. You will be eligible for parole on 13 April, 2000.

For the charge of maliciously wounding Adrian Anthony Harden I impose a total sentence upon you of penal servitude for four years, consisting of a minimum term of two years and an additional term of two years. The minimum term commenced on 13 April, 1995 and will conclude on 12 April, 1997. The additional term will commence on 13 April, 1997 and conclude on 12 April, .
 * * * 
