

Regina versus Caruana Matter No 70109/97 [1998] NSWSC 728 (6 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 18 January 1999 
REGINA versus GUY CARUANA /97 July 1998 
Greg James J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Criminal Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The accused, Guy Caruana, stands charged that he did wound Keong Ok Jeong with intent to murder, and that he did assault David Tthai and Leon Elliott Ruhl; all of these activities are alleged to have occurred on 30 November 1997 at Port Macquarie in the State of New South Wales. On arraignment the accused pleaded not guilty. 
An affidavit by Meredith Phelps, solicitor for the accused, has been admitted into evidence to show that she had advised the accused as to his right to trial by judge alone and the implications thereof, and in particular in respect of the matters required under [s.32(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/s32.html) of the [Criminal Procedure Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/) relating to trial by judge alone; further, she had advised the accused concerning his rights under the Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act 1990.

The accused has been examined by a number of psychiatrists, in particular Dr.
Strum and Dr. Lucas who gave evidence before me. Medical reports have been tendered. In each case the medical practitioner is of the view that the accused is fit for trial. There has been no question raised by the Crown or the defence as to any present unfitness.

On presentation of the indictment the learned Crown Prosecutor drew my attention to Practice Note 98 which provides that indictments in respect of charges other than murder, piracy, war crimes and treason should be presented in the District Court. In the exercise of my discretion I did not reject the indictment, since the accused had been arraigned in this court, committed to this court and the matter had been listed in this court and was ready to proceed, the psychiatrists being present.

On his trial, the accused, on the advice of his counsel, and in the light of the medical opinions and advice referred to earlier, admitted in court all the elements of the three charges to which I have referred, and tendered in evidence marked Exhibit A is a signed statement of those admissions.

There has also been tendered in evidence before me a bundle of statements, being the committal statements setting out the circumstances of the commission of the offences and including evidence of statements made by the accused to police officers together with a transcript of an electronically recorded interview. There has also been tendered the electronically recorded interview itself which has been played in court and which has been viewed by the two psychiatrists I have referred to.

Shortly, the evidence discloses that the accused resided at 16/72 Church
Street, Port Macquarie on 30 November 1997. The accused was a single man, aged , in receipt of a disability pension, who had for many years been suffering from a chronic psychotic illness, schizophrenia. He had been committed previously under the [Mental Health Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mha1990128/), had been treated by various medical practitioners, and had medication prescribed to him for that condition. It appears, although not with any degree of certainty, that at the time of the events that I am about to refer to, the accused may not have been taking his medication appropriately, or alternatively the medication was not effective.

In the late afternoon of Sunday 30 November the accused took a steak knife from his kitchen drawer and walked into central Port Macquarie. He confronted
David Tthai, a 22 year old man of Indonesian background, saying to him several times, "Do you want a punch?". Mr. Tthai left him and returned by car with a workmate. The two approached the accused, at which point the accused took the knife from his pocket and held it up, running towards Mr. Tthai. Mr. Tthai and his companion drove to the Port Macquarie Police Station and informed a police officer. These events constitute the count of assault in respect of Mr. Tthai.

At about 6.30 pm that afternoon, the accused was holding a knife in his left hand, in the vicinity of William Street, Port Macquarie, and when approached by Mr. Leon Ruhl, said, "Do you want to kill me?". When Mr. Ruhl replied, "No,
I have no desire to kill you", the accused dropped the knife, but as Mr. Ruhl walked onto the roadway to get around the accused, the accused said, "We have no choice, I have to kill you".

The accused then picked up the knife and ran at Mr. Ruhl, who ran off. The accused was shouting, "I am going to kill you" as he chased Mr. Ruhl. Mr. Ruhl outdistanced the accused, made his way home, and later that evening reported the matter at the Port Macquarie Police Station. This was the basis of the second count of assault.

At about 7.00 pm Keong Ok Jeong, a 27 year old woman from Korea on holiday in
Australia was standing outside the Ritz Cinema in Clarence Street, Port
Macquarie. The accused approached her with his arm raised, holding a knife. He stabbed her in the back with the knife as she turned around. She fell to the ground and then ran to a nearby ice cream shop, chased by the accused. She attempted to evade the accused by running behind a female customer. The customer grabbed Ms. Jeong. The accused still had the knife in his hand. The proprietor of the ice cream shop and other male persons intervened to assist her and shouted at the accused to leave the girl alone and leave the shop, but he then ran from the shop, pursued by two bystanders. This is the basis of the count of wounding with intent to murder, in the indictment.

Senior Constable Rand and Senior Constable Cavanagh, who were patrolling nearby, observed the accused walking in Murray Street. They saw him stop and throw the knife into the gutter. The accused, when spoken to, said:- "I just stabbed an Asian woman in the back, because a voice in my head told me to. If I didn't do it I would be killed. I was just about to go and do myself in." 
The accused was arrested and taken to Port Macquarie Police Station. His conduct at that station was seen by the police to display inappropriate emotional responses, including giggling and some degree of incoherence.

Ms. Jeong's clothing, having been seen to be soaked in blood, she was conveyed to Port Macquarie Hospital where she was found to have two lacerations to her back, one approximately two centimetres long and the other about one centimetre long. The larger laceration was found to have punctured her lung and she suffered a pneumothorax as a result. The lacerations were repaired and she made a satisfactory recovery, being discharged on 6 December 1997.

At the police station the accused told police that he stabbed the lady because he did not like Asians. "I have had a relapse. I have been on Stelazine." 
In the electronically recorded interview he gave a number of inappropriate replies to very much the same effect - inappropriate in that they were accompanied by laughter, giggling or sobbing.

It was clear that he asserted that he had intended to commit the crimes with which he was charged, but he did this because voices inside his head or his stomach told him that he had to do this, and that he had to do this because the persons concerned were Asian people. He indicated that the voices were coming from the Devil and that it was necessary for him to kill somebody; that when he stabbed, he thought he was killing something evil, like a cockroach.
He was using aggression or anger and he felt he had to do that which he was doing. He hated "them" for what they have done to people. He indicated that he had not been taking the appropriate dosage of the Stelazine. None of these facts was disputed.

He has been detained in custody since the events of that night receiving psychiatric treatment for his illness.

A report was provided, Exhibit E, from Dr. Schofield who had first seen the accused on 26 August 1996 following the accused having moved from Forster. He had an established diagnosis of schizo-affective disorder, that is to say, a variant of schizophrenia. He had been on lithium medication. He had been admitted previously to the Prince of Wales Hospital and had been diagnosed as schizophrenic.

Dr. Schofield noted an initial presentation of persecutory delusions and noted further that the accused was taking Stelazine. Dr. Schofield was of the view that the accused was psychiatrically unwell at the time of the incidents.

Dr. Nick Babidge, psychiatry registrar, also provided a report which was
Exhibit F. In that report Dr. Babidge noted that Mr. Caruana suffered from a chronic psychotic illness, namely schizophrenia, marked by auditory hallucinations and paranoid delusions when he is unwell or unmedicated with anti-psychotic medication.

He noted that the history commenced in the late 1980's when Mr. Caruana first consulted a psychiatrist, and that thereafter there was a history of schizophrenia, including suffering from auditory hallucinations and delusions and an assertion that the accused had been taken over by bad-natured spirits.
There had been some response to anti-psychotic medication but the accused was sensitive to side effects.

The report furnished by Dr. Babidge indicated that the symptoms of schizophrenia had continued and that on the day in question the accused had experienced voices giving him commands and auditory hallucinations.

Dr. Babidge was of the view that Mr. Caruana suffered from chronic schizophrenia and that on the day of the alleged offences Mr. Caruana had been in a distressed and panicky state, suffering florid psychotic symptoms, which appeared to have driven him to commit the offences.

Dr. Babidge points out that at this stage Mr. Caruana now presents as a co- operative, friendly and compliant person and it is recommended that he continue to receive close psychiatric monitoring and treatment with anti- psychotic medication in view of his symptoms and history of violent offending; that this treatment should occur in an inpatient setting. "If he is remanded in custody", said the doctor:- "we would continue his psychiatric treatment at the Long Bay Prison Hospital complex and consider bringing him under the forensic arm of the [Mental Health
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mha1990128/) with a view to acquiring further psychiatric treatment in a hospital and ultimately in the community by closely monitoring his mental state and compliance with medication and thus reduce the risk of further offending. If he is not remanded in custody for court he should be referred to the local acute psychiatric inpatient unit for further monitoring and treatment, ideally under the [Mental Health
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mha1990128/)." 
I interpolate that this is a most tragic matter, not only for those who suffered from violence at the hands of Mr. Caruana, but for Mr. Caruana and his family as well. This man, on this material, is patently ill and it is much to be regretted that the local acute psychiatric inpatient unit was not acquainted with his circumstances earlier in the hope that what has occurred in this case might have been avoided.

Dr. Babidge's conclusions were shared by both Dr. John Robert Strum and Dr.
William Lucas who gave oral evidence before me and whose reports were admitted into evidence.

Dr. Strum was of the view that at the time of the commission of this offence the accused was obviously floridly psychotic and was affected by delusions; that he knew the nature and quality of his act, but was unable to reason as to the wrongfulness of it with a moderate degree of composure. In his view there was no possibility of simulation. He was of the view that the prognosis was poor; that this man, without medication, would be floridly ill, and when ill would be a threat to the public, when on medication there would still be symptoms of schizophrenia; that the accused needed close supervision.

In his written report, Exhibit G, the doctor expressed the view that the accused suffered from that psychotic illness known as schizophrenia, marked by auditory hallucinations and paranoid delusions when he is unwell or unmedicated with anti-psychotic medication; that is, he shared the conclusion of Dr. Schofield.

Dr. Strum was of the view that at the time of the present offence Mr. Caruana was suffering from both delusions and hallucinations which centred around
Asians and his need to kill them. He admitted to having stopped the medication some time prior to the offences. His behaviour and thinking was bizarre at the time of the offence. The police noted Mr. Caruana's bizarre behaviour, as did
Mr. Ruhl in his statement.

Dr. Strum was of the view that Mr. Caruana was psychotic, suffering from chronic psychiatric illness, and that at the time of the commission of the offences he had the defence of insanity, that is to say that at the time of the commission of the offences the accused was mentally ill so as not to be responsible according to law for his or her action at the time that the act was done, that is to say that he was labouring under such a defect of reason from disease of the mind as not to know the quality and nature of the act he was doing, or if he did know it, that he did not know what he was doing was wrong: see Regina v. M'Naghten (1843) 8 ER 718; Regina v. Porter <case>; [(1936) 55 CLR 182] at 188; and s.38 of the Mental Health (Criminal
Procedure) Act 1900.

Dr. Lucas shared Dr. Strum's views and in his report expressed the view that:- "Mr. Caruana was suffering from chronic schizophrenia which appears to have begun in the late 1980s, that Mr. Caruana had the degrees of mental illness to which I have adverted, in that he was suffering from chronic schizophrenia exacerbated probably by a lack of medication to the point where he was having florid psychotic symptoms in the form of command hallucinations and delusions.
Mr. Caruana knew the nature and quality of his acts, but because of his disease of the mind was unable to reason about their wrongness with a moderate degree of sense and composure. He felt compelled by the command hallucinations to carry out the acts, and at the same time felt that he should not do them.
All the information available to me supports my opinion that he has the defence of mental illness to the charges." 
He, too, was of the view that it was vital that Mr. Caruana's future management be strictly supervised, and treatment enforced if necessary.

From the foregoing I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that all the elements of the offences with which the accused stands charged have been made out on the evidence, and that on the balance of probabilities I am satisfied that at the time of the commission of the acts constituting the offences, the accused was suffering from mental illness within the meaning of that term as used in s.38 of the Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act 1990, and therefore
I return the special verdict that the accused person is not guilty by reason of mental illness provided for by that section.

In those circumstances it is incumbent upon me to make the appropriate order required by s.39 of that Act; that is, that he be detained in such place and in such manner as the court thinks fit until released by due process of law.

Mr. Caruana, I order that you be detained in strict custody at the Long Bay
Prison Hospital and thereafter in such other place as is determined according to law until you are released by due process of law.
 * * * 
