

Gpi Leisure Corporation Ltd versus Yuill (984a) Matter No 1907/94 [1998] NSWSC (22 April 1998) 
Last Updated: 20 May 1998 
GPI LEISURE CORPORATION LTD versus YUILL (984A) /94 April 1998 
Young J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: These reasons are furnished to deal with two notices of motion, (A ) filed by the 8th defendants against the plaintiff for security of costs; and (B) filed by the second defendant on 10 February 1997 also against the plaintiff seeking security for costs. The principles arising for decision on the two notices of motion are identical. 
The present is a complex piece of litigation involving many parties. I am currently case-managing it with a view to a hearing in May 1999 extending over several months. Apart from claims between the plaintiff and the defendants, there are numerous cross claims. The 8th defendants, at all relevant times, carried on the practice of solicitors in partnership with the second defendant, Mr James Beatty, under the name Baker & McKenzie. The second defendant, apart from being a partner in that firm of solicitors, was also a director of the plaintiff.

The application is made under <case> of the Corporations Law which provides, so far as relevant, that "Where a corporation is a plaintiff in any ... legal proceeding, the Court ... may, if it appears by credible testimony that there is reason to believe that the corporation will be unable to pay the costs of the defendant if successful in his, her or its defence, require sufficient security to be given for those costs ...".

There is no doubt at all that the plaintiff is insolvent. The liquidator, Mr
O'Brien, gave evidence that the cause of the plaintiff's insolvency were two transactions referred to in evidence as the SHL Preference Share Transaction and the GPIL Convertible Notes Transaction.

In respect of both transactions, the plaintiff's claim against Mr Beatty is as to breaches of fiduciary duty, and as against Baker & McKenzie, the allegations are vicarious liability for Mr Beatty's acts and omissions, and the solicitors' obligations as the plaintiff's solicitors.

Furthermore, because of the extensive nature of these proceedings, it is likely that the costs will be extremely large and that with a plaintiff that is in liquidation and whose assets appear to be about $4,000,000 and whose liquidator has admitted proofs of debt to the value of almost $52,000,000 with another 62.5 million dollars currently being assessed, there must be reason to believe that the corporation will be unable to pay the costs.

Accordingly, the main debate before me ranges on discretionary factors.
Principally these involve the questions as to (1) whether, if at all, the relevant applicants have caused or contributed to the insolvency of the plaintiff; and (2) whether the strength of the plaintiff's claim is such that the court should lean against granting security. I will deal with these two factors, and then with the matter generally.

One of the problems that I have had, and in respect of which I have been greatly assisted by the oral and written submissions of counsel, is that there is a lot of loose phraseology in the various reported judgments on the question of what degree of the defendants' involvement with the plaintiff's insolvency is necessary before it amounts to a proper factor to take into account. I am not saying this in a pejorative sense: often it is not necessary for judges to go any further than the case before them, but when their utterances are reported and are apparently inconsistent, they do raise a problem for subsequent courts.

Of course, the utterances of the judges are, in one sense, not binding at all because they are merely instances of how a discretionary judgment was arrived at in particular circumstances. Guidelines from previous authorities are very useful in one sense because they save subsequent courts of co-ordinate jurisdiction from re-inventing the wheel, and they guide lower courts in the hierarchy as to the decision they should reach. As this court is a collegiate court, and as courts administering the Corporations Law should endeavour to assist one another, it is useful that a common approach to discretionary judgments be adopted. On the other hand there is also much to be said for the warning that it would seem now more frequently issues from courts of appeal that judges at first instance should not think up guidelines which will then stifle the exercise of discretions which the legislature has said are to be exercised in all the circumstances of each case.

Having unburdened myself of that, I will now look at the way in which this factor has been approached by previous courts.

I am indebted to Mr Weber of counsel for the plaintiff, Mr Cashion SC for Mr
Beatty and to Mr Foster SC and Mr Green for Baker & McKenzie, for their thorough analysis of the authorities. There is no need to discuss these in detail. At one end of the spectrum is the decision of Sweeney, J in the
Federal Court in Drumdurno Pty Ltd versus Braham <case>; [(1982) 7 ACLR 131], where at p 138, his Honour said as "it has not been shown to my satisfaction that any conduct of the respondents has led to the impecuniosity of the applicants" and as other factors fell in the same direction he ordered security for costs. At the other end of the scale, is the decision of the Northrop, J, again in the Federal Court in Jet Corporation of Australia Pty Ltd versus Petres Pty Ltd <case>; [(1983) 50 ALR 722], 733, where his Honour took into consideration that the plaintiff's "financial position has been worsened by the wrongful conduct of the respondents" together with other matters in declining to order security for costs.

Of the cases between those poles, Mr Weber puts that the most accurate approach was taken by Burley, J in Jeffcott Holdings Ltd versus Paior [(1994) ACSR 239], that "If the alleged actions of the defendant have caused or contributed to the plaintiffs impecuniosity, this is a factor that may be taken into account". Burley, J relied on (1) Australian Quarry Holdings Pty
Ltd versus Dougherty [(1992) 8 ACSR 569], 570 where
Ormiston, J had said in Victoria that he looked to see whether "the plaintiff's impecuniosity is caused or contributed to by the conduct of the defendants" and (2) GAI Holdings (No 3) Pty Ltd versus GAI Holdings (No 4) Pty
Ltd [(1985) 4 ACLC 90] at 93, where Shepherdson, J said at 93 that it was relevant that "the borrowing by the defendant played no small part in bringing the company to liquidation". As I said earlier, the ultimate question is how the discretion should be exercised in the interest of justice. The facts and circumstances of the case will often govern the particular language that is used in judgments. There will be some cases where it is fairly obvious that there has been a small company which has been devastated by the acts of the defendant, and so it is quite unjust that the defendant, when sued, should seek security for costs. However, the present is a quite different case. It is the case of a large corporation suing for millions of dollars and where the second and eighth defendants could by no means qualify as the primary causes of the plaintiff's insolvency. Having considered the cases to which I have already referred and others mentioned by counsel in their written submissions,
I consider that the "but for" test as gleaned by Delany in Security for
Costs (LBC 1989) from the authorities is an accurate a distillation of the law as any. Mr Delany says "It appears from the reported cases that to persuade the court to take this factor into account it will almost be necessary to show that but for the defendant's act the plaintiffs would have been financially secure." (p 156).

In the instant case, on the material before me, I could not say that but for what is alleged to have been by the second and eight defendants, the plaintiff would not have been insolvent.

The allied point is whether it has been shown that the plaintiff has a strong chance of success. Mr Weber rightly says that these are relatively early days in this complex litigation and it is clear that the plaintiff's claim is not vexatious and indeed, it has been advised as an appropriate course of action by experienced lawyers. Accordingly, the argument goes, the court should be slow before stifling the prosecution of the proceedings by an order for security for costs.

Again, with great respect, I believe the submission misses the key point in this aspect of the discretion. This aspect is similar to the matter previously discussed. If there is a case where a director admits that he stole a million dollars from the company, the company is so likely to succeed against the director that it would be unjust to put a barrier in its way by ordering security for costs. Conversely, where the case is purely speculative the reverse applies. However, just because one cannot say the plaintiff's case is speculative, or just because a plaintiff's case is one which has been advised by counsel as proper, does not take the decision-maker very far. Really this is just a neutral matter which does not incline the court to go one way or the other.

Accordingly, the case is one where the applicants fall within the section.
There does not appear to me to be any sufficient discretionary factor why the law should not take its ordinary course. Accordingly, I consider I should make an order for security for costs.

As to quantum, Mr Weber says that there is no proper dissection by the applicants of their costs to defend the claim as opposed to their costs of participating in the cross claims. Furthermore, there is very little evidence as to how far the cross claims are really part of the defence. My limited acquaintance with the proceedings suggests that they are not.

The applicants' affidavits dealing with quantum are also in very vague terms.
One solicitor says that she estimates the costs in total will be about 1.045 million dollars just for her clients on the basis that she will be paying counsels fees of $7,500 per day and solicitors' costs of $3,000 a day plus transcript, photocopying and other expenses for a four month hearing. The other solicitor who has filed an affidavit considers that costs, as opposed to disbursements, will be $11,600 per day.

It is very difficult to deal with numbers like these. The law is a labour intensive industry and it is necessary to remunerate properly highly skilled people or else they are going to be lost to the profession. On the other hand, litigants just cannot afford to have a situation even in a case involving some millions of dollars where seven different parties are each going to expend a million dollars in legal fees. However, this is the sort of case where it is not practicable to have diverse parties represented by the same solicitors and clients because everyone is trying to deny liability and then to lay off any liability that may be laid at their feet against somebody else.

It is also significant that whilst resources of possibly 10 million dollars are being poured into the case on the side of the litigants, all this information has to be digested, assessed and adjudicated upon by one man without any professional assistance at all. Thus the tendency to amass piles of paper at a cost of hundreds of dollars an hour plus photostatting bills of thousands of dollars is often a complete waste. What is required is a distillation of the material and a presentation which is simple and focuses on the main issues.

Great care will need to be exercised by me when managing the case to endeavour to curb the natural tendencies of lawyers to give Rolls Royce treatment to their clients.

I am conscious that in one sense once I have made an order for security for costs there is likely to be a constant stream of applications to increase that security. On the figures that I have been given, the hearing of these motions for security for costs will self-absorb some $15,000 if not more. I want to make it quite clear that whilst I believe that this is a case for security for costs, there will have to be very strict watch on the costs. It also does not follow that just because one defendant is going to spend half a million dollars on certain aspects of the case and is entitled to some security for costs, that every other defendant is entitled to do exactly the same work and also get security. Although this is not a situation where the one set of solicitors and counsel can represent all parties whose interests to some extent coincide but to another extent differ, nonetheless there can be some saving of costs by having exercises done by people in the same interest for all of them and only a small amount of costs allowed for one solicitor or one barrister superintending that exercise if it is complex.

Accordingly, what I intend to do is to make an order for security for costs in favour of each of the applicants for $200,000 with the usual proviso that if security is not given within 21 days then the action against that defendant is stayed. However, at the next directions hearing I will set up a costs review committee consisting, I hope, of an experienced lawyer, an experienced costs consultant and an accountant, and I will not authorize further security for costs unless there is a certificate from that committee that such an increase would be justified. I also should add the caveat that it may be that as further facts are discovered, material may become available which, as a matter of discretion, would mean that no further order for security should be made at all.

I thus publish these reasons. An order may be taken out in accordance with them, the date for furnishing the security being the 21st day after the publication of these reasons.

The costs of the two motions must be paid by the plaintiff.
 * * * 
