

Wilson versus Fay and Anor Matter No 12570/93 [1998] NSWSC 207 (5 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 10 June 1998 
WILSON versus FAY & ANOR /93 March 1998 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: These proceedings were commenced in July 1993. The plaintiff propounds a claim for damages arising out of personal injury. The claim is brought against two defendants. The second defendant is Metro Sheds Pty Limited. 
On 22 October 1997, the plaintiff filed a Notice of Motion. It sought, inter alia, an order that Metro Sheds (Sydney) Pty Limited be substituted as second defendant. The application was opposed by the proposed second defendant.

The application came before Acting Prothonotary Irwin. Three affidavits (the affidavits of Messrs Rimes, Parnell and Knox) were placed before him. On 10
December 1997, he delivered a reserved decision. The decision has been reduced to writing. The application was refused with costs.

Before turning to the decision of the Acting Prothonotary, I should briefly mention some of the material that emerged from the evidence. In mentioning this material, it is not intended to set forth an exhaustive recitation of relevant facts and evidence.

The plaintiff suffered injury when proceeding across an awning for the purpose of reridging a tiled roof. The awning collapsed causing the plaintiff to fall to the ground. The awning stood on the property of the first defendant. The plaintiff had been engaged to perform work on the property by the first defendant. It is alleged that there was a failure to properly construct the relevant part of the awning. There is evidence to suggest that both the first defendant and the proposed second defendant had involvement in the construction of the relevant part of the awning.

The relevant part of the awning was constructed in about 1978. The accident took place on 13 March 1992. Mr Rimes (the solicitor for the plaintiff) received instructions to act on 1 June 1992. In August 1992, he inspected documentation held by Liverpool Council. The documentation identified Metro
Sheds Pty Ltd as the builder and gave its address as 19 Canley Vale Road,
Canley Vale. The documentation also disclosed the Builder's Licensing number.
The name of the applicant on the Building Application could not be identified at that time.

In June 1993, a search was made against the name Metro Sheds Pty Ltd. The search produced a company registered in Queensland. Purported service took place in August 1993. There is evidence which reveals that the second defendant was not known at the address where the purported service took place.

Service took place on the first defendant. He filed a Defence in October 1993.
The evidence is unhelpful as to what happened between October 1993 and 21
February 1995.

It would seem that the plaintiff proceeded with his claim against the first defendant and took no further steps against the second defendant.

There was an arbitration hearing on 21 February 1995. Apparently, a rehearing was sought. The matter was placed in a callover on 10 November 1995. It was then stood out of the list.

At some unspecified time thereafter, interrogatories were administered to the first defendant. At some unspecified time thereafter (at a time later than 9
April 1996), the first defendant provided answers to the interrogatories.

The matter was then fixed for rehearing on 17 July 1997. In July 1997, new
Counsel (Mr Carr) was briefed for the plaintiff. The matter was given a "Not
Reached" marking.

In July 1997, Mr Carr made enquiries which led to the identification of the holder of the Builder's Licence (Mr Horton). Subsequently, Mr Horton was located by a private investigator (Mr Knox).

The matter had been fixed for hearing in October 1997. A subpoena was served on Mr Horton. Mr Horton attended Court and gave certain oral evidence. His evidence revealed that he had been the signatory to the Building Application and that the name of the builder was incorrectly stated in the Council documentation. It should have been Metro Sheds (Sydney) Pty Limited.

It is now convenient to return to the decision of the Acting Prothonotary.
Before doing so, I should mention a couple of matters. It seems that the second defendant has not played any part in the proceedings. It is known that in 1993 there was "strike-off action in progress". The second defendant and the proposed second defendant are not related companies.

The application was made pursuant to Part 20 rule 4(3) of the Supreme Court
Rules. The subrule is in the following terms:- 
Where there has been a mistake in the name of a party and the Court is satisfied that the mistake was not misleading nor such as to cause reasonable doubt as to the identity of the person intended to be made a party, the Court may make an order for leave to make an amendment to correct the mistake, whether or not the effect of the amendment is to substitute a new party.

The Acting Prothonotary was satisfied that a mistake had been made in the sense contemplated by the rule (see, inter alia, Lloyd Steel Co (Aust) Pty
Ltd versus Jade Shipping SA <case>; [173 CLR 231).]
This finding is accepted by the parties.

The written decision contained the following:- "Mistake within the meaning of the rule has been established but the other criteria have not been met. If I am wrong in finding that the proposed second defendant was mislead by the mistake, in the exercise of my discretion I would refuse to grant the application in any event." 
In exercising the discretion, it appears that the Acting Prothonotary had regard to various considerations including those of prejudice and the plaintiff's prospects of success against the proposed substituted party.

On 22 December 1997, the plaintiff filed a further Notice of Motion. It sought a review of the Acting Prothonotary's decision.

There was no dispute as to the approach to be taken on the review. The party seeking the review must discharge the onus of satisfying the Court that there is some basis for disturbing the decision of the Acting Prothonotary.

There was no dispute as to what must be done to satisfy the Court that an order should be made under subrule 4(3). The applicant must first satisfy the threshold requirements of the subrule. When that is done, the Court has a discretionary power to make the order sought. The onus remains with the applicant to satisfy the Court that the order should be made.

On behalf of the plaintiff, it is contended that the Acting Prothonotary made a number of errors. One is said to relate to a threshold requirement. The others are said to relate to discretionary considerations.

The threshold requirement concerns the words, "the court is satisfied that the mistake was not misleading nor such as to cause reasonable doubt as to the identity of the person intended to be made a party".

This requirement seems to have received little consideration over the years. I was not taken to any helpful authority. The decided cases have seen a concentration on the other threshold requirement.

As I read the words, they indicate that the exercise for the Court is to look at the mistake itself for the purpose of being satisfied that it was neither misleading nor such as to cause reasonable doubt as to the identity of a person intended to be made a party. I do not read the words as calling upon the Court to make inquiry as to whether the mistake did mislead or cause doubt as to the identity of a person intended to be made a party.

In this case, the plaintiff intended to sue a party involved in the construction of the relevant part of the awning and the mistake related to the name of a party involved in the carrying out of that work.

If my preferred view be the correct one, then it seems to me that the threshold requirement may be satisfied. If that is not the case, then the considerations will be different. I need not pursue those considerations, but it may be helpful if I mention some of the circumstances that could be material.

In this case, there was purported service in 1993. The process may or may not have come to the attention of the second defendant. To the extent that it remained a legal entity, the second defendant took no part in the proceedings.
The proposed second defendant did not become aware of both the claim and the proceedings until about October 1997.

Whatever be the position concerning the threshold requirement, it seems to me that this case can be resolved without reaching a final view on the question.
This aspect has not been fully argued and the determination of the legal question involved can be left for another day.

During the course of submissions, mention was made of various discretionary considerations. I will now turn to that aspect of the review.

The Court is not really in a position to form any assessment as to the prospects of success of the plaintiff's claim against the proposed second defendant. There is material that gives it some support. At this stage, all that can be said is that it does not appear to be hopeless.

If the plaintiff is allowed to bring this action against the proposed second defendant, he has prospects of recovering significant damages. If he is allowed to bring the claim against the proposed second defendant, it will be deprived of the benefit of the limitation period having expired. The three year period expired in March 1995.

There are three other discretionary considerations which are of significance.
There is delay or lack of diligence, the explanation offered for delay or lack of diligence and prejudice.

There has been significant delay. The material offered by way of explanation falls well short of that which could be regarded as being satisfactory. In many respects, the material can be described as being parsimonious and unhelpful.

On behalf of the plaintiff, it is claimed that he was misled by what appeared in the Council documentation. Mr Horton did provide the Council with information which erroneously described the builder. However, this documentation disclosed both the address of the builder and the Builder's
Licence number.

The plaintiff's search identified a Queensland company. The Queensland address did not provoke further enquiry. No enquiries were pursued in relation to the
Canley Vale address. Nothing was done about the information had as to the
Builder's Licence until 1997 (after a delay of about four years), when new
Counsel came into the matter. No real attempt has been made to explain this lack of enquiry. It may well be that further enquiry was simply overlooked until Mr Carr came into the matter.

The litigation seems to have proceeded in a leisurely fashion. The material suggests that there may have been periods of inactivity (some of significant length). I note by way of example that it took some years to administer interrogatories and that this took place only after there had been an arbitration and a callover for the rehearing.

Whilst there is no evidence of actual prejudice, the delay itself gives rise to a presumption of prejudice (see Brisbane South Regional Health Authority v
Taylor <case>; [(1996) 70 ALJR 866).] Taylor is a case which concerned a Queensland statute dealing with limitation periods. The present application, if successful, would see a party deprived of the benefit of a limitation period. Also, Taylor may be regarded as containing observations of general application where prejudice is an issue.

The questions of negligence involve considerations of the construction of part of an awning which took place about twenty years ago. It seems that the first defendant still owns the relevant premises. Presumably, Council records remain available. The proposed second defendant has not said that it has lost either records or witnesses. In the case of witnesses, it is likely that a dimming of recollection has taken place (the accident took place nearly six years ago).
There is no evidence as to the present condition of the awning. It is likely that it has been the subject of some repair since the accident. It is really not possible for the Court to form any view as to how helpful an inspection of the awning at this time may be.

If the proposed second defendant is made a party to the proceedings, it now faces the unenviable prospect of investigating an accident that took place in
It is likely that this task will present problems. There is little to guide the Court in assessing the extent of those problems. The first defendant may well have conducted an investigation. He is unlikely to assist the proposed second defendant. There could be expected to be a real contest between them. There would be little doubt that the second defendant itself has not carried out any investigation.

The Acting Prothonotary had the task of balancing up the relevant discretionary considerations. In performing that exercise, the Court is concerned to take the course that best serves the interests of justice. It seems to me that it was open to the Acting Prothonotary to dismiss the application on discretionary grounds.

In my view, whether or not there has been error, I consider that the plaintiff has failed to demonstrate that there is any basis for disturbing the decision of the Acting Prothonotary. I consider that the plaintiff has failed to demonstrate an entitlement to an order pursuant to the subrule.

The Notice of Motion is dismissed. The plaintiff is to pay the costs of the
Notice of Motion.
 * * * 
