

Shaw Stockbroking Ltd versus Australian Stock Exchange Ltd Matter No 5136/97 [1998] NSWSC 18 (6 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 31 March 1998 
SHAW STOCKBROKING LTD versus AUSTRALIAN STOCK EXCHANGE LTD & JILL MATHESON /97 March 1998 
Bryson J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
OBSERVATIONS 
HIS HONOUR: During the hearing of these proceedings I made directions with the object of preserving the confidentiality of the contents of Exhibit SSK1 and Annexure "D" to Mr Kinsky's affidavit of 30 January 1998. These directions appear at transcript p.1, l.34-38 and p.2, l.11-13. Orders (2) which I made earlier would bring the effect of those directions to an end today. The plaintiff's Senior Counsel applies for an order staying my orders until the final determination of the proposed appeal or further order and for an injunction restraining the defendants from making use of the information which is the subject of the suit. The injunction would be in much the same terms as Claim 9 in the Summons. Counsel proffered an undertaking to pursue an appeal with reasonable diligence and to apply for expedition. 
I made some observations in my reasons published today about the confidentiality order, which was made on preliminary consideration only. On fuller consideration it appeared to me that the order was appropriate, and in my view the continuation of some such restraint, if there is to be an appeal, is necessary for maintaining the effectiveness of the right of appeal. If the information and Draft Report were published the substance of any remedy which the plaintiff might obtain on appeal would be lost and any success would be nominal only.

However, that is not what the plaintiff's counsel asks. The interlocutory injunction which he seeks would prevents internal proceedings within the ASX's own organisation in which any use could be made of the information under contention. In fact there has been a restriction under an undertaking given between the parties recorded in correspondence between the plaintiff's solicitor andASX which I have seen for the purposes of this application -
Interlocutory Exhibit C. This arrangement ceases to have effect today.

The defendants resist the making of the injunction and the continuation of any controls.

My view is that a restriction on publication is necessary if the right of appeal is to be effectual. Success in the appeal would be no more than nominal if the public and any person who felt interested in the events knew what the information was. However, I do not regard it as necessary for the protection of the right of appeal to restrain the defendants from any further internal proceedings in which they think right to make use of the information.

If the appeal is successful those internal steps will be of no effect whereas if my order is affirmed there will be no substantial reason why the defendants should not have completed consideration of the material within the organisation of ASX. Consideration will take place under the confidentiality which exists around ASX's internal proceedings and has thus far been observed in a proper manner. I see no grounds for fearing that confidentiality will not continue to be respected.

Accordingly, I am not prepared to make the injunction asked. As the plaintiff's counsel has asked for an opportunity to present the same application to the Court of Appeal I will however make the injunction for a short time. To preserve a record of the terms of the application I will leave the Short Minutes in the file.

I will decide the question of costs without a further hearing.

ORDERS: 
I note and accept the undertaking of the plaintiff by counsel to the Court to pursue any appeal with all reasonable diligence and move for expedition of any appeal.

I vacate Order (2) of the Orders of 6 March 1998 and direct that the directions relating to confidentiality of 12 February 1998 continue in effect until further order of the Equity Division or of the Court of Appeal.

I make an injunction in terms of para (2) of the Short Minutes with effect up to and including 20 March 1998 or earlier further order of the Equity
Division or of the Court of Appeal.

I direct that the costs order should not be entered without further directions and each party is to send me within 7 days a written submission on the question of costs.

SHAW STOCKBROKING LTD versus AUSTRALIAN STOCK EXCHANGE LTD & JILL MATHESON 
JUDGMENT 
Table 
The litigation, the parties and the events 2 
Terms of Articles and Business Rule 12 
Formal authority to exercise powers 16 
Exchange Inspector 16 
New Structure on 1 February 1997 16 
Delegations 19 
Effect of defects - Article 18 25 
Ratification 26 
The circumstances and purposes of the exercise of powers 30 
Business Rule 1.4.2 30 
Article 57 34 
Implied contractual obligation to comply 37 
Procedural Fairness. 41 
Investigative not Determinative 42 
Compliance with Articles and Business Rules 46 
Absence of Particulars 47 
Dealing with the Draft Report and copies 49 
Confidentiality 49 
Conclusion and Orders 51 
The litigation, the parties and the events.

HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff challenges the effectiveness of proceedings undertaken within ASX with the object of producing an Exchange Inspector's report under Business Rule 1.4.2; and seeks to restrain those proceedings. 
The plaintiff (Shaw) is a Member Organisation of Australian Stock Exchange
Limited (ASX). The second defendant Ms Jill Matheson is a Manager employed by
ASX. Mr John O'Hare worked in Shaw's affairs from July 1996 until February
A company which he controlled was engaged by Shaw to provide his services as a Client Adviser primarily in the area of Exchange-traded options; sometimes he is referred to as an Options Trader. Most or all of the customers for whom he did business brought their business to Shaw when Mr O'Hare left his previous employer. On Thursday 30 January 1997 Mr Martin Kinsky who was then ASX's National Manager, Membership was told by another officer of ASX of some information circulating on the Options Trading floor, which led him to instruct two staff members examine Shaw's client margin and collateral summary to establish roughly Shaw's liquid capital position. As a result of their inquiry he formed the view that Shaw probably had sufficient liquid capital to sustain the losses to which the information related. On Friday 31 January 1997
Mr Kinsky told Ms Matheson "I want you and Bill Woods to arrange a meeting with Shaw to establish whether the rumours regarding possible client losses as a result of John O'Hare's and/or Tony Kirsten's trading are true. If they are true you had better try and establish the circumstances giving rise to this situation and the extent of the losses." Ms Matheson had a meeting with Mr
Harold Shapiro of Shaw on the afternoon of Friday 31 January 1997 and reported thereon to Mr Kinsky by file note on Saturday 1 February 1990. Mr Shapiro was and is Managing Director of Shaw.

At a meeting with other officers of ASX on Monday 3 February 1997 Mr Kinsky said, referring to Bill Woods, Alex Carrodus and Jill Matheson, "I'd like Bill and Alex, under Jill's supervision, to look into and report on the following matters - the history of John O'Hare and Shaw, the number of clients involved, the types of trade, the number of trades involved, whether the requisite documentation is in order, what Shaw is now doing about the issue, what supervision was applied, whether individual client positions were monitored, and if so, by whom, who paid margins, whether Shaw's capital is sufficient,
Shaw's solvency, what instructions were obtained from clients, what the strategy appears to have been and whether the trading was covered." This instruction was carried out, and Mr Woods and Mr Carrodus attended Shaw's office on numerous occasions to obtain information.

These events have been treated in ASX's affairs as a direction to Ms Matheson as an Exchange Inspector under Business Rule 1.4.2(2).

Mr Woods and Mr Carrodus attended Shaw's offices on numerous occasions between February and 20 February 1997 to obtain information and they prepared a draft report of 11 pages dated 18 February 1997. This includes a passage headed "Issues" of 16 paragraphs, some of which are short notes of subjects for investigation but most of which contain comments adverse to Shaw. This was considered by the Review Committee, an internal group convened by Mr Kinsky consisting of the Deputy Managing Director, Supervision (Mr Nottle), a corporate solicitor of ASX (Ms Pancino) and Mr Kinsky. The practice is that consideration by the Review Committee occurs when an Exchange Inspector considers that serious or unusual conduct by a member may be involved which warrants further steps being taken towards possible disciplinary action. Mr
Kinsky said in evidence "The function of the Review Committee at the time of the Shaw inspection included providing quality control on the work done by the various exchange inspectors, providing guidance on legal and technical issues and promoting uniformity and common standards in the conduct of inspections." 
On 4 March 1997 Mr Woods told Mr Shapiro that as part of the investigation it was necessary for Market Intermediaries to interview Mr Shapiro and three staff members. He also asked for some information and documents listed in a schedule. He made the same request by letter on 5 March. Shaw responded to several requests for documents. In a more formal letter to Mr Shapiro on 14
March 1997 Ms Matheson, giving her position as "Acting Manager, Market
Intermediaries (Sydney)" requested attendance of Mr Shapiro and three staff members at stated times at ASX's Boardroom "to provide information pursuant to
Art.57". The interviews took place on 20, 21 and 26 March and the proceedings were tape-recorded and transcribed. Mr Stanley Kalinko, a solicitor representing Shaw, was present at each interview. At each interview Ms
Matheson made an opening statement which included: "I am Exchange Inspector and Acting Manager, Market Intermediaries, (Sydney) and have been authorised by the Exchange to conduct this interview. It is an inspection conducted pursuant to Art.57 of the Articles of Association of the Australian Stock
Exchange and Rule 1.4.2 in relation to the conduct of Shaw Stockbroking
Limited a Member Organisation ...". She also said "The purpose of this interview is to gather information; it is not meant to be adversarial but please feel free to ask questions or clarification as we go through, as you see necessary" or words to that effect. There was a further request for documents or information by a letter in April, to which Shaw responded.

On 16 May 1997 Ms Matheson sent Mr Shapiro a copy of Draft Inspection Report
S7/97 and asked him by letter for any written comments concerning the matters set out in the report, in particular correction of any error of fact, saying that his response would be included in the Final Report.

The Draft Report of May 1996 was based on information obtained by Mr Woods and
Mr Carrodus and documents they inspected, on information and documents furnished by Ms Darke, Shaw's Compliance Officer, in correspondence and communications as officers of the Exchange and also and to a large extent on information obtained at the interviews of March.

Mr Kinsky described the practice followed for inspections into the activities of members in his evidence. An Exchange Inspector's report usually goes through several drafts until the final Draft Report is prepared, and then a copy of the final Draft Report is sent to the member concerned to allow the member to comment, particularly in order to correct any errors of fact. Then the practice is that the member provides its response, normally within three or four weeks; the final Inspection Report is prepared and any errors of fact are corrected and the member's comments are considered. The correspondence relating to the response is attached to the final version of the Inspection
Report, which indicates whether the report had been amended, and explains the position if comments made by a member have not been accepted.

The practice of preparing a Draft Report, giving the broker an opportunity to comment on it and incorporating consideration of the comments in the Final
Report is not prescribed by the Business Rules or the Articles.

The practice is that copies of various Draft Reports are provided to officers of ASX; these are Mr Kinsky, the Deputy Managing Director, Supervision, the internal Legal Adviser who is assisting the Exchange Inspector, and sometimes the Executive Officer assisting the Exchange Inspector. The Draft Report may be provided to ASX staff in other Divisions where specific input from those other Divisions is required. It is not the practice to distribute copies of
Draft Reports to members of the Board, or to other employees or external parties. In this case however the Australian Securities Commission (ASC) required ASX to furnish ASC with a copy of the Draft Report by notice pursuant to s.31 of the Australian Securities Commission Act, and this notice was complied with.

The practice is that the final Inspection Report is distributed to the Review
Committee to provide advice and input to Mr Kinsky when he determines whether a member should be charged with a breach of Art.51, 52 or the Business Rules.
It is for Mr Kinsky to decide whether the matter should be treated as a Fast
Track matter under Business Rule 1.4.2(5A) or as a standard adjudication hearing before the National Adjudicatory Tribunal under Art.51 or 52. Mr
Kinsky gave evidence that there is no prospect of the Fast Track procedure being used in this case because there was no agreement as to procedural facts and the matter was not one which should be classified as substantially low in a disciplinary environment. If the matter did proceed further it would proceed under Art.51 and 52.

Articles 51 and 52 relate to proceedings where (Art.51) the Board considers that a member should be charged with a breach of any of the Articles or Rules and (Art.52) the Board considers that a member should be charged with
Prohibited Conduct. Mr Kinsky has delegated authority to make decisions whether members should be charged. If there is a determination that a member should be charged a Notice of Charge is prepared, the member is notified of the charge and given a copy of the final Inspection Report, and the Chairman of the National Adjudicatory Tribunal is provided with a copy of the final
Inspection Report, Notice of Charge and other material.

Although Articles 51 and 52 speak in terms of the Board's determining a charge, that function is now exercised by the National Adjudicatory Tribunal under Article 55A and Delegation Document 7 - Ex 2. The final Inspection
Report and Notice of Charge are not distributed to members of the Board of
ASX, to other members of ASX or to external parties; with the exceptions that members of the ASX may also be members of the National Adjudicatory Tribunal and receive copies that way, and the ASC may require a copy under s.31.
National Adjudicatory Tribunal proceedings take place in private under
Art.55A(3). The practices described by Mr Kinsky have the effect that the decision to make a charge is made by an officer under delegated authority, and
Board members can approach any adjudicatory decision in which they participate without having engaged in the earlier steps.

At the present there is no Final Report. After correspondence relating to extending time to respond Shaw's solicitors furnished a response to the Draft
Report on 25 September 1997. The response comprised 170 pages of text and 57 attachments. On 25 September 1997 Shaw's solicitors also by letter contended that a number of matters of procedure were raised by the draft report and sought information and responses; ASX replied in detail on 12 November 1997.
On Friday 12 December Mr Shapiro accompanied by Mr Kalinko met Mr Kinsky. Shaw asked ASX to agree to terminate the inquiry, or to give an undertaking not to issue a Final Report based on material obtained since March 1997, to recover all copies of the Draft Report and destroy them, alternatively to undertake to provide fourteen days' notice before issuing a Final Report. The Exchange declined by letter of 16 December and these proceedings were commenced on 17
December 1997. Production of a Final Report and consideration whether there will be charges are at a stand pending this litigation.

Shaw's contentions ranged widely and many events were the subject of some adverse comment. The claims can be summarised thus: ) A declaration that Ms Matheson was not duly authorised to act under Art.57 at the time of the interview.
 ) A declaration that the Board is not authorised to make a retrospective delegation of its powers under Art.57(1) and 57(2) and Business Rule 1.4.2.
This was directed to changes to Delegation Document 2 made by the Board on 6
November 1997 and to the whole resolution and the sub-delegation by the
Managing Director on that day.
 ) A declaration that Ms Matheson did not validly exercise powers under Art.57 in conducting the interviews.
 ) A declaration that Ms Matheson or any other Exchange Inspector could not exercise powers under Art.57 for the purpose of conducting inquiries pursuant to Business Rule 1.4.2.
 ) A similar declaration to 4 relating to use for the purpose of making reports.
 ) A declaration that Business Rule 1.4.2 did not authorise the investigation which was conducted.

A) A declaration that the interviews as conducted were contrary to the rules of procedural fairness.

B) A declaration that it would be contrary to the rules of procedural fairness to take into account or use the interviews in any report under
Business Rule 1.4.2 or in exercise of any power under Business Rule 1.4.2(5A), or Art.51, 52, 53 or 55A.
 ) An injunction restraining Ms Matheson from providing a report to the Board.
 ) An injunction restraining ASX from disseminating any report.
 ) An injunction restraining ASX from making any use of information obtained from documents of the plaintiff provided to Ms Matheson and from the interviews.
 ) A mandatory order to recall all existing copies of the Draft Report and destroy them.

I have divided up consideration of these claims, but the subjects are not entirely discrete.

Terms of Articles and Business Rule.

Subrules (1) to (5A) inclusive of Business Rule 1.4.2 are in these terms; there are some further subrules. SCH means Securities Clearing House.
 "1.4.2 Exchange Inspectors 
The Exchange shall appoint as exchange inspectors one or more persons who shall be suitably qualified for such appointment.

The Exchange may at any time direct one or more of the exchange inspectors to determine whether or not a Broker selected by the Exchange is complying with the provisions of the Rules and Articles or has conducted itself in a manner considered to represent Prohibited Conduct. Any such Broker shall make available or cause to be made available to the exchange inspector any account and other records of, or relating to that Broker, which are within the power of the Broker to provide and which are relevant to the enquiry and are required by the inspector.

For the purposes of complying with a direction given by the Exchange under
Rule 1.4.2(2), the exchange inspector shall have such access as authorised by the Exchange to acccounts and other records relating to the Broker or Brokers or the business of the Broker or Brokers or any associate of the Broker or
Brokers or of a Settlement Agent of the Participating Broker, as are within the power of the Broker or Brokers to provide, including all accounts and other records held by the Exchange on behalf of the Broker, by the Broker or any associate of the Broker, by the auditors of the Broker, by the bankers of the Broker, by a Settlement Agent of the Participating Broker or by the
Exchange Examining Accountant.

The Exchange shall furnish the Board with the report of any inspection carried out by the exchange inspector which, in the opinion of the exchange inspector, discloses:- a failure by any Broker to comply with any provision of these Rules and
Articles; or the existence of Prohibited Conduct.

The Exchange may give SCH: a copy of a report (whether interim or final) or details of any inspection which includes information in relation to the activities of a Broker as an SCH participant; and information provided by or on behalf of a Broker to the Exchange, including without limitation, information provided in accordance with Rules .1, 1.3, 1.4 and 1.5.

The Exchange may impose conditions to be complied with by SCH, its officers, employees or agents in relation to the information disclosed to SCH.

Details of any report made in accordance with Rule 1.4.2(4) or .4.2(4A)(a) shall be supplied by the Exchange to the Broker the subject of the report.
 (i) After consideration of the report referred to in Rule 1.4.2(4)(a) above, the Board may act against any Member or Member Organisation on the basis of the report and may censure or impose a fine up to an amount of $5,000 and may require the Member or Member Organisation to pay the total commission or gross profit or part thereof arising from the transaction the subject of the report to the Exchange and the Board may deal with such amount in such manner as it thinks fit.

Any Member or Member Organisation which has been censured or fined in accordance with Rule 1.4.2(5A)(i) above shall have the right to a hearing by the Board in accordance with Article 51 or Article 52. Any Member or Member
Organisation shall notify the Board of its decision to exercise this right no later than the expiry of 10 Business Days afer the date of notification to the
Member or Member Organisation of the censure or imposition of the fine." 
Article 57 is in these terms:- "57. (1) The Board may call upon any Member or Member Organisation to produce, without delay, for inspection by themselves or their duly appointed representatives, all books or copies thereof relating to the business of the
Member or Members Organisation, and may also require Members and their partners, officers, employees, consultants or securities representatives to appear before the Board or its delegates at any time, and to give such information as may be required in connection with such business or to enable the Board to consider whether or not the Member continues to comply with admission requirements for the purposes of Article 38(5).

When requested by the Board, a Member or Member Organisation shall provide to the Exchange information and data in relation to financial statistics and transaction details as the Board determines." 
Formal Authority to exercise powers.

Exchange Inspectors.

In Business Rule 1.4.2 the person directed to make a determination under subr.(2) must have been appointed an Exchange Inspector under subr.(1). At all material times a chain of delegations from the Board existed under which Mr
Kinsky was authorised to appoint Exchange Inspectors, and to give a direction under Business Rule 1.4.2(2) as subdelegate of the Exchange. On 25 November Ms Matheson was appointed Acting Manager, Membership (Sydney) and she was still in that appointment on 31 January 1997. On 25 November 1996 Mr Kinsky in writing appointed Ms Matheson "as Exchange Inspector for New South Wales during the period of time you hold the position of Acting Manager, Membership ." 
New Structure on 1 February 1997.

The ASX adopted a new structure for its Membership Division with effect on 1
February 1997. The events in the restructure were set out in Circular 17/97 dated 15 January 1997 (Ex 1) authorised by the Managing Director Mr Richard
Humphry. The name of the Membership Division was changed to Market
Intermediaries Division. The title of the position held by Mr Kinsky was changed from National Manager, Membership to National Manager - Market
Intermediaries. New positions were created and these included Manager -
Prudential Supervision. No one was appointed to that position on 1 February , but two new positions of Assistant Manager - Prudential Supervision were created and the Circular stated that Ms Matheson would be appointed to one of these. The position for which Ms Matheson held an acting appointment was no longer designated Manager, Membership (Sydney) because the Membership Division had a new name. The duties she fulfilled did not alter; Mr Kinsky said in evidence that technically she could not hold the former position but de facto she did.

It is for consideration whether these events, when taken with the terms of the appointment of 25 November 1996 mean that she ceased to be an Exchange
Inspector on 31 January 1997.

It appears from the terms of Exhibit 1 and I find that in the new structure the Membership Division continued to exist with a change of name; it did not go out of existence. There was a change of the title of Mr Kinsky's position from National Manager, Membership to National Manager - Market Intermediaries, but this was no more than a change in title and he held the same position before and after the change. The Circular also states that "appointments to new position of Assistant Manager will also be made ..." and the following list includes Ms Matheson and indicates that she would be appointed Assistant
Manager Prudential Supervision. There is no evidence that this appointment took place before 1 September 1997. In documents after 1 February which identify the position she held she described herself either as "Exchange
Inspector" or as "Acting Manager Market Intermediaries (Sydney)". Mr Kinsky's evidence was that she was appointed Acting Manager, Membership (Sydney) from November 1996 and she held that position until 1 September 1997. In oral evidence he said that when Ms Matheson was appointed an Exchange Inspector she was only the Acting Manager and ASX was seeking a more senior person to fulfil the role of Manager, and a person was so appointed in late September or early
October. When cross-examined he gave evidence that from 1 February there was no longer anyone holding the position described as Acting Manager - Membership and also when asked whether he agreed "... that in fact she no longer held any position called Acting Manager Membership after February 1997?" he replied: "No. Because technically she cannot do that but de facto she did" and said that it was correct in theory to say that there was no such position as
Acting Manager Membership: "That is correct except she was the de facto manager".

I find that although from 1 February 1997 onwards the name "Acting Manager,
Membership (Sydney)" was no longer appropriate because the title of the
Membership Division had been changed, Ms Matheson still held the same position and continued to do so until 1 September; no appointment she held was ended and she did not receive any new appointment to any other position in the ASX's establishment on 1 February 1997. Ms Matheson continued to be an Exchange
Inspector until 1 September 1997.

Ms Matheson was again appointed to be Exchange Inspector by Mr Kinsky on 18
December 1997. Any future steps she may take under the appointment under
Business Rule 1.4.2(2) will be supported by that appointment and it does not appear from the evidence that she took any step under the appointment in the interval; or indeed since.

Delegations.

Delegation Document 2 (Ex 4) has been produced by a cumulation of decisions of the Board of ASX under Article 6(1)(a), under which the Board may confer any of the powers of the Board on the Managing Director, and may authorise sub- delegation.

Resolutions have altered Delegation Document 2 from time to time; Exhibit 4 shows the state it was in on 26 July 1996 and thereafter until 6 November , so far as relevant. Paragraph 5 was in these terms: 
Delegation of Rules - Managing Director and Management.
 "5. DELEGATION OF RULES - MANAGING DIRECTOR AND 
MANAGEMENT 
Pursuant to Article 6 of the Articles, the Board delegates to each of the managing Director, National Director Supervision and National Manager
Membership the following power: 
ARTICLE 57 - to call upon any Member or Member Organisation to produce without delay for inspection by the Delegate or his duly appointed representatives all books or copies thereof relating to the business of the Member or Member
Organisation, to require Members and their partners, officers, employees, consultants or securities representatives to appear before the Delegate at any time, and to give such information as may be required in connection with the business of the Member to enable the Delegate to consider whether or not the
Member continues to comply with admission requirements for the purposes of
Article 38(5) and for other matters referred to in Article 57(2)." 
By para.7.2 "7.2 The Managing Director, National Director Supervision or National Manager
Membership may sub-delegate any of the powers delegated to each of them by paragraph 5 of this Document of Delegation." 
By Sub-delegation Document dated 29 July 1996 (Ex 3) the Managing Director in para.(3) subpara.3.4 made a sub-delegation of Article 57 powers to the persons listed in Schd.4.
 "3.4 To the persons listed in Schedule 4: .4.1 ARTICLE 57 - to call upon any Member to produce without delay for inspection by the Sub-delegate or his duly appointed representatives all books or copies thereof relating to the business of the Member, to require Members and their partners, officers, employees, consultants or securities representatives to appear before the Sub-delegate at any time, and to give such information as may be required in connection with the business of the
Member to enable the Sub-delegate to consider whether or not the Member continues to comply with admission requirements for the purposes of Article (5) and for other matters referred to in Article 57(2)." 
Schedule 4 is thus:- "Schedule 4 - Sub-Delegates
The National Director, Supervision of ASX;
The National Manager, Membership of ASX; and
The Manager, Membership of the State, subject to the Manager obtaining prior written approval of the National Director Supervision or National
Manager Membership.." 
The last words of the sub-delegation are:- "Reference to the title of each ASX officer in the Schedules above includes the person that holds that position and the person acting in that capacity in the absence of the permanently appointed officer." 
While Ms Matheson acted as Manager, Membership (Sydney) she was within the third class in Sched.4. On 13 March 1997 Mr Kinsky sent Ms Matheson an e-mail message (Ex 5) which included this statement: "For the record please keep this note as my approval under the Delegation arrangements for the representatives of Shaw Stockbroking to be required to appear and give such information as may be required, under Article 57, in respect of the investigation you are conducting into options trading by their adviser John O'Hare". This constitutes the prior written approval required by Sched.4 para.3.

The Delegation and the sub-delegation do not exactly echo Article 57; in particular in the corresponding passage in Article 57 the word "or" appears, and I will give it emphasis:- "... and to give such information as may be required in connection with such business or to enable the Board to consider whether or not the member continues to comply with admission requirements ...".

Much of the case turned on the word "or" in Article 57(1) and its absence in the corresponding places in the texts of the Delegation and Sub-delegation. If para.5 of Exhibit 4 and para.3.4.1 of Exhibit 3 are read in isolation each is susceptible of the reading that the information which the sub-delegate may require persons to give is limited to such information as may be required to enable the sub-delegate to consider whether or not the member continues to comply with admission requirements, and such information as may be required for other matters referred to in Article 57(2), namely providing to the
Exchange information and data in relation to financial statistics and transaction details as the sub-delegate determines; in this reading there is no authorisation to require persons to give information in connection with the member's business except in these respects. Even reading the paragraphs in isolation there is room for the reader to doubt whether the references to the information which may be required should not be disjoined by commas or by implying "and" or "or". When these passages are read with a view to the context in the Delegation Document and in the Sub-delegation document and with a view to the terms of Article 57 powers under which are intended to be delegated it becomes clear, in my opinion, that there have been accidental omissions of the word "or" and that the passages should be read as if it had not been omitted. In my opinion this conclusion is dictated merely by referring to Article 57, but it is reinforced by considering whether there could be any reason for the Delegation and Sub-delegation to be limited to narrow parts of the subjects to which a proceeding under Article 57 could relate, and also whether it is likely that the Board and the Managing Director chose to limit them narrowly and also chose to do so by picking up words that appear in Article 57 and using them in a different sense in which the later qualify the earlier with an altogether different result to that produced by the same words in Article 57. It is very unlikely that delegation to the
Managing Director and sub-delegation to the National Director, Supervision and the National Manager Membership, who are also mentioned in Sched.4, would be intended to be narrowly confined. It is very difficult to see what purpose would be served by such a limitation. On the other hand it is likely that the intended purpose was complete delegation, and there is no indication of any other purpose in the provisions dealing with powers under Article 57.

This conclusion is far-reaching for the disposition of the case, as at a number of places Shaw's contentions turn on the view that there were breaches of the contractual obligation to conform to the Articles in that proceedings under Business Rule 1.4.2(2) and Article 57 were conducted by an unauthorised person.

Delegations - Effect of defects - Article 18.

Article 18 provides: "All acts done by any meeting of the Board or any
Committee or by any person acting as a director or as a member of any
Committee or as a delegate of the Board are, notwithstanding any defect in the constitution, proceedings or appointment of the Board or any Committee or of any member or observer of either or any such person's disqualification or any failure to comply with any direction or delegation of the Board, as valid as if there were no such defect, disqualification or failure." 
Article 18 operates to cure any defect consisting of a failure to comply with a delegation, and, if the Delegation or Sub-delegation are read literally and the word "or" is not supplied, the conduct of Ms Matheson in requiring information on a wider range of subjects than was delegated to her was a failure to comply with the Delegation and with the Sub-delegation. If there had been a failure in that way, the failure would have been cured by Article .

Ratification. 
ASX sought to rely on ratifications by the Board and by the Managing
Director on or about 6 November 1997 which related back to 1 March 1995. If these documents had their purported effect they would have cured any problems relating to delegations.

There is a general disposition to suppose that acts and events do not have the effect of changing rights which had earlier come into existence, and there is a disposition to interpret powers accordingly, extending to many fields including powers conferred on parties by contract, and also looking more widely to legislation. On the other hand there are many well-established instances, in contract law, in tort law and elsewhere, where ratification or adoption has cured defects of various kinds relating to the absence of authorisation. There is a fictional element at work, as the past cannot be changed. The general disposition was expressed in the judgment of McHugh and
Gummow JJ in Bailey v. New South Wales Medical Defence Union Limited <case>; [(1995) 184 CLR 399] at 430 thus: "Consistently with general principle, a power which might be construed so as to curtail or abrogate what otherwise would be rights or interests in favour of one party to the contract is construed as operating prospectively." Cases at note 75 exemplify this approach in various fields. In its application to Shaw's argument the implied power of ASX to ratify retrospectively action purportedly taken under Article 57 is impliedly limited so as not to detract from the immunity from use of the information obtained conferred by the implied contractual promise that ASX would act only in accordance with the Articles. As both the contractual terms which are to be reconciled are implied terms in the same document, it is not possible to pursue an analysis of which is to prevail; the perception of the implication will decide, and the case law, referred to in Oswald v. Bailey [(1987) 11
NSWLR 715] particularly by Priestley JA at 741B to F is not of assistance. I do not see search for an implication as providing an answer.

Recognition of the retrospective effect of ratifications and adoptions is a step with a fictional element, yet a step which has often been taken, on bases which include agreement of the parties that effect should be accorded to ratifications but also include other circumstances which cannot be so explained. Where purported exercises of agency authority or delegated power have created some duty with which another party must comply and the time for compliance has expired, it is not usually regarded as appropriate to impute effectiveness to the ratification and retrospectively to impose some penalty or disadvantage. A clear illustration is the view taken of a Notice to Quit where the agent's authority was not conferred until after the notice was served, or the time for compliance had expired; see ex parte Moriarty (1924) SR 298 per Cullen CJ at 301. This view was applied to exercise of a statutory power under delegation by McLelland J in Legal & General
Insurance of Australia Limited v. Board of Fire Commissioners of New South
Wales [[1982] 1 NSWLR 555] at 560. (The facts were interpreted in another way when this decision was affirmed [[1983] 2 NSWLR 131.)] 
The control which is maintained by Courts over ratifications in this regard has been expressed as that ratification must take place within a reasonable time; see Life Savers (Australasia) Limited v. Frigmobile Pty Limited &
Anor [[1983] 1 NSWLR 431] at 438 (Hutley JA) and see too Trident General
Insurance Co. Limited v. McNeice Bros. Pty Limited [(1987) 8 NSWLR 270] at 282 (McHugh JA). There can be no fixed standard for ascertaining what is a reasonable time, and the events which occurred in the interim must be considered as well as the length of time which elapsed.

In the present case Shaw complied with the requirement in March when it was made, but there was no ratification until November after the question of validity had been raised by Shaw's solicitors in September and after Shaw had dealt with the Draft Report which was based on the information obtained. In both respects Shaw acted on the basis that the requirement was authorised before there was any ratification, and it would not be just to take away any legal right which Shaw has in respect of the absence of authorisation. I find that a reasonable time had elapsed before the ratification took place.

If delegated authority were lacking in the respects the plaintiff contends for, and if the lack of authority had the legal effect contended for (neither of which I accept) I would not think of this as a case for attributing retrospective operation to the decisions of 6 November 1997.

Shaw's counsel contended that a retrospective delegation would be contrary to
Article 6(2), which is in these terms: "6. (2) A power of the Board unless it has been conferred exclusively under
Article 6(1) or delegated exclusively under Article 6(3), is exercisable only: by resolution at a meeting of the Board at which a quorum is present; or by a resolution of the directors under Article 17." 
It was said that retrospective delegation would require that Article 6(2) be amended with express provision to overcome Article 1(10) (which relates to the lack of effect of amendments to Articles on events previous to the amendment).
In my opinion Article 6(2) does not have any relation to retrospective operation of Board decisions; if a Board decision can operate retrospectively
Article 6(2) prescribes the manner in which it may be made.

The circumstances and purposes of the exercise of powers.

Business Rule 1.4.2 
Shaw's counsel contended that the terms of Business Rule 1.4.2 particularly subr.(2) and the context of Business Rules show that the purpose of the power conferred is supervisory, the power is not conferred for the investigation of complaints and that the power does not extend to an appointment for that purpose. This limitation was said to be implied from the context, from the arrangement of the Business Rules and from consideration of the preceding rules and of the headings. It was contended that this result is apparent from the selection process and the fact that an Exchange Inspector is to make the determination.

In my opinion the use of the power is not limited to random selection of brokers for inspection as a matter of routine, and there is no departure from the power when a decision to use it is made when considering what steps are to be taken on a complaint relating to the particular broker. To my reading nothing in the terms of the Business Rule or its context expresses and nothing implies the limitation contended for, and in particular the fact that an
Exchange Inspector is the person to make the determination does not carry any such implication. Exchange Inspectors do not exist only to perform routine inspections, although it would probably be necessary to follow much routine in any inspection, including this one.

As is usual with powers other than those conferred for the purpose of enabling the holder to advance his own interests, the power must be exercised in good faith and for the purposes for which it was conferred. Those purposes are very wide as they relate to the position of ASX and the relation between ASX and the members under the Articles and Business Rules. That ASX should wish to have a complaint investigated is well within the purposes for which ASX might give a direction for a determination under Business Rule 1.4.2(2).

It was also contended that in the present case there was no selection by the
Exchange in accordance with Business Rule 1.4.2. In my opinion however the powers delegated to Mr Kinsky extended to making the selection. Mr Kinsky's appointment as National Manager, Market Intermediaries Division carried with it implied authority to make the selection and the appointment.

It was also contended that an Exchange Inspector acting under Business Rule .4.2 does not have and cannot be given by delegation authority to act under
Article 57. It was said that Business Rule 1.4.2 identifies the information that may be made available to an Exchange Inspector by subrule (2) which requires the broker to make relevant accounts and records available to the
Exchange Inspector and subr. (3) which entitles the Exchange Inspector to have access to accounts and records of various persons. The contention was to the effect that this designation of sources of information is exhaustive. The argument that the interview powers in Article 57 are not available in an inquiry pursuant to Business Rule 1.4.2 suffers from a lack of textual support. In my opinion there is no indication that the means stated were intended to be exhaustive; the means spelt out are made available to the
Inspector to facilitate the task of determining the matters committed to the
Inspector in the first sentence of subrule (2). The task would be a difficult and strange one if the determination to be made were to be made solely on inspection of the records which the member is required to make available, and the records of other persons access to which the member is required to provide. It is elementary that a person commissioned to determine whether a broker is complying with the Rules and Articles or has engaged in Prohibited
Conduct would do more than trawl through books and records, although such a person would no doubt do a great deal of that, and an Exchange Inspector would in practical terms be futile and powerless to make a determination if disabled from making inquiries of the broker and the broker's staff, whether formally or informally. I see no indication in the Business Rules of any intention to disable an Exchange Inspector from taking this obvious step. In asking for information an Exchange Inspector does not have the advantage of the express creation by the Business Rules of an obligation to reply, as there is when the
Exchange Inspector asks for an inspection of records.

Section 5 of the May Draft Report deals with Mr Shapiro's suitability to act as Senior Representative of Shaw. Shaw's response included a claim that it was inappropriate to deal with this in the Inspection Report. Mr Kinsky and other
ASX officers considered this and decided that Section 5 should be deleted and that separate consideration should be given to action and process to be taken with respect to Mr Shapiro's status as Senior Representative. Shaw's counsel contended that this would not be an available use of the information. It was contended that the only available uses of the information are indicated by subrule (5A). In my opinion the use of the information is not subject to any implied contractual restraint of this kind and information which comes to ASX officers while considering one subject is available for them to consider in relation to another subject related to ASX's affairs.

Article 57. 
The question whether the Exchange Inspector may make inquiries and act on the answers, or as the case may be on refusal to answer, in making a determination is a different question to the question whether a broker and staff are obliged to reply. Article 57(1) may, according to its terms, be employed for the purpose of obtaining "such information as may be required in connection with such business ..." and that is wide enough to support a requirement founded on a direction to make a determination under Business Rule .4.2(2). If an Exchange Inspector is equipped with an effective delegation or sub-delegation of the powers of the Board to act under Article 57 I am of opinion that those powers can be brought to bear on a determination under
Business Rule 1.4.2.

It was further contended that an Exchange Inspector under Rule 1.4.2 cannot exercise the power of the Board under Article 57 because of the anomaly, or apparent anomaly, that the Exchange is to prepare a report to be furnished to the Board whereas in acting under Article 57 the function exercised by a delegate is deemed to have been exercised by the Board. In the operation of
Business Rule 1.4.2 the direction to the Exchange Inspector and the determination by the Exchange Inspector under subr.(2) lead to the existence of a report of an inspection which the Exchange is to furnish to the Board under subr.(4). Article 6 deals extensively with delegation of the powers of the Board and among many other things provides: Article 6(5) "A delegate to which any powers have delegated under Article 6(3) shall exercise the powers so delegated to it in accordance with any directions of the Board and the power so delegated when exercised by the delegate in accordance with this
Article 6(5) shall be deemed to have been exercised by the Board." 
As I understood it the point is to the effect that furnishing a report to the
Board is not a purpose for which the Board itself, which the delegate is deemed to be, could decide to proceed under Article 57. To my mind there is not in truth an anomaly because, while effect must be given to the deeming provision in Article 6(5), effect must also be given to the reality of the delegation of powers to a person other than the Board; the deeming provision is ancillary to the delegation and cannot have been intended to annihilate it.
Any use of powers in Article 57 is necessarily ancillary to the exercise of another power. Overall, Article 6(5) operating with Article 57 must have been intended to enable persons other than the Board to require appearance and information, and to use the information for ASX's purposes.

The following passage in the judgment of Mason J in O'Reilly v. State Bank of
Victoria <case>; [(1983) 153 CLR 1] at p17, on which Shaw's counsel relied, appears to me to be if anything contrary to the position contended for: "Delegation is not a parting with powers by the person who grants the delegation, but the conferring of authority to do things which otherwise that person would have to do for himself. (Huth v. Clarke [(1890) 25 QBD 391] at 395 per
Wills J)" 
It was then said that the same delegate would have to perform the whole of the functions under Article 57; and counsel referred to Mungoni v. The Attorney
General [[1960] AC 336] at 350. It was said that the delegation has to be complete and to give all the powers to the same delegate if it is to be effective. In my opinion it is correct that an effective delegation must be complete so as, in relation to Article 57(1), to authorise the delegate or sub-delegate to do each of the Board functions referred to in para.57(1) - to call on a member to require appearance, to require information and to consider whether there was compliance. In my opinion the sub-delegation does all these things. I base this conclusion on the construction of Article 6(5) and the sub-delegation, not on propositions drawn from Mungoni, which relates closely to the construction placed by the Judicial Committee on the terms of the particular delegation there considered; with a conclusion generally similar to that which
I have reached.

Implied contractual obligation to comply.

The Articles have contractual operation: Corporations Law subs.180(1),
Companies (N.S.W.) Code subs.78(1). Shaw's counsel contended that the Articles of Association contain an implied contractual stipulation that powers conferred on ASX or its officers are not to be exercised except in accordance with the Articles. Indeed it seemed to be an axiom of Shaw's case that if ASX or its officers made any departure from the terms of the Articles or of the
Business Rules all their subsequent acts were invalid, and that Shaw is entitled to prevent the use of anything founded on those acts in any way.

The contractual basis of the relationship brings with it a clear jurisdictional basis for injunctive and declaratory orders where there are breaches. However those orders are discretionary and are not made unless some interest of importance is to be protected: an injunction does not automatically follow a breach of an express or implied negative provision in the Articles. Lee v. Showman's Guild of Great Britain [[1952] 2 QB ]
shows the availability of an injunction to restrain denial of natural justice in an expulsion where procedure established by contract was not observed, but of course the breach of contract must be related in some sufficient way and in substance to procedural fairness if there is to be an injunction. See too
Dixon v. Australian Society of Accountants [(1989) 95 FLR 231.] 
In my opinion a contractual promise on the part of ASX is implied in the
Articles to the effect that when powers conferred by the Articles are exercised they will be exercised in accordance with the Articles. This could be restated in the form that it was promised that the powers would not be exercised except in accordance with the Articles. However the question remains whether, in relation to any particular non-compliance, the Articles mean, expressly or by implication, that compliance is a condition of the validity of the exercise in which the non-compliance occurred, or of any subsequent step.
No necessity supports an implication that no conduct of ASX should be based solely or in part on an act that was performed without complying with the
Articles in some way. The question always has to be asked whether the parties' contract means that a particular matter is a condition of the effectiveness of some other matter. Even if Business Rule 1.4.2 bore the meaning that the
Examining Inspector's sources of information were limited to the sources expressly mentioned, it would not follow that any other information which the
Examining Inspector came to have, by whatever means, must of necessity be ignored by the Examining Inspector and not taken into account in preparing a report. If the Examining Inspector asked a broker or staff member for information and it was furnished I find it impossible to suppose that that information ought to be ignored. In my opinion information obtained under a requirement purportedly made under Article 57 would be in the same position even if the circumstances for making the requirement in accordance with
Article 57 were incomplete in some way. If information were volunteered to an
Exchange Inspector by a complainant or some other outsider, I could not conclude that it would have to be ignored.

It is important to attempt to weigh what impact on events has been produced by the supposed lack of authority or unauthorised use of Article 57, if it be assumed that there was a lack of authority or unauthorised use, contrary to my opinion. Mr Kalinko said in oral evidence that he assumed that the Articles and Rules relating to the interviews had been complied with. When asked why he assumed this he said "Well, when the hearings commenced, Jill Matheson specifically said she was authorised. I accepted that.

Q. Now, what would you have done if at that time you had been aware that there was in fact no authority? 
A. If there was no authority I would have told my clients that they did not have to appear.

Q. And what would you have done if there had been some steps sought to be taken in conducting such hearings? 
A. I would have objected to the hearings if I could." (t2L51 to t3L11).

To my mind this is not evidence that Mr Shapiro and Shaw's other officers would not have attended and given information to Ms Matheson or some other representative of the Stock Exchange if they had known of a defect in her authority. It is to my mind on the whole improbable that they would have refused to give all information except under compulsion; and the evidence does not show that they would have so refused. It is easy to see the probabilities of what would have happened if they had refused and there had (as this argument assumes) in fact been no authority; the probabilities are that any deficiency of authority would have been supplied by a decision in due form and the intention to press for information would have been maintained; indeed intensified. It is improbable that if the (assumed) breaches had not occurred, information would not have been obtained and that the information on which the
Draft Report was furnished would not have been available.

Shaw's counsel referred me to the following passage in the judgment of Latham
CJ in Australian Workers' Union & Ors v. Bowen & Ors <case>; [(1948) 77 CLR 601] at 605 "The organisation is a voluntary Association, and before exercising a power of expelling members such a body as the Executive
Council of the Union is bound to comply with the rules of the organisation and to observe the principles of natural justice and to act bona fide: `... In interpreting rules which give jurisdiction to any tribunal there is always to be read into them the underlying condition that the proceedings shall be carried on in accordance with the fundamental principles of common justice': per O'Connor J in Dickason v. Edwards <case>; [(1910) 10 CLR 243] at 255; Baird v. Wells [(1890) 44 ChD 661] at 670." In my opinion this passage was directed to rules of the Association which relate to expulsion, and was not intended to suggest that strict compliance with all rules on any subject is a pre-condition for the effectiveness of proceedings against a member.

Procedural Fairness.

It was contended that ASX's proceedings should be restrained by injunction on grounds related to procedural fairness.

The matters which were said to show a want of procedural fairness were these: 
The use of the information obtained in the interviews conducted without authority and under a false representation as to existing authority does not accord with the requirements of procedural fairness, irrespective of any purported retrospective conferral of authority; the failure of the defendants to provide in writing particulars of any alleged breach of rules or Articles or accusation prior to conducting an interview under Article 57 itself shows want of procedural fairness; these failures make it a further breach of procedural evidence to use the information obtained for any purposes.

Investigative not Determinative 
In Australia it is well established that investigative powers may attract a duty to act fairly even if there is no determination of rights, interests or legitimate expectation; see Ainsworth & Anor v. Criminal Justice
Commission <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 564] at 576-577.

In Moran v. Lloyd's [[1981] 1 Lloyds LR 423]
Denning MR after referring to some judicial observations about preliminary inquiries, said at 427: "If those holding the preliminary inquiry are dishonest; if they are guilty of flagrant injustice; then the courts can, and should, interfere. But, short of that, it seems to me that no challenge should be allowed. It is too disruptive altogether of the due conduct of these preliminary inquiries: remembering always that, if a preliminary inquiry decides that a charge should be made - and it is made - the man accused has every opportunity, at the hearing of the charge, to cross-examine and to raise, if he wishes, any point he likes as to the preliminary inquiry." His
Lordship's observations were expressed with considerable vigour and went on to include "I simply say that we should not countenance tactics which are designed to hold up the arbitration." Cumming-Bruce and Ackner LJJ did not join in these observations, and disposed of the Appeal on the balance of convenience. Lord Denning MR recognized that investigative inquiries are subject to judicial remedies.

The proceedings under Article 57 took place in a procedural frame-work formed by the Business Rules, the Articles and by practice in which the determinations of an Examining Inspector and the preparation of a Draft Report and a Final Report can be clearly recognised as an investigative stage. There is a collection of information and consideration of its effect, but there is not a determination of any facts or of what the consequences of the facts are to be; the proceedings lay the ground for consideration whether charges are to be made. If charges are made other procedural arrangements clearly recognisable as a determinative stage begin. Those procedures can lead to determination of facts and the imposition of penalties and other adverse consequences. What is required as a matter of procedure to achieve fairness is quite different for these two stages.

The proceedings have not reached the stage where there has been a decision to make a charge, and no charge is under determination. The state of proceedings is that a Report is being prepared under business Rule 1.4.2, and the proceedings are now in the investigative stage; no Final Report has been furnished under subr.(4) and no decision has been taken on what steps if any will follow when it is furnished.

There are detailed prescriptions for securing procedural justice at a later stage and their existence is a large factor against judicialising the investigative stage to any extent. Article 57 shows that a right of ASX to require information is an established feature of the relationship between ASX and its members. Concepts of procedural justice must be accommodated to this.

There was no suggestion in evidence that the interviews were conducted with the object of fulfilling any pre-conceived list of charges or winkling out information for the purpose of substantiating charges. Mr Kalinko was present throughout all the interviews, and had an opportunity to object at any stage he thought right.

Shaw's counsel referred me to several judicial statements dealing with the nature and variable content of procedural fairness: O'Rourke v. Miller <case>; [(1985) 156 CLR 342] at 352-353 (Gibbs CJ), Salemi v. MacKellar <case>; [(1977) 137 CLR 396] at 444-445 (Stephen J). These observations are directed to the determinative stage of proceedings. The investigative stage is not entirely separate from the process of determination and not exempt from requirements on procedural fairness, but much less is required, and inquiries made in good faith and for proper purposes, without trickery or bias are unlikely to require judicial control. In relation to Article 57, if information falling within Article 57 is obtained in good faith for purposes of ASX it is difficult to suppose that there could be any control.

Counsel also referred to National Companies & Securities Commission v.
The News Corporation Limited & Ors <case>; [(1984) 156 CLR 296], where there was a statutory requirement to observe the rules of natural justice in the investigative stage. Counsel also referred to observations in University of Ceylon v. Fernando [1960] 1WLR 223-232 at -2 which were clearly directed to the determinative stage of an inquiry.

In support of the claims for injunction and declaratory relief against the production and use of the Final Report counsel referred to observations in
Hot Holdings Pty Limited v. Creasy & Ors [(1996) 185 CLR 149] at 159,
These passages deal with the availability in public law of certiorari against preliminary decisions or recommendations, a subject well removed from this case. The concluding observation of Brennan CJ Gaudron & Gummow JJ at has analogies to the present case in that in accordance with practice the
Final Report would go to the National Adjudicatory Tribunal if there were a charge; although the National Adjudicatory Tribunal is not obliged to act on it or pay regard to it, there is a high likelihood that that would happen.
Their Honours said "A preliminary decision or recommendation, if it is one to which regard must be paid by the final decision-maker, will have the requisite legal effect upon rights to attract certiorari." (and they referred to authority).

Compliance with the Articles and Business Rules.

It was said that the conduct of the interviews without authority and under a false representation of the existence of authority does not accord with the requirements of procedural fairness. I have found that these failings did not occur, but if they had, there are no circumstances in which the procedure was unfair; the events which took place were very much the same as the events which would have taken place if authority had existed, and if a lack of authority had been adverted to and raised on either side there is a high probability that it would have been promptly rectified and the matter would have proceeded very much as it has proceeded. I see no failure in procedural fairness.

In my judgment the conduct of the interviews by a person who was, on Shaw's assumptions, unauthorised was not unfair. Even if Ms Matheson was not an
Exchange Inspector and was not authorised under Article 57, she was clearly a suitable person to be appointed to both those offices; she had been an
Exchange Inspector and her conduct was later approved by the Board. There is no evidence of any element of personal unsuitability. Irregularity or lack of appointment may have made the conduct of the interviews irregular or ineffective; but there is no ground upon which it made them unfair.

Absence of particulars.

It was also contended that want of procedural fairness is established by failure of ASX and Ms Matheson to provide Shaw with written particulars of any alleged breach of Rules or Articles or of any accusation prior to the interviews.

Mr Kinsky has a delegation (Exhibit 3 cll.3.2.9 and 3.2.10) under which he may determine whether to make charges under Articles 51 or 52, and for that purpose he must have the Final Report. The February Draft Report does not show that any charges have been adopted or made; nor indeed does the May Draft
Report. The Articles regulate the hearing of any charge in detail - Articles , 52, 55A and 56. I see no force in the complaint that Shaw Stockbroking was not told before the interviews what charges were under consideration or given any particulars of them, as the nature of the business in hand meant that there were none.

The plaintiff's contention would have the effect that it was a procedural injustice not to formulate and make a charge at a different and earlier point to that at which the Articles require it to be made, and without observing the procedures which have been adopted in practice for consideration leading to the making of a charge. In a careful way the practice indicates the course to be followed and does so for the protection of persons who may be charged and for the purpose of obtaining proper consideration and fair procedures. The procedure in the Articles is enhanced by further protection adopted as a matter of practice.

There is no requirement of fairness to adopt any practices influenced by criminal procedure in which warnings must be given during an investigation when the prospect that there may be a charge comes under consideration.
Analogies from criminal procedure are too far-drawn to be useful. In ASX events take place among persons who are well-informed, well-advised and sophisticated as to what is at stake and the possibility that there may be charges are obvious; all are parties to Article 57 and to its system under which ASX is entitled to information. Warnings are superfluous.

Dealing with the Draft Report and copies.

When there is a Final Report it will be a report furnished to the Board under
Business Rule 1.4.2(4) by the Exchange, not by the Exchange Inspector; and Mr
Kinsky is the Exchange's delegate for a purpose of furnishing the Report;
Exhibit 3 cl.3.2.37 and (Sched.(2)). Subrule (4) contains authorisation for its distribution. Mr Kinsky is an appropriate recipient of information both about the Draft Report, about the Final Report as prepared by any other officer, and also of information from time to time about the progress of inquiries, because of the position which he holds and the responsibilities involved in that position, and because of his responsibility for furnishing the Board with the Report.

Confidentiality.

Information collected, the interviews, the correspondence, the Draft Report and, when it comes into existence a Final Report are all clearly confidential material; disciplinary proceedings are to be conducted in private, and the confidential nature of information-gathering which does or may lead to disciplinary proceedings is obvious and, indeed, has been respected. The only apparent exception is that a copy of a Draft Report was given to ASC under compulsory powers and this event illustrates in a way the confidential nature of the material.

The availability of information gathered including Draft Reports and the final
Inspection Report to Mr Kinsky and to other officers of ASX under practices which I have set out does not in my opinion infringe any right of Shaw. There is no threat to breach confidentiality of the information as Mr Kinsky, the
Review Committee and other ASX officers to whom the information can be expected to come have an appropriate interest in receiving it, they are bound by its confidentiality and there is no threat or intention to use the information improperly.

At an early stage in the hearing I made a direction which requires certain exhibits to be treated as confidential and prevents their being published. I made this decision on preliminary consideration only, with the object of preserving my opportunity to consider the matter and I have now considered it further. It was necessary to preserve confidentiality by an interlocutory order as otherwise an approach to the Court for justice would have been in practical terms impossible; the ordinary practices under which evidence once tendered is available for public information would have largely defeated
Shaw's claim no matter what decision the Court came to. Now as the proceedings are to be dismissed this protection does not continue and my interlocutory order will cease to have effect.

The litigation has produced the result that a body of material which would ordinarily be confidential and which of its nature is incomplete and not fully digested will enter the public domain. ASX has taken no step to bring it into the public domain, and from the point of view of good order in ASX's internal affairs it is unfortunate that it will become public. However the conduct of judicial proceedings in public brings with it public access to the material after the dismissal of the proceedings and that is a higher interest which I should observe.

Conclusions and Orders.

In my opinion Shaw is not entitled to succeed. There would be no utility in making a declaration as in Claim 2. There is no evidence of a threat or intention to disseminate any report except for proper purposes of ASX and no ground for an injunction as in Claim 8.

I order: 
The proceedings are dismissed with costs.

The directions of 12 February 1998 relating to non-publication of documents cease to have effect.

SHAW STOCKBROKING. APPOINTMENTS AND RESOLUTIONS 
Undated Delegation Document. 2 - delegation by the Board to the Managing Director under Article 6.
 - Article 57(1), 57(2), - Rule 1.4.2 Appointment of Exchange 
Inspectors, Sub-rules (1), (2), (3), (4) and (not (4)(a) EX 4, 
Sub-delegate Kalinko - 41-43 /9/95 Delegation Doc.7 by the Board EX 2 , 6 & 7/11/97 Resolution of Board by Board Members signing copies. Delegation with effect from March 1995.

Para.1(c), delegation under Article 6(c) to 
Managing Director or Sub-delegate.
 - Article 57(1) and 57(2) by delegate.
 - Rule 1.4.2 delegations.
 (e) - Sub-delegation by Managing Director of Article 7 powers to National Manager 
Membership Sydney.
 - Ratification to 1 March 1995. Kinsky 100, 
Kalinko - 44 (Attachment 3) /796 Sub-delegation Document by Managing 
Director Humphrey EX. 3 
Undated Sub-delegation Document by Managing 
Director Humphrey sub-delegates powers to appoint Exchange Inspectors to 
National Manager, Market Intermediaries (Rule 1.4.2) also delegates powers 
Article 57. See Schedules 2 and 7 for persons affected.

Mr Kinsky refers to this document as dated November 1997 in his appointment of December 1997 Kalinko 48-49 /11/96 Kinsky appoints Matheson to be Exchange 
Inspector while Acting Manager Membership 
Sydney Kalinko 40 
Attachment 1 /1/97 Circular - new structure and operation of 
Membership Division. From 1 February 1997 
Matheson to be Assistant Manager 
Prudential Supervision (Sydney). EX. 1 /3/97 National Manager Market Intermediaries 
Kinsky approves requirement under 
Article [57 EX. 5] /2/97 National Manager Market Intermediaries (Kinsky appoints Matheson to be 
Exchange Inspector under sub-delegation of 6 November 1997.) 
Bailey v. New South Wales Medical Defence Union Limited <case>; [(1995) 184 CLR 399] at 430 
Oswald v. Bailey [(1987) 11 NSWLR 715] 
Legal & General Insurance of Australia Limited v. Board of Fire
Commissioners of New South Wales [[1982] 1 NSWLR 555] at 560 
Life Savers (Australasia) Limited v. Frigmobile Pty Limited & Anor [[1983] NSWLR 431] at 438 
Trident General Insurance Co. Limited v. McNeice Bros. Pty Limited [(1987) 8
NSWLR 270] at 282 
O'Reilly v. State Bank of Victoria <case>; [(1983) 153 CLR 1] at p17, 
Huth v. Clarke [(1890) 25 QBD 391] at 395 
Mungoni v. The Attorney General [[1960] AC 336] at 350 
Lee v. Showman's Guild of Great Britain [[1952] 2 QB 329] 
Dixon v. Australian Society of Accountants [(1989) 95 FLR 231] 
Australian Workers' Union & Ors v. Bowen & Ors <case>; <case>; [(1910) 10 CLR 243] at 255 
Baird v. Wells [(1890) 44 ChD 661] at 670 
Ainsworth & Anor v. Criminal Justice Commission <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 564] at 576-577.

Moran v. Lloyd's [[1981] 1 Lloyds LR 423] 
O'Rourke v. Miller <case>; [(1985) 156 CLR 342] at 352-353 
Salemi v. MacKellar <case>; [(1977) 137 CLR 396] at 444-445 
National Companies & Securities Commission v. The News Corporation Limited & Ors <case>; [(1984) 156 CLR 296] 
University of Ceylon v. Fernando [1960] 1WLR 223-232 at 231-2 
Hot Holdings Pty Limited v. Creasy & Ors [(1996) 185 CLR 149] at 159, * * * 
