

Irwin Johnston and Partners NSW Pty Ltd versus Smith and Anor Matter No /98 [1998] NSWSC 675 (18 December 1998) 
Last Updated: 13 January 1999 
IRWIN JOHNSTON & PARTNERS NSW PTY LTD versus GOWER SMITH 
And ROBYN SMITH /98 December 1998 
David Kirby J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
KIRBY J: This matter came before the Court by way of case stated by Mr Gould, a Local Court Magistrate. 
The proceedings before the Local Court arose out of the renovation of a semi- detached cottage at McMahons Point. The house was owned by Mr and Mrs Johnston ("the Johnstons"). The renovations included the excavation below the existing house to create a new room. The Johnstons retained an engineer, Irwin Johnston & Partners NSW Pty Limited ("the engineer") (the appellant). On 20 October , during the course of works, the Johnston's house collapsed.

There was a block of flats on one side of the Johnston's, which was owned by
Gower Smith and Robyn Smith ("the Smiths")(the respondents). The block was damaged in various ways which were relatively minor. The Smiths were insured by AMP General Insurance ("AMP"). After the collapse, the Smiths and their insurer attended the site. They spoke to the Johnstons. The learned Magistrate made the following findings of fact: "2.8 After the collapse of the Johnstons' dwelling, the respondents and a representative of their insurer, AMP General Insurance, attended the scene and had conversations with Mr Johnston.
 .9 After the collapse repairs were effected to the respondents' property separately by each of the respondents and their insurer." 
One gathered that the insurer took steps to support, or underpin, the block of flats. The Smiths, meanwhile, carried out internal repairs which were required.

The neighbours of the Johnstons on the other side were Mr and Mrs Giddey ("the
Giddeys"). They were also affected. They occupied a semi-detached house attached to the Johnstons.

The Johnstons and the Giddeys commenced proceedings in the Supreme Court against the engineer and the builder. The proceedings were heard together. The
Smiths, however, dealt directly with the Johnstons in respect to the damage to their property. The insurer, AMP, was aware of these negotiations. The negotiations were confined to the reimbursement of the Smiths for their payout. The cost to the insurer of underpinning and supporting the block of flats was apparently not dealt with.

In November 1994 the Johnstons and the Smiths agreed upon a figure, namely, $16,000. The agreed sum was to be paid by instalments. By 20 March 1995 the sum had been paid. The Johnsons then procured the following document, executed in front of a witness by the Smiths: `RELEASE & INDEMNITY 
We, Gower Smith and Robyn Smith of 49 East Crescent Street, McMahons Point, agree to accept the sum of $16,000 from Anthony Charles Johnston and Carolyn
Jane Elizabeth Johnston ("the Johnstons"), paid without admission of liability.

This amount is accepted in full satisfaction of our claim for compensation arising from the collapse of the Johnsons' house at 2 Waiwera Street, McMahons
Point on 20th October 1994 ("the accident").

We also agree to indemnify the Johnstons against any claim made by any person having an interest in the real estate known as 49 East Crescent Street,
McMahons Point or in any property situated in or about that real estate at the time of the accident in respect of damage sustained by them or their property as a result of the accident.

Dated at Sydney on this 20th day of March 1995." 
Although the AMP knew of the negotiations, it was not told of the settlement until 9 November 1995. The engineer was neither a party to the discussions between the Johnstons and the Smiths, nor the agreement which they reached.

The Smiths, at the time they signed the indemnity and release, were aware of the proceedings by the Johnstons against the engineer and the builder. They were also aware that the Johnstons' claim against the engineer included the monies that they had been required to pay to the Smiths. They knew that the document which they executed on 20 March 1994 would be used in those proceedings as proof of payment to the Smiths.

The proceedings in the Supreme Court by the Johnstons and the Giddeys were referred to a Referee, under Pt72 of the Supreme Court Rules. The Johnstons identified as one aspect of their claim, the $16,000 they had paid to the
Smiths. When the matter proceeded before the Referee, Mr McInnes QC, appearing for the Johnstons, announced the outcome of discussions he had had with counsel for the engineers. The transcript is in these terms: "MR McINNES: If I might say, at the outset, I've had some discussions with my learned friend and it's been agreed that, on the basis that the plaintiffs do not seek more than the sum of $16,000 in respect of the claim made by Gower
Smiths, who are the neighbours opposite to the Giddeys, then they will accept that as being a reasonable price for the restoration of damage caused to their building and it will be unnecessary to prove that damage. We do accept $16,000 and will not make any claim in addition to that sum on behalf of the Gower
Smiths.

THE REFEREE: Just so that I'm clear on this, as I read the statements, certain moneys have been paid to the Gower Smiths.

MR McINNES: Yes.

THE REFEREE: Is that over and above that? 
MR McINNES: No, that is the $16,000 that has already been paid. It's a total of $16,000 and no more.

THE REFEREE: That's clear, is it? 
MR RUDGE: Thank you." 
The Johnstons succeeded in their claim against the engineer (although not against the builder). The sum of $16,000, in respect of the damage to the
Smiths, was specifically included in the amount awarded.

Later the AMP, in the name of the Smiths, commenced proceedings against the engineer in the Local Court. The proceedings were to recover the cost of the support and underpinning of the Smiths' property, the block of flats. The engineer sought to argue a preliminary point. It was suggested, on behalf of the engineer, that the Smiths were precluded from maintaining their action by reason of the money which had been paid to them by the Johnstons and the release and indemnity which they had executed on 20 March 1994.

The learned Magistrate rejected the preliminary point. He determined that the
Smiths could maintain the action against the engineer. He did so on a number of bases. His findings can be encapsulated in three propositions. First, the engineer was not a party to the release. The release, therefore, did not operate as a bar to proceedings against the engineer by the Smiths. It operated only to release the Johnstons. (The Construction Issue.) 
Secondly, on the principle expressed by Smart J in the two decisions in
Morganite Ceramic Fibres Pty Limited versus Sola Basic Australia Ltd [(1987) NSWLR 189]; (1988) 5 ANZ CAS 60-883 at 75, 625, the release did not prevent an insurer, subrogated to the rights of his insured, from claiming in respect of monies paid. (The Subrogation Issue.) In the context of that principle, the stated case included the following findings: "3.2 I held that the decision of Smart J was binding on me and should be followed as opposed to obiter remarks by Meagher JA.
 .3 I did not make any finding as to whether the appellant had any knowledge of the respondents' insurer's rights." 
Thirdly, that there was no evidence to support an estoppel. There was no evidence that the release and indemnity had been relied upon by the engineer.
(The Estoppel Issue.) 
The appellant (engineer) asserted that, in respect of each matter, the learned
Magistrate was wrong. It was further submitted (as it was before the Local
Court) that the Smiths' claim against the engineer had been discharged by the accord and satisfaction arising from the Johnstons' settlement.

The Construction Issue 
The appellant made the following submission: "32. The document in the third paragraph restricts the indemnity to the
Johnstons. No attempt has been made to similarly restrict the release that is set out in the second paragraph. The document is drafted in simple terms. The plain meaning of the words used is consistent with a release directed to the world at large." 
However, the release was an agreement between the Johnstons and the Smiths.
The engineer was not a party to it. He was not, in contract, released by it.

Was the position any different in tort? No doubt the Smiths could have sued the engineer, the builder, and the Johnstons, as joint or concurrent tortfeasors. The position at common law was described by Brennan CJ, Dawson and Toohey JJ in Thompson versus Australian Capital Television Pty Limited &
Ors <case>; [(1996) 186 CLR 574] at 581, in these words: "At common law, where there was a joint tort there could be only one action and one judgment for the whole amount of damages to which the plaintiff was entitled. That is to say, the cause of action was one and indivisible so that when judgment was obtained on it, whether against one or more of the joint tortfeasors, the cause of action merged in the judgment and precluded further recovery against any remaining tortfeasors. That was the basis of the rule in
Brinsmead versus Harrison [(1872) LR 7 CP 547], that a judgment obtained against one joint tortfeasor was a bar to an action against the others upon the same cause of action, even if the judgment remained unsatisfied. It was also the basis of the rule that the release of one joint tortfeasor released all the others." 
However, the position was changed by [s5](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1946404/s5.html) of the [Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1946404/), which abrogated the rule in Brinsmead versus Harrison. The effect of [s5](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1946404/s5.html) was that a cause of action against joint tortfeasors was no longer one and indivisible. The implication of that change was described by Brennan CJ,
Dawson and Toohey JJ, in Thompson in these words: (at 584) "The concept of a single wrong and a single cause of action having gone, the rule that a release given by one joint tortfeasor releases any others must have gone with it, for that rule is nothing more than another aspect of the same thing, namely, that there is only one cause of action against all joint tortfeasors in respect of the one tort. In other words, once the cause of action is by statute no longer one and indivisible, there is no conceptual basis for the rule that the release of one joint tortfeasor releases the others. The rule must therefore be taken to have been impliedly abolished by the statute." 
Counsel for the engineer, Mr Roberts, drew attention to the analysis of Gummow
J in the same case. His Honour examined in some detail the law before the 1946
Act. He pointed to the difference between the defence of release, and that of accord and satisfaction (at 610). In the context of that difference, Mr
Roberts made the following submission: "The effect of the decision in Thompson versus ACTV is undoubtedly that a release of one tortfeasor does not release all. However, even though that is the case as regards a release, it is submitted that an accord and satisfaction (and in particular the satisfaction) does have the effect of discharging the plaintiff's claim." 
I am not persuaded. Before the [Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1946404/), an unqualified release of one joint tortfeasor released all. To be effective the release was required to be by Deed. (Thompson, per Gummow J at 610.)
Accord and satisfaction, in respect of one joint tortfeasor, discharged the remaining tortfeasors. No seal was required. Section 5 of the 1946 Act, however, changed the position. Neither a release, nor accord and satisfaction, by one tortfeasor will discharge the others.

The Subrogation Issue 
The general rule in relation to subrogation was stated by Mason JA in
Sydney Turf Club versus Crowley [(1971) 1 NSWLR 724] at 734: "Where an insurer is subrogated to the rights of the insured against a third party, the insured does not acquire an independent cause of action in his own right. He succeeds to the insured's cause of action against the third party, in this case a right of action on the policy issued by the Jockey Club. That aright of action remains in all respects unaltered; it is brought in the name of the insured and it is subject to all the defences which would be available if the action had been brought by the insured for his own benefit ..." 
When the present claim proceeded before the Local Court, counsel for the
Smiths suggested that the rule as stated by Mason JA was subject to a qualification. The qualification was said to be contained in the judgment of
Barwick CJ in State Government Insurance Office (Qld) versus Brisbane
Stevedoring Pty Limited <case>; [(1969) 123 CLR 228], where the following was said: (at 240-241) "It is settled law that an insurer who has paid the amount of a loss under a policy of indemnity is entitled to the benefit of all the rights of the insured in the subject matter of the loss and by subrogation may enforce them.
This right of subrogation is inherent in the contract of indemnity." 
Barwick CJ added: (at 241) "It is also settled law than an insured may not release, diminish, compromise or divert the benefit of any right to which the insurer is or will be entitled to succeed and enjoy under his right of subrogation. On occasions an attempt by the insured to do so will be ineffective against the insurer because of the knowledge of the circumstances which the person under obligation to the insured may have. On other occasions when the insured's act has become effective as against the insurer, the insured will be liable to the insurer in damages, or possibly, on some occasions for money had and received. ..." 
In Morganite Ceramic Fibres Pty Limited versus Sola Basic Australia Ltd [(1987) 11 NSWLR 189], Smart J considered a preliminary point taken in an action by an insurer (Zurich Australia Insurance Limited) in the name of its insured (Morganite Ceramic Fibres Pty Limited), against a company with whom the insured had arguably reached a settlement. The claim arose out of the sale of certain goods. The defendants paid the plaintiff the sum of $24,005 in the context of an exchange of telexes. The issue was whether the defence of accord and satisfaction, which had been pleaded by the defendant, was made out, having regard to the text of the telexes. The defendants contended that the insurer stands in the shoes of the plaintiff, and since the plaintiff had released the claim, the claim by the subrogated insurer must fail. Smart J reached the following view in respect of the rights of the insurer: (at 198) "In my opinion the general rules are as stated by Mason JA in Sydney Turf
Club, but there is a qualification as stated by Barwick CJ." 
In other words, a release granted to a third party by an insurer will not bind the insurer if the third party was aware of the subrogated insurer's interest in an action against him at the time when the release was procured or granted.

Smart J went on to hear the case. He ultimately determined that the telexes did not amount to a general release. The plea of accord and satisfaction, therefore, failed (Morganite Ceramic Fibres Pty Limited versus Sola Basic
Australia Limited (1988) 5 ANZ CAS 60-883 at 75, 625).

The Court of Appeal by majority (Sola Basic Australia Limited versus Morganite
Ceramic Fibres Pty Limited (unreported, 11 May 1989) (Hope and Priestley
JJA) dismissed an appeal against the decision of Smart J. Meagher JA, however, disagreed. The telexes, in his view, should be construed as constituting an accord which was followed by satisfaction. He was, accordingly, obliged to consider whether the insurer was in a different or better position that the insured, in such circumstances. He took a different view to Smart J. He said this: (at 23) "It is undoubtedly true, as Sir Garfield Barwick pointed out, that in every contract of insurance there is an obligation, implied if not expressed, as between the insurer and his insured that the latter will not do anything to diminish the former's right to subrogation. It does not emerge clearly from the cases what is the source or the nature of that obligation. ... But one thing is clear; it does not enable an insurer to treat as void a transaction which has been completed in breach of the stipulation." 
However, the facts of this case are quite different from the facts in
Morganite Ceramic Fibres. They do not, in my view, call for the resolution of the difference between Smart J and Meagher JA. Here, the insurer was the AMP. The insured was the Smiths. The Smiths had executed a release to the Johnstons. They had not executed a release of their claim against the engineer. When the insurer sued the engineer, in the name of the insured, the
Smiths, the engineer, for the reasons stated, could not rely upon the release and indemnity executed by the Smiths. It was not a contract with the engineer.
It was not, therefore, their accord and satisfaction. The discharge given by one of a number of tortfeasors could not (since the [Law Reform (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1946404/)) be called in aid by other tortfeasors who may be sued.

The only relevance of the settlement, as between the Smiths, and the engineer, is in the context of the rule against double satisfaction. In Thompson v
Australian Capital Television Pty Limited, Gummow J described the operation of that rule in the context of concurrent tortfeasors in these terms: (at 6080 "The principle given expression by these rules is to be distinguished from that against double satisfaction. Where the wrongdoers were concurrent rather than joint tortfeasors, the entry of judgment in an action against one was no bar to other actions against those tortfeasors because the plaintiff had a distinct cause of action against each of them. However, even here, once the plaintiff had fully recouped the loss, of necessity the plaintiff could not thereafter pursue any other remedy the plaintiff might have or which the plaintiff might earlier have pursued. Having recouped the whole of the loss, any further proceedings would, as it recently was put by the Judicial
Committee, `lack a subject matter'. The satisfaction might have been provided even by a stranger to the wrongdoing. It appears that satisfaction of the former judgment could be asserted by a plea in bar or a plea in estoppel to any later action at law. Moreover, equity would interfere by injunction to restrain the plaintiff receiving double satisfaction upon execution of a plurality of judgments which had been recovered by the plaintiff." 
The decision of the Judicial Committee referred to was that in Tang Man Sit v Capacious Investments Ltd (PC) [[1996] 1 AC 514], where the following was said at 522: "When the remedies are against two different people, he may sue both persons.
He may do so concurrently, and obtain judgment against both. ... Or the plaintiff may sue the two persons successively. He may obtain judgment against one, and take steps to enforce the judgment. This does not preclude him from then suing the other. There are limitations to this freedom. One limitation is the so called rule in Henderson versus Henderson <case>; [(1843) 3 Hare 100.] In the interests of fairness and finality a plaintiff is required to bring forward his whole case against a defendant in one action.
Another limitation is that the court has power to ensure that, when fairness so requires, claims against more than one person shall all be tried and decided together. A third limitation is that a plaintiff cannot recover in the aggregate from one or more defendants an amount in excess of his loss. Part satisfaction of a judgment against one person does not operate as a bar to the plaintiff thereafter bringing an actions against another who is also liable, but it does operate to reduce the amount recoverable in the second action." 
Here, there is no suggestion that the Smiths (through their insurer, the AMP) were seeking to recover the cost of the internal damage to the units. The cost of the internal damage had been recovered from the Johnstons, and recouped by them from the engineer in their action against the engineer. The Smiths (that is, AMP), were seeking to recover the cost of the underpinning. There was no question of double satisfaction.

The Estoppel Issue 
Finally, it was suggested that there was an estoppel. It operated to prevent the Smiths claiming any more than the sum paid by the Johnstons to them, and recovered by the Johnstons from the engineer. The submissions of the appellant identified the factual circumstance giving rise to the estoppel as follows: "50. When the agreement was reached between the Smiths and the Johnstons each knew that the Smiths' loss would be included in the claim by the Johnstons against the Engineer. The Smiths knew that the Release and Indemnity would be used by the Johnstons to recover from the Engineer.
By providing the Johnstons with the document in those circumstances the
Smiths represented to the Engineer that the amount stated in the document was the whole of the amount that satisfied the Smiths' claim." 
The engineer relied upon the representation by the Smiths to the following effect: "This amount is accepted in full satisfaction of our claim for compensation arising from the collapse of the Johnsons' house at 2 Waiwera Street, McMahons
Point on 20th October 1994 ("the accident")." 
The submission on behalf of the engineer said this: "The Engineer altered its position by not putting the Johnstons to strict proof of that part of the case." 
Accordingly, it was not open to the Magistrate, according to this submission, to find that there was no evidence of reliance.

The elements of an estoppel were succinctly stated by Jordan CJ in Franklin v Manufacturers Mutual Insurance Ltd <case>; [(1935) 36 NSWSR 76] at 82: "The type of estoppel which became definitely established in the common law by the case of Pickard versus Sears <case>; [(6
Ad & E 469)] - estoppel by representation - depends upon different principles. In order that this type of estoppel may arise, it is necessary that (1) by word or conduct (2) reasonably likely to be understood as a representation of fact, (3) a representation of fact, as contrasted with a mere expression of intention, should be made to another person, either innocently or fraudulently, (4) in such circumstances that a reasonable man would regard himself as invited to act upon it in a particular way, (5) and that the representation should have been material in inducing the person to whom it was made to act on it in that way (6) so that his position would be altered to his detriment if the fact were otherwise than as represented." 
The engineer was confronted by a claim by the Johnstons. The claim provided particulars of the damage which had been suffered. The damage included the monies paid out by the Johnstons to the Smiths. The engineer would plainly be aware of the work said to have been carried out, and costing $16,000. A forensic decision was made in proceedings before the Referee that, in respect of the itemised loss which the Johnstons had paid out, the Johnstons would not be put to proof. There is no evidence, and no finding of fact by the
Magistrate, that it was the representation in the release signed by the Smiths that caused the engineer to act in the way that he did. Nor can it be inferred. The inference one would ordinarily draw from these facts is that the defendant assessed the claim by reference to its knowledge of the damage which had been occasioned to the units, and the cost of effecting repairs, and determined that the amount claimed was reasonable. Further, there is no evidence of the engineer having acted (on the faith of the representation) to his detriment. The finding by the learned Magistrate that there was no reliance, and no estoppel, seems to me appropriate.

I have reached the same view as the learned Magistrate by a slightly different path. However, in respect to the determination by him that the respondents (the Smiths) were not precluded from suing the appellant (the engineer), I hold that his determination was not erroneous in point of law. Accordingly, I dismiss the appeal. The appellant should pay the respondents' costs.
 * * * 
