

R versus Qaumi and Ors (No 11) (s 45 Crime Commission Act) [2016] NSWSC 211 (21
March 2016) 
Last Updated: 22 November 2016 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Decision: 
Pursuant to <case> Crime Commission Act 2012 , order that the evidence of a named witness be made available to the legal representatives of Farhad
Qaumi (see para [33]).  
Catchwords: 
CRIMINAL LAW - application to release transcript of evidence given at Crime
Commission - application opposed by Crime Commission - correct procedure - submissions taken in the absence of the accused and his lawyers - factors relevant to the interests of justice - fairness of trial proceedings - danger to witness - right of witness to be heard  
JUDGMENT
The accused Farhad Qaumi and Witness M (who was an accused person at the time but has since entered a plea of guilty) moved on separate notices of motion for orders pursuant to <case> and 45(5) of the Crime Commission Act 2012 ('the Act').
Farhad Qaumi sought an order in the following terms: "An order pursuant to section 45 of the Crime Commission Act 2012 that the Crime Commission makes available to the accused legal representative any evidence given for before the commission:  relating to the murder of Joseph Antoun;  relating to the murder of Mahmoud Hamzy;  relating to the conspiracy to murder Mahmoud Hamzy, or  any evidence given by Mohammed Hamzy."
As a result of the order that I made severing the count on the indictment relating to the murder of Joseph Antoun ("the Antoun trial"), Senior Counsel for Farhad Qaumi did not press item (a) in the list of articles sought under the order. The Antoun trial is to proceed after the trial relating to the murder of Mahmoud Hamzy and other related shooting offences ('the current trial') and whether the accused brings a separate application in relation to the Antoun trial will be a matter for him. Further, the call in relation to the evidence of Mohammed Hamzy was limited to evidence (if any) concerning the murder of Mahmoud Hamzy.
The notice of motion on behalf of Witness M sought: "An order pursuant to section 45 of the Crime Commission Act 2012 that the Crime Commission makes available to the accused's legal representative any evidence given before the commission by Mumtaz Qaumi and
Mohammed Hamzy: - 
Relating to the murder of Joseph Antoun; 
Relating to the murder of Mahmoud Hamzy; 
Relating to the conspiracy to murder Mohammed Hamzy."
In the course of argument on 29 February 2016, the solicitor appearing for Witness M did not press the order in relation to evidence (if any) given by Mohammed Hamzy. Witness M then pleaded guilty on 3 March 2016. Witness M's application was subsequently abandoned in the course of a detention application brought by the Crown following Witness M's change of plea.[1]
Section 45 of the Act is in the following terms: "45. Publication or disclosure of evidence 
The Commission may direct that:  any evidence given before it, or  the contents of any document, or a description of any thing, produced to the Commission or seized under a search warrant, or  any information that might enable a person who has given or may be about to give evidence before the Commission to be identified or located, or  the fact that any person has given or may be about to give evidence at a hearing,  must not be published, or must not be published except in such manner, and to such persons, as the Commission specifies. 
The Commission must give such a direction if the failure to do so might prejudice the safety or reputation of a person or prejudice the fair trial of a person who has been or may be charged with an offence. 
A person must not make a publication in contravention of a direction given under this section. 
Maximum penalty: 100 penalty units or imprisonment for 2 years, or both. 
If:  a person has been charged with an offence before a court of the State, and  the court considers that it may be desirable in the interests of justice that particular evidence given before the Commission in relation to which the Commission has given a direction under this section be made available to the person or to a legal practitioner representing the person and to the prosecutor,  the court may give to the Commission a certificate to that effect and, if the court does so, the Commission must make the evidence available to the court. 
If:  the Commission makes evidence available to a court in accordance with subsection (4), and  the court, after examining the evidence, is satisfied that the interests of justice so require,  the court may make the evidence available to the person charged with the offence concerned or to an Australian legal practitioner representing the person and to the prosecutor. 
This section has effect subject to section 45A. 
In this section:  "publish" includes:  disclose to a person, and  in relation to evidence or a record of evidence-disclose any information directly contained in or implied from that evidence or record, except where the information could be obtained elsewhere."
With the exception of that part of the notice of motion purporting to catch evidence (if any) given by Mohammed Hamzy, the Crime Commission consented to orders pursuant to <case> in relation to evidence (if any) caught by the Notices of Motion. In other words, the Crime Commission agreed that the material should be produced to the Court pursuant to a certificate that "the court considers that it may be desirable in the interests of justice that particular evidence given before the Commission in relation to which the Commission has given a direction under this section be made available to the person or to a legal practitioner representing the person and to the prosecutor" (my emphasis).
In accordance with that concession I granted a certificate under <case> on 24 February 2014. Pursuant to that certificate, and with the consent of the legal practitioners for Farhad Qaumi and Witness M, the Crime Commission agreed to produce to me in chambers the material (if any) caught by the notices of motion. Any such material is confidential.
The Crime Commission objected to any orders under <case> and read an open affidavit of Timothy James O'Connor (MFI 64). I also received, without objection, two confidential affidavits by Mr O'Connor. One was sworn on 29 February 2016 (confidential MFI 63) and the second sworn 2 March 2016 (confidential MFI 71).
I note in passing that during the course of all of the argument in relation to these applications the learned Crown Prosecutor, his co-counsel and their instructing solicitors absented themselves from the court room. Transcripts of the arguments have not been provided to them. For those familiar with recent High Court authority, the reasons for this would be obvious: see X7 versus Australian Crime Commission <case>; [248 CLR 92] at 21.
Further arguments were heard (in the absence of the Crown Prosecutor but in the presence of the accused and their lawyers) on 2 March 2016. I then heard further submissions in a fully closed court on Thursday, 3 March 2016 and Wednesday, 16 March 2016.
I have considered the material in the confidential affidavit as well as the material (if any) produced by the Crime Commission.
It is impossible, or inappropriate, to articulate the reasons for the conclusions I have reached in a judgment that is either published or made available to the legal representatives or the accused themselves. That is the nature of the application and because of the private and secretive nature of hearings and interrogations conducted by the Crime Commission. However, in order that this decision is amenable to appeal, I will record the reasons for the decision that are specific to this case in a separate and unpublished annexure.
These more general observations are simply designed to indicate what I consider to be some of the relevant factors to be taken into account when considering an application under <case> of the Act. 
The first and perhaps most important consideration concerns the fundamental right of an accused to a fair trial. Dealing with relevantly identical provisions in Chapman & Anor versus Gentle & Ors [(1987) 28 A Crim R 29], Yeldham J said (at [32]-[33]): "The words 'the interests of justice' and the expression 'desirable in the interests of justice' have in other contexts been considered from time to time. Plainly they are words of considerable width (See, for example, Herron v The Attorney-General & Ors, Court of Appeal, unreported, 21 May 1987 and The Queen versus Horsham Justices ex parte Farquharson [1982] 2 QB 762.) As is made plain in those and in other authorities to which I was referred in the helpful written submissions put before me in the present case, the interests of justice incorporate as a paramount consideration that an accused person should have a fair trial. In a case such as the present, where so much reliance is placed upon the evidence of the witness Kron, and where he has on a prior occasion given evidence and made a statement concerning the same issues before the Commission, the only conclusion reasonably open to a
Magistrate, to whom application is made under s13(10), is to order that the evidence before the Commission be made available to the Court. It is fundamental that if, but only if, that earlier evidence, when produced, could adversely affect the testimony given in the committal proceedings by the witness Kron, the Court should consider thereafter making it available. But in order to determine whether it could adversely affect the evidence of the witness as given before the Magistrate it must be inspected. Without an inspection, no decision as to the relevance or otherwise to the committal proceedings of what was said before the Commission can be made. 
An order under s13(10) does not mean that the material is to be shown to the persons charged or their legal representatives. If, after inspecting it, the Magistrate concludes that it is of little or no relevance, in the sense that it is not in any real way different from the evidence already given by the witness before him, or if it is so highly sensitive because it reveals other inquiries concerning the accused or other alleged drug dealers that the interests of the community outweigh those of the accused in a particular case, then, no doubt, in such circumstances, no order under s13(11) would be made."
It is impossible to define in advance or with any degree of prescience or precision the matters that may be relevant to a determination of an application such as the present. Sub-section 45(5) requires the Court to make a determination of what "the interests of justice so require". That is a quite stringent test but, in its context, the word "require" does not have the meaning of imperative as might often be the case. A similar approach was taken by Hall J in Muir versus The Council of Trinity Grammar School <case>, a case involving a consideration of what the interests of justice required in determining whether a civil case should be heard by a jury. His Honour at [16] set out a series of dot-points including: "In context, the term require is not equivalent in, in my opinion, to necessity or the concept inherent in the word essential. It must be accepted that a judge alone is capable of hearing and determining any form of civil proceedings including, in particular, any common law claim. Accordingly s.85(2)(b) implicitly involves a broader concept than capacity to determine a claim and allows for the identification of particular matters that constitute a substantial reason or warrant for departing from the normal method or mode of trial."
However, the provision does set a relatively high bar for an applicant who seeks release of the material. This is so for a number of reasons, not least of which is the fact that the provision will only come into effect if the Commission has made a direction under <case> that the relevant evidence must not be published. Accordingly, in any case where an application is made under <case> or (5), the status quo will be that the evidence is not to be released. However, the section creates a proviso to that status quo which allows the Court to inspect the relevant transcript if it "may be desirable in the interests of justice" and then, if the "interests of justice so require", the Court may make the evidence available to the legal practitioner representing the accused and to the prosecutor. The addition of the words "and the prosecutor" came in the aftermath of the decisions in X7 versus Australian Crime Commission and Lee versus New South Wales Crime Commission.
The expression "interests of justice" is a phrase of very wide import which allows a wide number of considerations to be taken into account. In O'Hare versus DPP <case> in which O'Keefe J said at [47] - [49]: "...the phrase in the 'interests of justice', has been construed in many contexts. Furthermore, it too is a phrase of wide impact which comprehends many factors. It is therefore undesirable, possibly impossible, to define it.  ... 
Since there will be a myriad of factual circumstances to which the phrase may be applied it is undesirable to limit by reference to a rigid definition what the interests of justice are."
Similarly, in Muir versus Counsel of Trinity Grammar School, Hall J said at [10] that the expression "interests of justice" is a broad one and is one that enables all relevant factors to be taken into account. His Honour referred to the decision of the Full Federal Court in Acton Engineering Pty. Limited versus Campbell <case>; [103 ALR 437] where <case> of the Corporations Acts was under consideration. Black CJ said at 440: "Section 44(2) will allow a wide range of considerations to be taken into account in deciding whether it is more appropriate for a proceeding to be determined in another court. The expression 'the interests of justice' is a broad one. Section 44(3) requires a court to have regard to the matters it specifies but it does not thereby limit the range of matters that fall for consideration under s44(2)."
Davies J said further at 441: "The term 'interests of justice' is a broad term which enables all relevant factors to be taken into account. Those factors include matters relating to the efficiency, including the economy and expedition, of litigation and matters of convenience having regard to the location of witnesses and records.
The term would also encompass matters of policy relating to the administration of justice by the Federal Court and the State and Territory Supreme Courts."
As I have said, the interests of justice is not a phrase that can be defined by means of criteria in advance of any particular case. However, where the power under <case> of the Act is invoked, there are a number of factors that may arise and might inform the exercise of the discretion granted to the court to make a determination as to what the interests of justice "require". Without suggesting that the following is an exhaustive catalogue of the matters that might arise, the following are examples of the kind of factors pertinent to the determination under <case>.
As emphasised in Chapman versus Gentle the "paramount consideration" is that the accused person should have a fair trial. However, the Court will generally start from the proposition that the evidence was given in private and is subject to an order that the evidence must not be published. The witness who gave the evidence will probably have been told at the commencement of the hearing that the evidence that they give will not be published. That creates in the witness a reasonable expectation that the things that they say are said in private and that the material will not be published. That is a relevant factor in determining where the interests of justice lie.
Next, it will be relevant whether the witness in question is likely to be a witness in the trial proceedings. That is an important factor but it is not determinative. For example, a Judge who inspects the material following the granting of a certificate under <case> may become aware of the existence of a person who, while not a witness, may be in a position to give important evidence or provide important information either to the prosecution or to the defence. However, in cases where it is known that the witness at the Crime Commission is to be a prosecution witness in the trial, that will be a factor militating in favour of a finding that the interests of justice require the release of material. If the evidence before the Crime Commission is patently inconsistent with the evidence that is expected to be given by the witness in the trial, and the trial evidence expected to be inculpatory, that again will militate - in some cases, strongly - in favour of release of the material to be defendant.
If a witness to the Crime Commission is not expected to be a witness in the trial but where their evidence may contain important exculpatory information, or give rise to theories of the case that may not be readily apparent to the defence or prosecution, that will be a factor militating in favour of release of the material.
If the release of the material may place the witness in physical danger, that is a very strong factor militating against making an order under <case>. That is particularly important in cases where the witness may be seen to be an informant or has provided information inculpating known or suspected criminals. It is well known that such witnesses may be the target of reprisals. Expressions of fear by the witness in the course of their Crime Commission testimony will be a factor militating against the release of the material.
Where it is known (and generally the transcript before the Commission will make this clear) that the witness has been compelled to give evidence over objection, there may be a greater reluctance to release the material. However, compulsion such as that is not an uncommon feature of Crime Commission evidence and it is not a determinative factor. Rather, it is another matter to be taken into account amongst the many other circumstances that might inform a proper and principled assessment of the interests of justice.
It may also be that the Judge forms the view that the evidence is so fanciful or lacking in credit that its release to the defendant or the prosecutor will not be in the interests of justice. However, a Judge called upon to make a determination under sub-s (5) will be cautious in attempting to form such opinions based on the transcript alone.
The more central to the facts and allegations to be litigated in the trial proceedings the more likely it will be that the interests of justice will require release of the transcript of evidence. Matters which are merely on the periphery of events are unlikely to overcome the potential damage that release of the material may do. That damage may come in the form of danger to the witnesses or in interfering with the processes of the Commission's work. Where the subject matter of the testimony is central to an important issue in the trial, it is more likely that a Judge will form the opinion that the release of the material to the defendant and to the prosecutor is in the interests of justice.
Another relevant factor is whether a witness who gave evidence before the Crime Commission consents to the release of their evidence. Such consent is not determinative as the Crime Commission may oppose the release of the material for reasons beyond the knowledge or care of the witness. Similarly, an objection by the witness to the release of the evidence is a relevant consideration but not a determinative one.
The factor referred to in the preceding paragraph raises a practical consideration when an application under <case> and <case> is brought. A witness whose evidence is subject to such an application has a right to be heard, at least in opposition to an order under <case>. This raises practical problems because the accused may not be aware of the identities of witnesses who gave evidence before the Crime Commission. As I suggested in argument, one possible approach is for the Judge to consider the application on a preliminary or provisional basis and, if a view is formed that the material may be released, call on submissions from the witness.
Those are the kinds of matters that might arise in any given case. Where relevant and applicable, I have applied that kind of approach and reasoning to a determination of the present application. However, it must not be assumed from anything that I have said that there is any evidence of the kind caught by the notice of motion. Such information will be made clear in the confidential annexure to this judgment. That annexure will be placed in a sealed envelope marked "not to be opened except by order of a judge of this Court or a judge of a higher Court" and kept with the file copy of this Judgment.
For the reasons set out in the confidential annexure, I make the following orders: * (1) Subject to Orders 2 to 9 below, certain evidence given on 9 April 2014 to the New South Wales Crime Commission ('the Crime Commission') by the witness referred to in these proceedings as 'Witness M' is to be made available to: * (a) Mr Stratton SC, Ms Curry and Ms Gittani, the legal representatives for the accused Farhad Qaumi in these proceedings; and * (b) The Crown Prosecutors and solicitors acting for the Crown in these proceedings * (2) The Crime Commission is to produce to the Court the following documents on or before 30 March 2016: * (a) A copy of the transcript of Witness M's evidence, in which the evidence that the Court has indicated ought not to be made available (in closed court on 16 March 2016 and in the Confidential Annexure to the Court's judgment published on 21 March 2016) is highlighted; and * (b) A document reproducing those parts of the transcript of Witness M's evidence that are not highlighted ('the redacted transcript').
* (3) The documents produced in accordance with order (2) are to be held by the Court in a sealed envelope and marked "not to be opened except by an order of a Judge of the Supreme Court of New South Wales or higher court." * (4) The evidence that is to be made available in accordance with Order (1) above is the redacted transcript.
* (5) The redacted transcript is to be made available once the Court is satisfied that the redactions accord with the Confidential Annexure and matters raised in closed court.
* (6) The redacted transcript is to be made available to the legal representatives specified in Order 1 above at the Crime Commission office at 453 - 463 Kent Street Sydney by appointment, such appointment to occur after Witness M has been sentenced for the matters to which Witness M pleaded guilty on 3 March 2016.
* (7) The redacted transcript is not to be removed from the Crime Commission's premises.
* (8) No copy, photo or image of the redacted transcript is to be made other than by officers of the Crime Commission or the Crime Commission's legal representatives.
* (9) The legal representatives specified in Order 1 above are to retain in their possession all notes they make of the content of the redacted transcript.
* (10) The Court notes that: * (a) On 24 February 2016, the Court gave the Crime Commission a certificate pursuant to subs. 45(4) of the Crime Commission Act.
* (b) Pursuant to that certificate, the Crime Commission made certain evidence available to the Court on a confidential basis on 24 February 2016 ('the evidence').
* (c) Pursuant to s. 45(5) of the Crime Commission Act, the Court is satisfied that: * (i) The applicant Farhad Qaumi is charged with offences before the Supreme Court; * (ii) The evidence is subject to a non-publication order made by the Crime Commission pursuant to s. 45(1) of the Crime Commission Act; and * (iii) The interests of justice require that the redacted transcript be made available to the legal representatives specified in Order 1 above, on the conditions set out in Orders 2 to 10 above * * * [1] R versus AC Transcript (T) 8 March 2016 at p 19.  [2] Cf Hamden versus Rumsfeld [548 US 557] (2006).
 * * * 
