

Norton versus Amsure Agencies Pty Ltd Matter No 1750/98 [1998] NSWSC 85 (6
April 1998) 
Last Updated: 21 April 1998 `

NORTON versus AMSURE AGENCIES PTY LTD` ` 1750/98` `6 April 1998` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` `JUDGMENT` 
HIS HONOUR: These were originally proceedings to extend a caveat. The plaintiff no longer seeks that order and the plaintiff does not oppose the current sale proceeding, so long as moneys out of the proceeds are held in trust pending the hearing of proceedings to have declared a trust in respect of $80,000, plus fifty percent of the profits of sale. 
The profits of sale on the current evidence are $20,000. The plaintiff says that the property the subject of the trust was sold at an undervalue of $225,000. There is not acceptable evidence of this, the valuation relied on by the plaintiff being on the basis that development approval had been obtained when at the time of sale it had not been obtained.

Accordingly, the highest that I would have been prepared to go was to require $90,000 to be retained, namely the $80,000, plus $10,000 estimated one half of the profits.

The proceedings are awkward because the plaintiff's claim to the trust has never been pleaded. At the moment the suit is just one to extend a caveat. The evidence is extremely confusing and it is confusing because the deal into which the plaintiff's late husband and the other parties entered was one which was entrepreneurial and involved money circulating.

It is true that the plaintiff contributed $80,000 by cheque, but it would also appear that that $80,000 found its way into the plaintiff's hands by being an amount that was paid into her husband's real estate firm's trust account by way of deposit under a deed, and yet was released as so-called commissions, the cheques being endorsed from the real estate agency to the plaintiff.

The plaintiff says that her late husband, as her agent, set up the deal and is entitled to be remunerated, but the whole of the evidence is so confusing and so capable of many interpretations that it is really speculative at this stage.

It may be that things will become clearer once the plaintiff has amended these proceedings or commences separate proceedings to ask for appropriate relief by way of trust, but at present there is insufficient material to enable me to make any order in favour of the plaintiff, so I decline to give the plaintiff any interim relief.

To obtain interlocutory relief the plaintiff must establish three things; (1) there is an arguable case; (2) that damages are not an adequate remedy; and that the balance of convenience or balance of justice favours interim relief, rather than not given such relief. In actual fact these three matters coalesce.

In the instant case I recognize that there is the problem under head (2) that the defendant may well be a $2 company with this its only venture, so that if these moneys are accounted for they may never see the light of day again.

However, it is for the plaintiff to show that were the facts accepted then there would be an arguable case. It seems to me that with undefined issues and with the speculative and confusing evidence that is currently before the court
I could not conclude that there is an arguable case. After proper pleadings or proper evidence it may be that I or some other judge will come to a different view, but judging the matter on the material before me, the plaintiff has not shown an arguable case.

I make orders in accordance with the consent orders for the ongoing conduct of the case which I have initialled. The matter will be listed before the
Registrar on 22 May 1998.

The plaintiff must pay the costs of the proceedings to date. The exhibits may be retained.
 * * * 
