

Regina versus Pham; Regina versus Nguyen Matter Nos 70010/97 [1998] NSWSC 1024 (15
May 1998) 
Last Updated: 5 June 1998 
REGINA versus TRUNG HIEU PHAM /97 
REGINA versus QUOC LINH NGUYEN /97 May 1998 
Hidden J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
REMARKS ON SENTENCE 
HIS HONOUR: On 9 March 1998 Trung Hieu Pham and Quoc Linh Nguyen each pleaded guilty to two charges of robbery in company and one charge of attempted robbery in company. In addition, Mr Pham was indicted upon a charge of murder, to which he pleaded not guilty but guilty of manslaughter. The Crown prosecutor accepted that plea in satisfaction of that count. After some brief evidence from the officer in charge of the investigation, the proceedings were adjourned to 16 April 1998 for further evidence and for the provision of reports in respect of both the offenders.

Facts 
All offences occurred at Cabramatta in the late afternoon of Wednesday 23
October 1996. The two offenders approached a 21 year old student, Kyaw Nanda
Win, and asked him for heroin or money. Mr Win had some money and the circumstances were such that he feared being assaulted if he did not give it to them. He took $183 from his pocket and handed it over. This gave rise to the first count of robbery in company.

Shortly thereafter they approached an 18 year old man, Freddie Hadwan, and asked him for money. He said that he had only $30 and they searched his pockets and took that amount. This was the second count of robbery in company.

The offence of attempted robbery in company and of manslaughter by Mr Pham arose from the tragic incident which then ensued. The two offenders approached
Jaturong Kanjanumporn, a 23 year old married man and the father of an infant son. They demanded his money and his heroin, but he said that he had nothing to give them. They began to search him and a fight broke out. Mr Kanjanumporn produced a knife and lunged at Pham, but missed him. Pham seized the knife and stabbed Mr Kanjanumporn in the chest. At the same time, Mr Nguyen was hitting
Mr Kanjanumporn around the back of his head. The struggle continued and Mr
Kanjanumporn recovered the knife. However, he collapsed while still holding it. By the time police and ambulance officers arrived at the scene he had died.

Both men were originally charged with murder. The Crown prosecutor accepted Mr
Pham's plea of guilty to manslaughter on the basis that the intent to kill or to inflict grievous bodily harm could not be established. Accordingly, he stands for sentence for manslaughter by an unlawful and dangerous act. The
Crown prosecutor also recognised that the evidence did not establish Mr
Nguyen's complicity in the killing, so that he was guilty neither of murder nor manslaughter.

When interviewed by police about this last incident, Mr Pham claimed that he had bought some powder from the deceased which he understood to be heroin, only to find that it was not heroin (or, at least, heroin adulterated to an unacceptable extent by another substance). He said that he and Mr Nguyen approached the deceased only to recover the money he had paid for the drug, not to rob him of any money or drug he might have had. Counsel for Pham, Mr
Scragg, submitted that I should accept this account for the purpose of sentence.

I am prepared to put aside the question whether that account amounts to a claim of right, so as to be inconsistent with the plea of guilty to attempted robbery in company. Nevertheless, I do not accept it. It is true that there is some evidence suggesting that the deceased may have been at least a user of heroin, even though a statement by his wife discloses that she had no knowledge of it. However, in the light of his pleas of guilty, much of Mr
Pham's account to the police in relation to all the offences must be rejected.
In addition, the proposition that the two offenders approached the deceased and demanded his money and his heroin is derived from the statement of an apparently reliable eye witness, the victim of the first offence, Mr Win.

In any event, I do not consider this issue to be of significance for present purposes. Even if Mr Pham's account were accepted, it has little bearing on the criminality of the robbery, and absolutely none in respect of the manslaughter. Neither offence is the less serious because the victim might himself have been involved in nefarious dealings. The criminality of the manslaughter must be assessed in the light of the fact that it was committed in the heat of the moment in circumstances where it was the victim who first produced the knife and used it aggressively.

The two offences of robbery in company and the attempted robbery in company, viewed in isolation from its tragic consequences, are by no means the most serious offences of their class. I accept that Mr Nguyen hit the deceased not for the purpose of robbery, but only in the course of the struggle which occurred after production of the knife.

In the course of searching Mr Pham's home, police found a marijuana plant growing in a tub. An offence of cultivating a prohibited plant has been placed on a Form 2 and I have been asked to take it into account when sentencing him.

Victim Impact Statements 
I received in evidence a report by Dr John Strum, psychiatrist, of his consultation with the deceased's widow, Ms Thankamon Kanjanumporn, and a further report by Ms Anita Duffy, psychologist, in respect of his mother, Ms
Suwaphee Kanjanumporn. The reports trace the background of those two unfortunate women, including their relationship with the deceased, and set out the serious and enduring effects upon them of the violent death of their loved one. The court extends its deepest sympathy to both of them and hopes that the opportunity to express their feelings has, in some way, assisted them to come to terms with their tragic loss.

However, I cannot take those reports into account for the purpose of sentencing Mr Pham, unless I consider it appropriate to do so: <case> of the [Criminal Procedure Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/) (as
Amended). For the reasons expressed by Hunt CJ at CL in his remarks on sentence in Reg versus Previtera (unreported, 27 May 1997) at pp 16-19, and reiterated by his Honour in Reg versus Bollen (CCA, unreported, 25 March 1998) at p 30, I do not consider it appropriate. I do not see how the assessment of the criminality of a killing could ever be influenced by whether there are loved ones of the deceased who are bereaved by his or her death and, if so, whether they have the will and the capacity to articulate their feelings to health professionals or to the sentencing court.

Subjective Cases 
Mr Pham was 22 years old at the time of the offences and he is now aged 24. He has a minor criminal record which I consider of no significance for present purposes. A pre-sentence report discloses that he was born in Vietnam and endured a most disturbed childhood in that country. He escaped in 1988 and, after spending a year in a Malaysian refugee camp, came to this country in the following year, aged 15. His mother and other members of his family had come here independently, and he lived initially with her and later with an uncle.

In 1992 he returned to Vietnam, where he married and had a son. In the following year he came back to Australia, intending that his wife and son should join him, but she became attached to another man and remained in
Vietnam. In 1995 he formed a defacto relationship with another young woman which endured for two years, but which came to an end early this year while he was in custody.

Given his disturbed background, it is not surprising that he has no more than primary education and has had very little employment in this country. It is equally unsurprising that he began to associate with an undesirable peer group and became addicted to drugs, in particular, heroin. He has twice been himself the victim of violence, on one of those occasions having been stabbed. This is a matter which I take into account in his favour when assessing his culpability for the manslaughter.

He has been in custody since his arrest on 10 November 1996. He enjoys the ongoing support of family members, and it seems that he has begun to take steps towards his rehabilitation whilst in prison. The author of the pre- sentence report, Mr Ambrose Dinh, concludes: "... he has begun to reassess his situation and to look for reasons underlying his criminal behaviour. He has developed a positive plan for his future to participate in English skills training and trade skills training whilst in gaol and to adopt a positive lifestyle. He claimed he is now more mature and would do his best in the future to prevent reoffending." 
I have regard to all this subjective material in determining the appropriate sentence for Mr Pham and, in the interests of fostering his rehabilitation, I propose to give him the benefit of an extended additional term.

Mr Nguyen was 16 years old at the time of the offences and is now aged 17. He also has a minor Children's Court record to which I attach no significance. He too was born in Vietnam and, as a child, suffered the disruption of his father's flight from that country in the early 1980's. His father came to
Australia in 1985 after residing for three years in refugee camps in Thailand, but it was not until 1990 that he was able to bring the family to join him in this country.

I have been very much assisted by the thorough and insightful report of Mr Cu
Nguyen of the Department of Juvenile Justice, which outlines the offender's relationship with his family, his education and his lifestyle in this country.
Although his background was not nearly as disturbed as that of Mr Pham, it is not surprising that he also had difficulties adjusting to life in a country so culturally different from that of his family. His parents were largely unable to control his movements outside the home, he was expelled from school halfway through year nine, he became involved with people described in the report as "similarly vulnerable peers", and became addicted to heroin.

He was in custody from his arrest on 24 October 1996 until his initial appearance in this court on 9 March 1998, when I granted him bail: a period of a little over 16 months. Whilst in custody he undertook general studies and various vocational courses, as well as drug and alcohol counselling, earning favourable reports of his progress. Since his release he has not re- established contact with the young people with whom he was associating prior to his arrest, and the Department has assisted him in his efforts to further his general education and acquire work skills.

The report concludes: "Linh is aware of the serious nature of the offences and indicated remorse for his actions and the impact that these offences have had on his life and his family.

Linh presents as a quiet individual and appears as being (a) somewhat confused young man who has experienced major disruptions in his life. The family experienced physical separation, relocation and adjustment to a new environment with a very different lifestyle. Linh comes from a non-English speaking background with little education in his own country and appears to have experienced difficulties in adjusting into the Australian educational system. These factors appear to have negatively impacted on his behaviour and life in Australia.

Linh appears to be in need of support and guidance in finding some direction in relation to his future education, training and employment ...

Linh appears to have successfully remained drug free and has reportedly refrained from seeing his former similarly vulnerable peers.

Linh has the full support of his parents who are willing and prepared to assist him to become a positive member of the general community." 
Sentence 
In all the circumstances, I consider that the manslaughter to which Mr Pham has pleaded guilty falls well towards the lower range of culpability for that crime. I propose to pass sentences in respect of the robbery offences which are concurrent amongst themselves and are also concurrent with the sentence for the manslaughter. In arriving at the effective sentence I have regard to the totality of the criminality embraced by all offences, but I also recognise the close link in time and circumstances between the robbery offences and the homicide.

I took the unusual course of granting bail to Mr Nguyen on 9 March having been supplied by his counsel, Mr Zahra, with Judicial Commission statistics of penalties imposed by Children's Courts for the offence of robbery in company.
From those figures it appears that, if he had been dealt with summarily, it is unlikely that Mr Nguyen would have been subject to a control order longer than the period he had spent in custody. The Crown prosecutor, fairly and responsibly, did not wish to be heard to the contrary and, in the course of final submissions on 16 April, he did not oppose a non-custodial order.

Trung Hieu PHAM, on the charge of manslaughter and taking into account the matter on the Form 2, you are sentenced to penal servitude for 8 years comprising a minimum term of 5 years to commence on 10 November 1996 and to expire on 9 November 2001, and an additional term of 3 years. On each of the offences of robbery in company and attempted robbery in company, you are sentenced to a fixed term of penal servitude for 3 years, also to commence on November 1996. You will be eligible for release on parole on 10 November .

Quoc Linh NGUYEN, in respect of each charge to which you have pleaded guilty, I defer passing sentence upon your entering into a recognisance, without surety, in the sum of $1000, to be of good behaviour for a period of 2 years from this date. It is a condition of that recognisance that you submit to the supervision and guidance of the Department of Juvenile Justice for as much of that period as the officer dealing with you considers appropriate.
 * * * 
