

Regina versus Sean Christopher Skinner [1998] NSWSC 1051 (10 December 1998) 
REGINA versus SEAN CHRISTOPHER SKINNER /96 
TUESDAY 30 JULY 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, SULLY J, IRELAND J 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: I will ask Sully J to give the first judgment.

SULLY J: On Monday 11 December 1995 Sean Christopher Skinner, to whom I shall refer as the applicant, stood for sentence before Maguire DCJ in the District Court at Gosford. His Honour imposed upon the applicant a sentence of imprisonment, to the details of which it will be necessary to return presently.

The applicant now appears in person seeking leave to appeal against what he asserts is the appellable severity of the sentence thus imposed upon him.
Before coming in detail to what occurred on 11 December 1995 it is relevant to put into a proper focus the antecedent history of the applicant.

On 4 November 1992 the applicant stood for sentence before Maguire DCJ, once again in the District Court at Gosford. He so stood, having adhered to a plea of guilty earlier entered before a magistrate to a charge of armed robbery.
The material facts concerning that offence can be shortly stated as follows.

On the morning of 14 July 1992 the applicant, having earlier decided that he would rob a chemist shop at Asquith, got a large kitchen knife which he wrapped in a tea towel and placed in a shopping bag. He travelled to Asquith by train from his home, and waited in the vicinity of the particular shop until there were no customers in it. He then entered the shop and walked to the counter, where he confronted the sales assistant. He produced the kitchen knife, pointed it at the assistant in a threatening manner, and told her to give him money if she did not want to be hurt. She, apparently, was somewhat disconcerted by this approach, and called out to the owner of the store, who was working at the rear of the premises.

The owner came to the counter, and the applicant made, in effect, the same demand and the same threat to her. The owner then told the sales assistant to do as the applicant demanded, and the assistant in her turn placed some $600 in banknotes into the applicant's bag.

The applicant then decamped from the store and made his way to his de facto wife's mother's home which was some 500 metres distant from the store. He remained there until evening, and then returned to his own home at Berowra.

The applicant was apparently apprehensive that he may have been identified, and on his way to his own home at Berowra he dumped the bag containing the money and the knife, as well as the clothing he had been wearing. He was arrested the following day at his home; was later interviewed by police; and readily admitted the offence. He gave as an explanation for his actions that he had needed the money to enable himself to set up house with his then de facto wife and their children. None of the $600 was recovered.

At the conclusion of the proceedings on sentence, his Honour asked the applicant whether he, the applicant, understood what was involved in the giving of a bond; his Honour anticipating that he would be asked by the then legal representative of the applicant in fact to give the applicant a bond rather than to send him into some form of full time custody.

Having been told by the applicant that he did not really understand what was involved in the giving of a bond, his Honour addressed the applicant in the following terms: "Well, if you were to be given a bond, it would mean that you would undertake to behave yourself. It would further mean that if you breach that undertaking you will come back before me and I put you into some gaol for approximately two years. Now why should I give you such a bond? Why should I give you such a chance?" 
The applicant responded as follows: "After experiencing gaol, sir, well, I have no intention at all of breaking any laws. I think you know if I am going to prove myself it is - I can't prove myself inside a gaol." 
His Honour responded: "All right. Well, I am going to give you that chance, Mr Skinner, but don't come back." 
To which the applicant responded: "I won't, sir".

Thereupon his Honour gave the applicant a bond.

Put simply and sufficiently for present purposes, the bond required the applicant to be of good behaviour, that is to say, not to break the law in any way great or small, for a period of three years extending from 4 November 1992 to and including 3 November 1995.

It was, as well, a condition of the bond that the applicant pay in compensation to the owner of the chemist shop, which he had robbed, the sum of $600, and a period of some months was allowed for that purpose.

On 6 January 1993 the applicant appeared at the Hornsby Local Court. He was there dealt with in respect of four matters; the first of them was a charge of assault and in respect of that matter he received, again, a recognisance to be of good behaviour, this time for a period of two years.

On charges of assault police, resist arrest and cross railway lines he was fined, in each case, a comparatively small amount.

On 7 July 1994 the applicant again appeared in the Hornsby Local Court This time he was charged, again, with assault. He was fined $800 and an amount of
Court costs.

When the applicant came once again to stand for sentence before Maguire DCJ on December 1995, he had pleaded guilty to a charge of having used an offensive weapon to prevent lawful apprehension. He had asked his Honour to take into account as well, and on a schedule, as by law provided, three further offences.

The first of the three further offences involved an offence of malicious damage committed on 16 July 1995. The short facts given to the Court in relation to that matter were as follows: "About 12.30 a.m. the offender became involved in an argument with security staff from the Union Hotel. He walked to Donnison Street and threw a bottle at a window of the hotel causing it to break." 
The second of those three scheduled matters involved a charge of having possession of a prohibited drug, also on 16 July 1995. The short facts given to Maguire DCJ in respect of that matter were as follows: "As a result of being arrested for the malicious damage offence, the defendant was searched by police. A quantity of cannabis leaf was located in his right hip pocket during the search." 
The third of the three matters on the schedule involved a quite serious assault by the applicant upon his de facto wife Michelle Marley, that offence having occurred on 13 August 1995. The short facts put before the sentencing
Judge in that regard were as follows: "The defendant became involved in a domestic dispute with his de facto
Michelle Marley. This incident became heated, resulting in the defendant punching the victim in the head several times. He then lifted her from a sitting position by the legs and forced her body onto the floor in a spear- tackle type motion." 
As to the charge of having used an offensive weapon to prevent lawful apprehension, the relevant facts may be shortly stated as follows.

Following upon the assault last mentioned, the police were summoned to the premises shared by the applicant and his de facto wife Michelle Marley. The police went to the premises, entered them and located the applicant hiding in a cupboard in the main bedroom. The police asked him to leave the cupboard and he refused. The police spoke to him further, informing him that he was under arrest for the assault, about which I have earlier spoken.

The applicant became aggressive and kicked the door of the cupboard, and stood up clutching in his hand an eight centimetre knife with a serrated blade. When called upon to surrender the weapon he refused, stating that he was not going to any police station to be charged, that if arrested and taken to the police station he would "have to sit around for five hours", something which he was not disposed to do, having just started a new job and being determined to go back to work on the following day.

Again the police remonstrated with the applicant urging him to put the knife down, and he responded by saying "If you lunge at me you will know all about it." Further negotiations, if I may so describe them, took place between the relevant police officers and the applicant, and in the end the applicant did give up the knife without any untoward incident. He was arrested, conveyed to the police station and charged; and in due course, and as earlier noted, he pleaded guilty to the offence.

That was the background against which Maguire DCJ came to deal with the applicant on 11 December 1995.

His Honour dealt with the applicant in the following fashion: in relation to the matters to which the applicant had pleaded before his Honour, his Honour sentenced the applicant to penal servitude for a period of nine months to commence on 11 December 1996 and to expire on 10 September 1997, that sentence being imposed as a minimum term; and an additional term of fifteen months to commence on 11 September 1997 and to expire on 10 December 1998.

In relation to the callup of the applicant for breach of the recognisance which his Honour had earlier granted, his Honour fixed a term of 12 months' penal servitude to commence on 11 December 1995 and to expire on 10 December .

These are the sentences which are the subject of the present application.

Because the applicant appears in person and without any legal representation or assistance, it is, I think, important to make at once the point that the proper right of this Court to interfere, if at all, with the sentences imposed by Maguire DCJ depends upon it being demonstrated by the applicant that
Maguire DCJ erred in some way in law in the way in which he framed the sentences that he imposed.

Two basic questions might be thought to arise in that respect.

The first is whether his Honour sufficiently took into account what the law terms the principle of totality, that is to say, the notion of a fairly assessed overall criminality expressing the entirety, or the totality, of the individual offences with which the primary Judge is being called upon to deal.

I have considered carefully the background as I have earlier outlined it. I have considered carefully the remarks on sentence of Maguire DCJ. I am unable to see that there is any basis upon which it might be said reasonably that his
Honour erred in point of law in respect of the principle of totality, which undoubtedly was one of the important principles that he was required to take into account in dealing with the present matter.

The second question which might be thought to arise, derived from the fact that his Honour, as will be seen from the terms of the sentences as I have earlier set them out, made the sentences cumulative rather than concurrent.

In my opinion, having regard to the applicant's history as I have earlier outlined it, his Honour was entirely justified in adopting that approach.

This morning the applicant has put before this Court a number of matters which fall within that category of material conventionally described as subjective features or subjective factors. For my own part, I do not disparage them. I am sure there is a question of hardship occasioned to the applicant's family by his present incarceration. Nor do I simply, as it were, brush aside the apparent attempts at rehabilitation which the applicant has been making during his present custody, those attempts being vouched by the material which the applicant handed to us this morning and which we have read and considered.

There is, however, and in my opinion, no getting away from the fact that the bond originally given by Maguire DCJ to the applicant was, if I may respectfully say so, a compassionate and lenient penalty. It gave the applicant the benefit of every relevant doubt. It gave the applicant a clear- cut, plainly explained opportunity to reform and to remain out of further trouble. It would be difficult to imagine an explanation more simple, more clear, more complete than that given by Maguire DCJ to the applicant in connection with the nature of the obligations attending a bond of the kind that his Honour was ultimately persuaded to make available to the applicant; and yet, as the history shows, the applicant breached the bond not once but on a number of occasions.

He breached it both in respect of the obligations which it imposed upon him not to break the law during the period of the bond, and in his failure to pay compensation in accordance with the term in that behalf which was a condition of the bond.

It is one thing to say, as for myself I think it can fairly be said, that one feels instinctively a measure of sympathy for the present personal circumstances of the applicant. Tt is entirely another thing to say that the
Court, activated by nothing more than those feelings of sympathy, will interfere with a sentence which, so far as I can see, is well grounded both in law and in fact.

In deference to the fact that the applicant had to appear for himself in an unfamiliar environment and without the assistance of legal representation, I would grant the application for leave to appeal but I would dismiss the substantive appeal.

GLEESON CJ: I agree.

IRELAND J: I also agree.

GLEESON CJ: The orders of the court will be as proposed by Sully J.
 * * * 
