

The Honourable Justice Vince Bruce versus The Honourable Terence Cole and Ors
Matter No Ca 40337/98 [1998] NSWSC 260 (12 June 1998) 
Last Updated: 9 September 1998 
THE HONOURABLE JUSTICE VINCE BRUCE v THE HONOURABLE TERENCE COLE & ORS 
CA 40337/98 June 1998 
Spigelman CJ, Mason P, Priestley JA, Sheller JA, Powell JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
SPIGELMAN CJ: The Honourable Justice Vince Bruce, the Plaintiff in these proceedings, is a judge of this Court. The first three named defendants constituted a Conduct Division of the Judicial Commission of New South Wales, appointed to examine certain complaints made to the Judicial Commission concerning the conduct of the Plaintiff. The Judicial Commission is also a Defendant. The Conduct Division and the Commission have not taken a substantive part in these proceedings. The contradictor has been the Attorney General for New South Wales. 
Subsequent to the presentation of the Report of the Conduct Division, which is the subject of these proceedings, I assumed Office as Chief Justice of New
South Wales and, accordingly, became President of the Judicial Commission. No objection was made to my participation in these proceedings. Further, as indicated at the hearing of an interlocutory application in these proceedings on 26 May 1998, all of the judges of the Court have varying degrees of association with the Plaintiff. The Court was constituted by the five most senior judges available at the time of the hearing. No objection was taken to the participation of any member of the Court.

At the start it must be emphasised that these proceedings are not in the nature of an appeal. Nor do they call for a review by the Court of the factual material before the Conduct Division. The Court is not called upon to decide whether the complaints concerning Justice Bruce were substantiated. Nor is it for this Court to decide whether the matter considered by the Conduct Division could justify Parliamentary consideration of the removal of Justice Bruce.
This case is restricted to two issues of law.

These proceedings involve legislation of the highest constitutional significance for the rule of law in New South Wales. The independence of the judiciary is, to a very substantial degree, dependent upon the maintenance of a system in which the removal of a judicial officer from office is an absolutely extraordinary occurrence. For a period of almost three hundred years, from the passage of the Act of Settlement 1700, it has been accepted that judicial officers cannot be removed except by exceptional measures involving action by both the Executive and the Legislature.
 [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s53.html) of the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/)
Act 1902 , now provides: "53(1) No holder of a judicial office can be removed from the office, except as provided by this Part.

The holder of a judicial office can be removed from the office by the
Governor, on an address from both Houses of Parliament in the same session, seeking removal on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity.

Legislation may lay down additional procedures and requirements to be complied with before a judicial officer may be removed from office." 
Section 53 was entrenched in 1995. That means that it can only be changed by referendum. Section 53, as so entrenched, reflects the central significance of judicial independence in our system of government.

Upon the adoption of the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/)
Act 1992 , s4 of the Judicial Officers Act, which was of similar effect, was repealed. That Act did not otherwise operate as an implied repeal of any part of the Judicial Officers Act. Rather, the earlier Act constituted "additional procedures and requirements to be complied with", within the meaning of [s53(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s53.html) of the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/)
Act. (See s41(2) of the Judicial Officers Act) 
Section 41 of the Judicial Officers Act, which I will set out fully below, provides that a judicial officer may not be removed from office unless the
Conduct Division has presented a Report in which the Division expresses an opinion that the matter referred to in the Report could justify Parliamentary consideration of the removal of the judicial officer from office. This requirement introduces a restraint on removal from officer over and above the restraints in existence at the time of the passage of the Judicial Officers
Act. It reinforces the principle of judicial independence.

Although the New South Wales [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) does not embody a formal separation of powers, there is a significant restraint upon the ability of the Parliament of New South Wales to impinge on the independence of the judiciary. This restraint derives from The
Commonwealth [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/).

In Kable versus Director of Public Prosecutions  <case>; [(1996) 189 CLR 51], the High Court enunciated an incompatibility doctrine, directed to the matter in issue in that case, namely: Was the exercise of a specific non-judicial power compatible with the exercise by the State Court of the judicial power of the Commonwealth? The reasoning of the Court involved principles of broader application.

As McHugh J said: "...it is a necessary implication of the Constitution's plan of an
Australian judicial system with State Courts invested with federal jurisdiction, that no government can act in a way that might undermine public confidence in the impartial administration of the judicial function of State
Courts". (118) 
His Honour emphasised the centrality of independence of the judiciary and concluded: "In the case of State Courts, this means they must be independent and appear to be independent of their own State's legislature and executive government as well as the federal legislature and government." (106) 
Justice Gaudron's reasoning was to similar effect: "...there is nothing anywhere in the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) to suggest that it permits of different grades or qualities of justice, depending on whether judicial power is exercised by State Courts or Federal Courts created by the Parliament." (103) 
The reasoning in Kable, in my opinion, indicates that the legislative power of the State may not be used to fundamentally alter the independence of a
Supreme Court judge, or the integrity of the State judicial system. No submission has been made that any part of the [Judicial Officers Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/joa1986155/) or the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/)
Act 1902 , in their present form, has any such effect.

The operation of the statutory scheme can be summarised as follows: 
A complaint was made to the Judicial Commission concerning the "ability or behaviour" of Justice Bruce. (s15(1)) 
In December 1997, the members of the Judicial Commission of New South
Wales appointed a panel of three persons to constitute the "Conduct Division" for purposes of exercising the functions of a Division in relation to a complaint. (s22) 
The Conduct Division was constituted by two judicial officers, The
Honourable Terence Roderick Hudson Cole QC RFD, and The Honourable Justice
David Henry Lloyd and, as is permitted, one retired judicial officer, The
Honourable Dennis Leslie Mahoney AO QC. (s22(2)) 
The functions of the Conduct Division were then "to examine and to deal with complaints referred to it by the Commission". (s14) 
The Conduct Division had then to conduct an examination of the complaint.
) It decided to conduct a hearing. (s24(2)) 
The Commission had power to classify a complaint as "serious" in the following circumstances: "If the grounds of the complaint, if substantiated, could, in its opinion, justify parliamentary consideration of the removal of the judicial officer complained about from office." (s30(1)) 
After the complaint had been referred to it, the Conduct Division had power to reclassify a complaint. (s30(3)).

In the course of dealing with a complaint, the Conduct Division had power to treat it as extending to other matters, including matters arising in the course of dealing with the initial complaint (s31(1)) and matters "which might constitute grounds for a complaint". (s31(2)).

In a Report dated 14 April 1998, the Conduct Division decided to extend the original complaint to 27 additional matters. It also decided to reclassify the original complaint, as so extended, together with a further complaint that had been referred to it, as "serious" in the sense identified above.

Pursuant to s30(4), the Conduct Division furnished a Report to the
Commission setting out its reasons for reclassifying the complaint. This decision to reclassify the complaint as "serious" has not been challenged.

A document entitled "Reasons of the Honourable D.L. Mahoney AO QC Re: The
Honourable Justice Bruce" is dated 14 May 1998 ("Mr Mahoney's Reasons").

On 15 May the Conduct Division completed a report entitled: "Report of the Conduct Division to the Governor Regarding Complaints against The
Honourable Justice Vince Bruce" ("The Report"). (s29) 
The validity of the Report has been challenged on two alternative grounds: 
Contrary to the requirements of the Act, the expression of opinion by the
Division was not unanimous.

The Report is liable to be set aside on a number of administrative law grounds and should be set aside.

The Construction Argument 
The factual foundation for the first submission is made out: the Report was not a unanimous one. The Minutes of the Meeting of the Conduct Division of 13
May 1998 and 14 May 1998 were tendered in evidence. They make it plain that Mr
Mahoney, before signing the Report, did not resile from the opinion he expressed in his Reasons. He, and the other members took the view that a majority report was "the Report of the Division" by reason of the provision to which I will refer below.

Accordingly, the "opinion" of the Division referred to in ss28, 29(2) and 41 of the Act, which sections are set out below, was not unanimous. The first submission of the Plaintiff is that the "opinion" referred to in each of these sections must be unanimous.

It will be necessary to refer to a number of sections of the Act. The key sections are as follows: "13(1) There shall be a Conduct Division of the Commission.

The Conduct Division shall have and may exercise the functions conferred or imposed on it by or under this or any other Act.

The functions of the Conduct Division may be exercised by 3 persons in accordance with Part 6, and not otherwise.

Schedule 3 has effect with respect to the procedure of the Conduct
Division.
 ..................
 (1) Any person may complain to the Commission about a matter that concerns or may concern the ability or behaviour of a judicial officer.

The Commission shall not deal with a complaint (otherwise than to summarily dismiss it under section 20) unless it appears to the Commission that: the matter, if substantiated, could justify parliamentary consideration of the removal of the judicial officer from office; or although the matter, if substantiated, might not justify parliamentary consideration of the removal of the judicial officer from office, the matter warrants further examination on the ground that the matter may affect or may have affected the performance of judicial or official duties by the officer.

The Commission shall not deal with a complaint (otherwise than to summarily dismiss it under section 20) about: a matter arising before the appointment of the judicial officer to the judicial office then held; or a matter arising before the commencement of this Act, unless it appears to the Commission that the matter, if substantiated, could justify parliamentary consideration of the removal of the officer from office.

A complaint may be made in relation to a judicial officer's competence in performing judicial or office duties, so long as the Commission is satisfied as to the matters mentioned in subsection (2)(a) or (b).

A complaint may be made in relation to a matter, and be dealt with, even though the matter is already or has been the subject of investigation or other action by the Commission or Conduct Division or by any other body or person.

Without limiting the foregoing, a complaint may be made in relation to a matter, and be dealt with, even thought he matter constitutes or may constitute a criminal offence (whether or not dealt with, or being dealt with, by a court).

The Commission or Conduct Division may adjourn consideration of any matter if it is being dealt with by a court or for any other appropriate reason.
 ........................
 The Conduct Division shall dismiss a complaint to the extent that the
Division is of the opinion that: the complaint should be dismissed on any of the grounds on which the
Commission may summarily dismiss complaints; or the complaint has not been substantiated.
 If the Conduct Division decides that a minor complaint is wholly or partly substantiated, it shall either so inform the judicial officer complained about or decide that no action need be taken.
 If the Conduct Division decides that a serious complaint is wholly or partly substantiated, it may form an opinion that the matter could justify parliamentary consideration of the removal of the judicial officer complained about from office.
 (1) The Conduct Division shall, in relation to a serious complaint, present to the Governor a Report setting out the Division's conclusions.

If the Conduct Division decides that a serious complaint is wholly or partly substantiated and forms an opinion that the matter could justify parliamentary consideration of the removal of the judicial officer from office, the Report shall set out: the Division's findings of fact; and that opinion.
 (1) If: a complaint is made about a judicial officer or a Report is made by the
Conduct Division setting out its opinion that a matter could justify parliamentary consideration of the removal of a judicial officer from office; or a judicial officer is: charged in New South Wales with an offence that is punishable by imprisonment for 12 months or upwards or charged elsewhere than in New South
Wales with an offence that if committed in New South Wales would be an offence so punishable; or convicted in New South Wales or elsewhere of such an offence, the appropriate authority may suspend the officer.

The appropriate authority may lift the suspension at any time.
 * * * * ......................
 (1) A judicial officer may not be removed from office in the absence of a
Report of the Conduct Division to the Governor under this Act that sets out the Division's opinion that the matters referred to in the Report could justify parliamentary consideration of the removal of the judicial officer on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity.

The provisions of this section are additional to those of [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s53.html) of the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/)
Act 1902." 
There is a tension between subss(3) and (4) of s13. Sub-section 13(3) emphasises, by the addition of the words "and not otherwise", that the functions of a Conduct Division are to be exercised by three persons. However, subs(4) gives effect to Schedule 3 of the Act, which, in turn, provides in cl4: "4 A decision supported by a majority of the votes cast at a meeting of the
Conduct Division shall be the decision of the Division".

The tension should be resolved in favour of this express provision (See
Project Blue Sky Inc versus Australian Broadcasting Authority (1998) HCA par70).

The first submission of the Plaintiff, as originally put, requires the conclusion that the word "decision" in cl4 is to be understood in a strict sense, so that majority voting applies only to such functions of the Division as are identified by use of the word "decision". There are a number of sections in which the word "decides" appears. This submission would have the consequence that it is only in these particular respects that a majority decision is open to be made. The particular provisions are as follows: 
A decision to hold a hearing pursuant to s24(2).

A decision that a complaint is "wholly or partially substantiated" under s27, s28 or s29(2).

A decision to refer a complaint to another person under s35(1).

As the Lord Chancellor, Lord Halsbury said in Ex Parte County Council of Kent and Council of the Borough of Dover 1891 1QB 725 @ 728-9, "decision" is a popular word, not a technical or legal one. In the judicial context there under consideration, the word meant the expression of the opinion of the Court about how a matter is to be decided.

In the [Judicial Officers
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/joa1986155/), the "opinion" which it is said must be unanimous, is that mentioned in [s28](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/joa1986155/s28.html), [29](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/joa1986155/s29.html)(2) and [41](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/joa1986155/s41.html).
The significance of the "opinion" referred to in these sections cannot be overstated. It is one of only three steps for the removal of a judge: 
A report of the Conduct Division setting out the "opinion that the matter referred to in the report could justify parliamentary consideration of the removal of the judicial officer".
[(s41](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/joa1986155/s41.html) [Judicial Officers
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/joa1986155/)) 
An address from both Houses of Parliament.
[(s53(2)(d))](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s53.html) of the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/)
Act) 
Removal by the Governor on the advice of the Executive Council.
[(s53](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s53.html) of the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/)
Act, [ss3(6)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/joa1986155/s3.html) and s[41](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/joa1986155/s41.html) of the [Judicial Officers
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/joa1986155/)) 
The consequences of the removal of a judge are of such significance that it can be assumed that Parliament did not intend that the threshold would be easy of attainment. This is the most powerful argument in favour of the unanimity requirement for which the plaintiff contends.

Nevertheless the provision for a majority "decision" in cl4 of Schedule 3 is clear. The textual indications all suggest that the word "decision" is intended to encompass all forms of deliberative process of the Conduct
Division for which the Act provides, including the formation of an "opinion".

First, in s28 and s29(2) the reference to a "decision" (which on the plaintiff's submission may be by majority) and the formation of an "opinion" (which on his submission must be unanimous) occur in the same sentence. There is no separation between the two, nor any language that indicates a different decision-making process is involved. It is, in my view, most unlikely that the legislature intended any such transformation sub silentio.

Furthermore, there is another reference to the formation of an "opinion" by the Conduct Division found in s34 which is in the following terms: "34(1) If the Conduct Division is of the opinion that a judicial officer about whom a serious complaint has been made may be physically or mentally unfit to exercise efficiently the functions of a judicial office, the Division may request the officer to undergo such a medical examination as the Division specifies." 
With respect to this preliminary step of requiring a medical examination, the plaintiff's submission requires that the opinion of the Division must be unanimous as to the question whether or not the Judicial Officer "may be physically or mentally unfit to exercise efficiently the functions of a judicial office". Where the consequence of this opinion is a requirement for a medical examination, it is doubtful that the legislature required unanimity.

Of particular significance is s26 which is set out above and which contains a reference to an "opinion". It indicates that the Conduct Division shall dismiss a complaint if it forms one or other of the opinions set out in (a) or . This includes an "opinion" that the complaint has not been substantiated.

The Plaintiff's submission, as first advanced, had the effect that the Conduct
Division cannot dismiss a complaint on the grounds that "the complaint has not been substantiated" unless it is unanimous. However, it may by majority "decide" that a serious complaint is wholly or partially substantiated, for the purposes of ss27, 28 or 29. The Plaintiff's original submission would result in an absurd situation in a case where one member of the Division believes a complaint to be substantiated. This voice is enough to prevent the
Division dismissing the complaint under s26(6). At the same time, there cannot, on the above assumption, be a majority "decision" that the complaint is substantiated under s27 or s29. The complaint would remain in limbo. For these reasons, no doubt, Mr Conti QC, who appeared for the Plaintiff, conceded that "opinion" in s26 could be a majority decision.

It is also necessary to note that the submissions made in this regard could have similar consequences for the operation of the Judicial Commission itself.
Schedule 2 of the Act contains a set of procedures for the conduct of the
Commission, parallel to those in Schedule 3 for the Conduct Division. Clause 5 of Schedule 2 provides that "a decision" of a majority at a meeting of the
Commission, is the decision of the Commission.

There is direct reference to the formation of a "opinion by the Commission" in both s20 and s30.

Section 20 refers to summary dismissal of complaints: "20(1) The Commission shall summarily dismiss the complaint if it is of the opinion that: the complaint is one that it is required not to deal with; the complaint is frivolous, vexatious or not in good faith; the subject-matter of the complaint is trivial; the matter complained about occurred at too remote a time to justify further consideration; in relation to the matter complained about, there is or was available a satisfactory means of redress or of dealing with the complaint or the subject- matter of the complaint; without limiting paragraph (e), the complaint relates to the exercise of a judicial or other function that is or was subject to adequate appeal or review rights; the person complained about is no longer a judicial officer; or having regard to all the circumstances of the case, further consideration of the complaint would be or is unnecessary or unjustifiable.

In deciding whether or not to summarily dismiss a complaint, the
Commission may have regard to such matters as it thinks fit." 
Section 30 refers to the classification of complaints: "30(1) An undismissed complaint shall be classified by the Commission as serious if the grounds of the complaint, if substantiated, could, in its opinion, justify parliamentary consideration of the removal of the judicial officer complained about from office.

Any other undismissed complaint shall be classified by the Commission as minor." 
The effect of the Plaintiff's original submissions in this case would be that the "opinion" of the Commission under either s20 and s30 must be unanimous.
Nothing in the scope and purpose of the Act suggests this conclusion. Indeed the reference in s20(1) to the formation of an "opinion", which must lead to the dismissal of a complaint, is described in s20(2) as: "In deciding whether or not to summarily dismiss a complaint ...". In this section the words "opinion" and "decision" are treated as equivalent.

Again, Mr Conti QC conceded that "opinion" in s20 could be a majority opinion.
However, he maintained the proposition that "opinion" in ss28, 29(2) and 41 had consequences of such significance, that the legislature used the word in a different sense in those sections than it did in ss20, 26 and 30. This is inherently unlikely.

In the course of his submissions on this matter Mr Conti QC invoked what is described as a "rule of statutory interpretation": expressio unius est exclusio alterius. For authors of text books on statutory interpretation it is no doubt convenient to have "rules" or "maxims" or "principles". It may be time to review the status of expressio unius on such lists. Its application is subject to authoritative warnings. (See R versus Australian Broadcasting
Tribunal ex parte 2HD <case>; [(1979-80) 144 CLR 45] @ 52; Houssein versus Under Secretary, Department of
Industrial Relations and Technology <case>; [(1982) 148 CLR 88] @ 94; Ainsworth versus Criminal Justice Commission <case>; [(1992 175 CLR 564] @ 525; Pearce and Geddes "Statutory Interpretation in
Australia 4th ed par4.22).

Contemporary practices of legislative drafting do not usually warrant an assumption that the adoption of different words for similar matters represents a deliberate intention to deal with them differently. This is at least true with popular words like "opinion" and "decision". This matter always depends on the construction of the statute as a whole in accordance with the contemporary approach to construction. (See eg Kingston versus Keprose Pty Ltd [(1987) 11 NSWLR 404] @ 421-4 per McHugh JA; substantially reiterated in Saraswati v R <case>; [(1991) 172 CLR 1] @ 21-23 per
McHugh J). The maxim expressio unius hardly ever plays a useful role in this process of statutory construction. It is almost always a means of stating a conclusion.

In the [Judicial Officers
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/joa1986155/) there is no warrant for the assumption that a word like "decision" is not intended to embrace numerous other words referring to the deliberations of the Conduct
Division such as "initiate" [(s23)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/joa1986155/s23.html); "direct" (s524(4); [24](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/joa1986155/s24.html)(5) [36](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/joa1986155/s36.html)(1)); "authorise" [(s24(7))](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/joa1986155/s24.html) "reclassify" (s30(3)(6)) "determine" (Schedule 3 cl1) and, relevantly "form an opinion" [(ss28](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/joa1986155/s28.html), [29](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/joa1986155/s29.html)(2)).

There is one aspect of the argument in favour of the unanimity construction to which I should refer. The Conduct Division took the view that the statutory report to the Governor should not contain any indication that it was a majority report.

The reasons for this view are set out in a memorandum of the Chairman of the
Conduct Division: "5 When each decision is considered at the meeting of the Division the decision supported by a majority `shall be the decision of the Division'.
 As the Division may present only one report [(s29(1))](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/joa1986155/s29.html), it should contain only the majority decision regarding each of the two matters referred to in [s28](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/joa1986155/s28.html) and each of the two matters referred to in [s29(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/joa1986155/s29.html), in each instance they being the decisions of the Division.
 Implicit in [s29](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/joa1986155/s29.html) is that the report to the Governor should set forth the reasons for the
Division's conclusions, its findings of fact and its opinion. Accordingly as each of those constitutes a decision, the report should set forth only the majority view regarding each question decided.
 Regarding whether the report should state that any decision which is not unanimous is the decision of a majority, the competing considerations are: [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/joa1986155/s29.html) contemplates that the report provided to the Governor is to be laid both houses of Parliament, and a copy given to the judicial officer concerned. In so far as Parliament may seek to take action in consequence of the report it should be provided with one finding of fact, one opinion and one expression of reasons. That is the purpose of having a Conduct Division, and of having the provision in Schedule 3, clause 4 to ensure that Parliament has before it a clear series of findings; 
It may be unfair to the Parliament, and to the judicial officer if each are not told that in relation to some decision on fact, decision whether a complaint was wholly or partially substantiated, or decision on the opinion of the Conduct Division was not a unanimous decision.

There is nothing in the [Judicial Officers
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/joa1986155/) which explicitly states that the report may not state that a decision referred to above is a majority decision. On the other hand, the import of Schedule 3, clause 4 suggests there may be only one decision in respect of any matter required to be decided and accordingly it is only that decision which should be expressed.
 In my opinion, the better view is that the report should be a report of the
Division which sets out only one decision in relation to each of the matters referred to in [ss28](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/joa1986155/s28.html) and [29](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/joa1986155/s29.html), and it should not refer to any minority view, or the fact that a particular decision is a majority decision. That flows from Schedule 3 clause 4." 
One of the functions of the Report is to inform Parliament. In my view that function is better performed if reasons for dissent, of the character prepared by Mr Mahoney in this case, are made available as part of the Report.

The statutory opinion turns on whether the matter "could" justify consideration of removal. This indicates that the process of deliberation is only beginning. The Parliament should receive as much assistance as possible in exercising its weighty task of deciding whether to address the Governor.

If I accepted that the contrary was the case, I would regard it as a significant but not necessarily determinative indication that the Act did require unanimity in the formation of the statutory opinion. I do not see anything in the text or subject matter of the Act which warrants the statement that Parliament must receive "one finding of fact, one opinion and one expression of reasons".

There is no reason why a Conduct Division, when "setting out" its "conclusions" under s29(1) or its "findings of fact" and opinion under s29(2), should be prohibited from setting out the reasons by which it reached its conclusions, including a statement of any minority position.

A Conduct Division must be constituted by three judicial officers, although one may be a retired judicial officer (s22(2)). In both s28 and s29, the relevant opinion is described as something which the Division `forms'. This involves a process of reasoning with which judges are familiar. The Minister must table the Report in Parliament (s22(3)). This is plainly intended as a step in the process of the Parliament resolving whether or not to address the
Governor under [s53](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s53.html) of the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/)
Act. (See s41(2)).

A Conduct Division is obliged to present a Report to the Governor, (s29(1)) which sets out the Division's "conclusions". The word conclusion is apt to cover any step in disposing of a matter. That Report must also set out the
Division's findings of fact, as well as the opinion of the Division of the character referred to in s29(2). There is no express reference to an obligation that the Report contain the course of reasoning which led the
Division to the formation of the relevant opinion. Obviously it is permissible to do so, as was done here.

This is part of the process of informing Parliament. That process, contrary to the views expressed by the Chairman of the Division, may permissibly extend to the presentation of a minority opinion, if any, and the reasons therefore.

Finally, on this aspect of the case, reliance was placed on the common law rule permitting public powers to be exercised by majority decision, considered by this Court in Bowen-James versus Delegate of the Director General of the
Department of Health [1992 27 NSWLR 457.] In my view
Parliament has made express provision in this regard in the Act and there is no room for the application of this rule.

In my opinion, the first submission fails.

The Findings of the Conduct Division 
The difference between the majority of the Conduct Division and the dissentient, turned on the formation of the opinion pursuant to s28 and s29(2) of the Act. All members of the Division agreed that the complaint was substantiated with respect to the capacity, but not the behaviour, of the judge. They did not, however, agree that incapacity continued after the period in January or February 1998, when the Judge received new treatment for the medical condition of depression from which all members found, his Honour suffered until that date.

It is important to emphasise that there is no finding of misbehaviour, only of incapacity. Accordingly, there can be no proper basis for the formation of an opinion that Justice Bruce could be removed because of his past conduct, notwithstanding the serious effects his failure to deliver reserved judgments had on the litigants in these cases, or on this Court, in terms of disrupting its organisation and increasing the burden on other judges. Removal could only be a permissible option if his incapacity remained extant at the time of the
Report.

The decision of the Conduct Division involved a judgment as to whether Justice
Bruce's medical condition constituted the sole, or at least the predominant, cause of his incapacity and, accordingly, whether or not the change in his medical condition which all accept did occur in January and February of 1998, meant that he was no longer incapable of performing his functions as a judicial officer.

In par65 of the Report of the Conduct Division, the submission made on behalf of Justice Bruce that he "is now cured of any disabling depressive illness" is described as having "considerable support". That support is set out in pars66-69 as follows: "66 First, when seen by Dr Gilandas, clinical psychologist, on 25 March , with whom Justice Bruce undertook lengthy quantitative psychological assessment tests, Dr Gilandas found "no evidence of major psychiatric disorder". He found Justice Bruce was "no longer clinically depressed".
 Second, Dr Dent said that: "If the Judge maintains his physical well being and continues to maintain our programmes we have got him on now with medication, counselling and otherwise and if he perhaps has acupuncture again if symptoms start to recur, he should do well, he should continue well." 
Dr Dent said there had been the expected rapid recovery from the illness of severe depression to the present stage where the recovery had plateaued so that Justice Bruce was now in a position from which he would not improve and from which he would not deteriorate, assuming he continued the recommended treatment.
 Third, Justice Bruce said that he now feels quite different from the way he felt in December 1997, and is confident of his present capacity to perform.
 Fourth, is the fact that he has delivered all but two of the judgments shown on the schedule of 19 February 1998 (Table B)." 
The Report went on to pose the following question: "70 The question remains whether the incapacity to perform the judicial function continues notwithstanding removal or alleviation of the depressive illness. There is much to support the view that it does so remain." 
The evidence on which the Conduct Division relied in this regard is as follows: "71 First, Dr Gilandas has identified an "ingrained personality attribute of procrastination". If, at a time when it is said that his cure from depression has plateaued, he remains unable to adhere to arrangements for delivery of judgments which Justice Bruce has, after consideration and discussion with the
Chief Justice, himself advanced and agreed to, that is indicative that the delay in judgment delivery contains in it a significant element of procrastination. That is particularly so when Justice Bruce appreciated that, in being given time to write judgments to be delivered in accordance with a schedule agreed with the Chief Justice, he was being given a final chance to demonstrate both organisational, decision making and judgment writing capacities all of which are a required aspect of judicial performance. Yet
Justice Bruce did not adhere to that schedule. The detail of the delay from the agreed Schedule B is set forth in Exhibit Z which we reproduce." 
It is not necessary to set out Schedule B. However, as referred to in this paragraph, delays from the Schedule varied from 3 days to 29 days. The Report goes on to describe these departures from the agreed Schedule as "significant both in number and extent".

The Report sets out, and comments on, the explanations made by or on behalf
Justice Bruce with respect to his failure to adhere to the Schedule: "72 The departures from the agreed schedule are significant both in number and extent. One case (Buckett) was advanced ahead of the scheduled delivery date. In every other instance where judgment has been delivered there has been a failure to adhere to the agreed schedule. Further, the length of delay has been significant. For example, Civic Transport was to be delivered 19 days after the schedule was agreed, but it was delayed a further 29 days. Maxwell was to be delivered 19 days after the agreed schedule but it was delayed a further 23 days. Jennings was to be delivered twelve days after the agreed schedule but it was delayed a further seventeen days. After the conclusion of the hearing on 11 May 1998 we were informed that the Chief Justice had agreed to the judgment in Williams versus Maritime Services Board being delivered on 19
May 1998.
 A number of reasons were advanced for these failures to adhere to the agreed schedule: 
First, it was said that the schedule was prepared on the mistaken premise that Justice Bruce would substantially be out of court for the early period to which the schedule related, whereas in fact he was to sit both as
Duty Judge and as a Judge of the Court of Criminal Appeal for the week commencing 2 March 1998, as he had.

As previously noted, the schedule was prepared on the basis that the Judge would sit for one week commencing 9 March, on 23 March for 2 days, and on 30
March for a further two weeks. Otherwise he would not sit until 26 May.

It was thus anticipated that by 19 March, being the date when the Conduct
Division reconvened to enquire into the failure to adhere to the schedule, and by which date thirteen judgments should have been delivered, but only two had been, the Judge would have sat for five days. In fact, he had sat for six.
That extra sitting day alone cannot explain the failure to adhere to the schedule in the first month after it was agreed.

Second, it was said that the Judge fell behind in the initial stage of the schedule due to the onset of a debilitating back complaint which occurred at the beginning of the schedule period and which significantly disabled him for five days.

The evidence was that the back injury occurred on Friday, 20 February, the second hearing date of the Conduct Division. It was said to disable the Judge on the following Saturday, Sunday and Tuesday. The Judge sat as Duty Judge on that Monday, and heard a case on the Wednesday. Although it seems the Judge did not come in to Chambers on the Thursday, that was not attributed to the back disability. Justice Bruce's evidence was: `On the morning of before the hearing here, I bent forward and hurt my back and my back hurt in my chambers. By eleven o'clock it was extremely painful and I had to go and lie down. I did that for the balance of Friday, on
Saturday and Sunday. I came in on Monday because I was the Duty Judge. I was unable to come in on Tuesday. I came in on Wednesday and heard a case which was in the list on the Monday. I should say the Wednesday I did that. On the
Thursday I don't believe I came in, and the Beveridge judgment was delivered on the Friday, because that was a day which apparently for some reason or another suited Mr Beveridge. My back was sore but not incapacitating, just inconveniently painful until after 12 March 1998.' 
Thus the back injury disabled him on two working days (February and Tuesday February) and two days of the weekend of 21-22 February.

The back injury also does not explain the failure to adhere to the schedule during the first month up to 19 March 1998.

Third, it was said the schedule was further compromised by a significant migraine attack which occurred on 12 March 1998 and disabled him for five days.

Plainly the migraine was not a factor in the failure to deliver judgments prior to 12 March, when the Conduct Division decided to reconvene. As is now known only two of the schedule twelve judgments had then been delivered.

The migraine was said to disable Justice Bruce from judgment writing on
Thursday, Friday, Saturday, Monday and Tuesday, 12, 13, 14, 16 and 17 March.
Apparently it did not disable him on Sunday 16 March, when he was able to attend, as chairman, a meeting of the Asthma Council Foundation.

It is accepted that this affected compliance with the schedule to some extent. We find it surprising that the disability lifted for a day when
Justice Bruce had another external activity, but he was not questioned regarding this matter and we accept his evidence." 
The Division concluded: "74 We have considered whether these factors, in combination, provide in themselves a satisfactory explanation for the extensive delays in delivering judgments beyond the agreed scheduled times. The Division has come to the conclusion they do not. The Division thinks that there was also operating as a significant factor what Dr Gilandas called "procrastination". Of course, the explanations advanced do not attempt to explain the failure to advise the
Chief Justice of the failure to adhere to the schedule or the reasons therefor." 
Having dealt with the first basis for its conclusion that incapacity was a continuing condition in pars71-73, the Division went on: "75 Second, it is not without significance that the arrangement made with the Chief Justice was that Justice Bruce would notify him of the delivery of the judgments contemplated by the schedule. When the schedule was not adhered to by the delivery of the first twelve judgments in accordance with it Justice
Bruce did not regard it as appropriate to inform the Chief Justice of that fact or of any reasons for it. The matter was simply ignored until the Conduct
Division reassembled when a new schedule was provided.
 Third, the Crown Solicitor wrote to Justice Bruce's solicitor on many occasions in late February and up until 17 March noting failures to adhere to the schedules and seeking an explanation. Justice Bruce's solicitors sought to obtain instructions from him but were unable to do so prior to 18 March 1998.
They could not obtain instructions because they could not contact Justice
Bruce. It is difficult to accept that a judicial officer who is capable of performing to a reasonable standard his judicial duties would not recognise the seriousness of failing to adhere to a schedule agreed with the Chief
Justice, or not promptly communicating to the Chief Justice reasons for his inability to so adhere, and for a period of some three weeks isolating himself so as to deny his solicitors the opportunity to convey explanations for the default.

Failure to confront departures from the schedule agreed with the Chief
Justice or to respond his solicitor's requests for instructions seems to us to be not dissimilar to the failure to confront the expected unpleasantness anticipated in the letters from the Judicial Commission to Justice Bruce in late 1997 which he felt unable to open.
 Fourth, Dr Dent recognised that procrastination was "an issue". We did not understand him to dissent from Dr Gilandas in that respect: rather his view was that the onset of depression may render more powerful the effect of the pre-existing character trait of procrastination. It must follow that removal or diminution of that depression would reduce the aspect of procrastination. Notwithstanding the very significant improvement in the depressive illness from which Justice Bruce suffered in December 1997, which improvement resulted from the treatment given by Dr Dent, the failure to adhere to the schedule agreed with the Chief Justice, and the failure or inability to confront and give a timely explanation for that departure is strongly indicative of the continuation of an incapacity to perform the judicial function to an agreed level which cannot be attributed to the previous severe depression.
 The Division has given earnest consideration to these competing contentions. Ultimately the Division has come to the view that as the medical condition of Justice Bruce has, with treatment, now plateaued, it cannot be said that the incapacity satisfactorily to perform the judicial function has been removed. That is so whatever may have been the cause of that incapacity prior to treatment by Dr Dent.

The Division is of the view that the indisputably demonstrated incapacity has been diminished to some extent by the relieving of the severe depression." 
The dissenting Report came to a different conclusion. Mr Mahoney referred to the medical condition in the following terms: "It is not contested that there is a long recognised condition described in this inquiry as depression. It is not contested that depression, if sufficiently severe, can impede or prevent the discharge of judicial duties.
... depression of this kind is not a mere emotional condition. It is a psychiatric condition which has been long recognised." (p3) 
Mr Mahoney went on to analyse the position under the heading: "Did the Conditions Cause What Happened? 
It is necessary to determine whether those conditions brought about what happened. The evidence does not compel a conclusion on this issue. It shows that from time to time not long after he became a Judge (July 1994), the judge accumulated a list of unfinished matters in which the delay was unacceptable, unacceptable in the absence of an acceptable excuse. The Judge's evidence was to the effect that his mental and physical condition produced an inability to cope with what was before him for determination. Mr McAlary QC for the
Judicial Commission suggested in his cross-examination and otherwise that this did not accord with the expert evidence. He suggested that the evidence of the treating psychiatrists Dr Dent was that until 1997 there was no depression or none such as would explain what happened. Dr Gilandas, a psychologist who saw the Judge, suggested that the reason for delay could range from what he delicately described as "procrastination" through personality traits to a genuine and severe depression. Initially he suggested that the failure of the
Judge to maintain the schedule for the delivery of judgments in early 1998 at a time when the depression had been alleviated showed that the first rather than the last was the cause of what happened. Mr Conti QC for Judge suggested that Dr Gilandas had misunderstood the evidence in this regard and in my opinion the doctor retreated significantly from what initially he had been inclined to think.

The views of both doctors were not elicited with absolute clarity but in the end I am satisfied that each of them was of the opinion that the conditions from which the Judge suffered did cause or substantially cause what had happened. The details which are set forth in the reasons of the other members of the Division make it unnecessary to pursue the detail of the matter further. I do not mean by this that the evidence indicates that these conditions and the conditions alone were operative in this regard. Both doctors recognised that the conditions, when they existed, could operate upon personality traits and even upon a disposition to procrastinate and that in the present case the position was not clear. However, I am satisfied that the evidence from each of them was such that it would not be proper to come to the conclusion that what the Judge said as to the cause of what happened should be rejected." (pp3-4) 
The majority and the dissentient diverged as to whether or not the Conduct
Division should form an opinion "that the matter could justify parliamentary consideration of the removal of the judicial officer from office" in accordance with s28 and s29(2). A Report containing an opinion to that effect is an essential pre-condition to the exercise of the power by the Governor to remove the officer from office following an address of both Houses of
Parliament. (See s41 of the Act). The Governor's power must be exercised only upon the advice of the Executive Council (See s3(6)) 
The reasoning of the Conduct Division in this regard is set out in par80 of its Report to the Governor: "80 It is the Division's view these substantiated complaints against Justice
Bruce could justify Parliamentary consideration of his removal from office.
The reason for that opinion is that, having taken into account pursuant to s31 the 27 additional matters together with the complaints of Commander Beveridge and Mr Bradley, there has been proved an incapacity to perform judicial duties judged by any reasonable standard. The number of instances of delay is great.
The extent of individual delays is unacceptable by any reasonable standard.
The failure to adhere to assurances of performance which Justice Bruce knew or suspected would be conveyed to litigants has been shown to result in both distress and hardship to litigants. Incapacity to perform judicial duties has been proven to have been present from, at least, early 1995 and continues." 
The crucial words are the last two: "and continues". Nothing in the reasoning of the Report suggests that the Division would have reached the statutory "opinion", if it did not believe that incapacity was continuing.

It is in this respect that Mr Mahoney dissented.

Mr Mahoney in his Reasons concluded as follows: "Parliamentary Consideration of Removal ... As I have indicated, incapacity has been substantiated up to January -
February 1998. This covers the period during which the failure of the Judge to do what he should took place. The Judge contends that after that time his condition changed and that he became capable of discharging his judicial duties. If that contention be true, then in my opinion, the matter could not justify parliamentary consideration of his removal. Prima facie the fact that a judge has been incapable of doing what he should in the past could not justify the parliament removing him from office if he is able to discharge his judicial duties. Removal is not a punishment but a protection of the public and the system of justice. I do not exclude the possibility of special cases, but his is not suggested to be such.

But the Judge's contention has been contested: it has been claimed that he is still incapable if discharging his judicial duties. It is this which, as the matter has been presented and developed, is the crux of the matter.

I shall not rehearse the factual material: it is sufficiently detailed in the reasons of the other members of the Division. I shall state my own conclusions shortly. The Judge claims that he is now capable of discharging his duties. The thrust of the evidence of the two witnesses before the
Division is to the same effect. The treating psychiatrist Dr Dent, supports his contention; the doctor stated in terms that he was able to do what he should and that, in effect his condition would not improve or deteriorate. Dr
Gilandas was confident that he showed no sign of depression.

The case to the contrary of this depends upon inferences which it is said should be drawn from the failure of the Judge to do what he said he would do in relation to the schedule of judgments that he was to deal with. The statement of the matter in the reasons of the other members of the Division relieve me of the need to detail facts. It is accepted that the Judge told the
Chief Justice that he would deal with the outstanding judgments, and would do so by the times that he then specified in the schedule. He did not do so. He disposed of the matters but in a number of cases, comprising the majority of the matters, he delayed disposing of them for substantial periods. The Judge gave reasons which he said justified the failure to abide by the schedule.
Those reasons do not dispose fully of the complaint against what he did. In the end the main point made against him is that he did not do what he said he would do, that he did not face up to the significance of his failure and that he failed to meet the inquiries that were attempted to be made of him at the time. The contention made is that these and the other things to which reference has been made in the material show that he is still incapable of carrying out his judicial duties. The complaint is not that what he did constituted misconduct which itself would or could justify consideration of his removal: it is that it shows incapacity. It is to be emphasised that it is incapacity alone which is in question.

The suggestion is, in effect, that the inferences to be drawn from the material relating to the schedule warrant putting aside the evidence of the
Judge that he can do what he is required to do and the evidence of the doctors that he can do so. In my opinion that is a course that on the evidence as it is before the Division is not justified." (pp5-6) 
It can be seen that the divergence between the majority and the minority in the Conduct Division turned on two specific matters: 
A difference in the understanding of the professional evidence.

A different assessment of the conduct of the judge, subsequent to February , with respect to satisfying the Schedule of delivery of judgments.

On the first matter, the Report said that Dr Gilandas had "identified" an "ingrained personality attribute of procrastination". (par71) 
Dr Dent is said to have "recognised that procrastination was `an issue'". The
Report went on to say: "We did not understand him to dissent from Dr Gilandas in that respect: rather his view was that the onset of depression may render more powerful the effect of the a (sic) pre-existing character trait of procrastination." 
In that regard, the Report refers to "the very significant improvement in the depressive illness from which Justice Bruce suffered". (par77); At another point in the Report this improvement is referred to in these terms: "the medical condition of Justice Bruce has, with treatment, now plateaued ....".
 
The majority concluded that the "incapacity has been diminished to some extent by the relieving of the severe depression". (par78) 
In contrast, Mr Mahoney, said that the "thrust" of the evidence of both witnesses was "to the same effect" namely, that Justice Bruce was not now suffering from depression. (See last paragraph on p5). Mr Mahoney went on in the passage fully quoted above, to indicate that the medical evidence was not "elicited with absolute clarity" and that the impact of the medical conditions upon personality traits, including "upon a disposition to procrastinate" was, in its application to the present case, "not clear". As he had earlier put it, with respect to the effect on the Judge's conduct of his medical condition: "the evidence does not compel a conclusion on this issue".

With respect to the second matter, namely the failure to comply with a
Schedule for delivery of judgments, the Report gave this significant weight.
The failure occurred after the medical treatment was said to have relieved the
Judge from his depression.

As indicated in par71 of the Report quoted above, this failure was said to be "indicative" that the prior delay contained in it "a significant element of procrastination" namely, that the judge's failures in this regard were not wholly, or perhaps even preponderantly, attributable to the medical condition.
This is reaffirmed in par74 where, after rejecting the Judge's explanation for these further delays as "unsatisfactory", the Report referred to the identified "procrastination" as continuing to operate. Accordingly, the Report concluded that the failure to adhere to the Schedule, and the failure or inability to confront and give a timely explanation for the departure from the
Schedule was "strongly indicative of the continuation of an incapacity to perform the judicial function to an agreed level which cannot be attributed to the previous severe depression". (par77) 
Mr Mahoney's Reasons state that this conclusion was based entirely on inferences available from the failure of the judge with respect to the
Schedule of judgments. Mr Mahoney found that this conduct did not compel a conclusion contrary to the evidence of the judge, and of the doctors, that he was now able to perform his functions as a judicial officer. (p6 of the
Reasons).

It is important to recognise that there is no suggestion of a finding that the
Plaintiff's failure to adhere to the Schedule, or his other conduct with respect to that failure, itself constitutes a form of incapacity or misbehaviour.

Rather, the Report concludes that this conduct, occurring as it did at a time when the effects of the medical condition of depression had been resolved, or at least, substantially attenuated, helps establish that the prior conduct with respect to the delay of judgments could not be substantially attributed to that medical condition, but rather that it was caused to such a degree by the personality trait referred to as "procrastination", that the Judge's hitherto demonstrated incapacity must be seen as continuing to exist.

There is no statement of such a finding in terms. However, the reference to "indicative" of "a significant element of procrastination" (par71) and to "strongly indicative" of a continuation of an incapacity "which cannot be attributed to the previous severe depression", satisfies me that that is what the majority concluded.

The critical ultimate finding of fact by the Conduct Division was: "The Division is of the view that the indisputably demonstrated incapacity up to February 1998 remains..." (Par48) 
This is reiterated in par80, in which the Division outlines its reasons for forming the statutory "opinion": "Incapacity to perform judicial duties has been proven to have been present from, at least, early 1995 and continues".

It is this finding which the Plaintiff challenged on administrative law grounds. Absent this finding, Mr Mahoney was clearly correct when he said, in a proposition which, as I read the Report, the majority would also accept: "The Judge contends that after that time his condition changed and that he became capable of discharging his judicial duties. If that contention be true, then in my opinion, the matter could not justify parliamentary consideration of his removal." 
The Administrative Law Challenge 
By reason of the detailed statutory scheme of the [Judicial Officers
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/joa1986155/), a
Conduct Division is subject to the supervisory jurisdiction of the Court. As I have already said this is not an appeal, nor a review on the merits. This
Court is not concerned to determine whether the Division made the correct decision. It is not relevant to ask whether I would have come to the same decision as the Division. This Court can intervene if, and only if, some form of legal error can be identified. The grounds of legal error are limited.

In the present case, the challenge is to the formation of an opinion. It was once thought that, by reason of the element of subjectivity, such a decision was not examinable by the courts. That is no longer the case.

As Menzies J noted in Parramatta City Council versus Pestell <case>; [(1972) 128 CLR 305] @ 323: "The definition of land that may be subject to a local rate is determined by the Council's justifiable opinion of special benefit so that if the so called opinion could not be justified on any reasonable ground, then, the requisite opinion is lacking. There is, however, a world of difference between justifiable opinion and sound opinion. The former is one open to a reasonable man; the latter is one that is not merely defensible - it is right. The validity of a local rule does not depend upon the soundness of a council's opinion; it is sufficient if the opinion expressed is one reasonably open to a council. Whether it is sound or not is not a question for decision by a court." 
Contemporary Australian doctrine on matters of this character is now as stated by Gibbs J in Buck versus Bavone <case>; [(1976) 135 CLR 110] @ 118-9: "It is not uncommon for statutes to provide that a board or other authority shall or may take certain action if it is satisfied of the existence of certain matters specified in the statute. Whether the decision of the authority under such a statute can be effectively reviewed by the courts will often largely depend on the nature of the matters of which the authority is required to be satisfied. In all such cases the authority must act in good faith; it cannot act merely arbitrarily or capriciously. Moreover, a person affected will obtain relief from the courts if he can show that the authority has misdirected itself in law or that it has failed to consider matters that it was required to consider or has taken irrelevant matters into account. Even if none of these things can be established, the courts will interfere if the decision reached by the authority appears so unreasonable that no reasonable authority could properly have arrived at it. However, where the matter of which the authority is required to be satisfied is a matter of opinion or policy or taste it may be very difficult to show that it has erred in one of these ways, or that its decision could not reasonably have been reached. In such cases the authority will be left with a very wide discretion which cannot be effectively reviewed by the courts." 
This dictum was first authoritatively applied in Minister for Immigration v
Teo [(1995) 57 FCR 194] @ 198-9. It has subsequently been endorsed in majority judgments of the High Court in Minister for Immigration and Ethnic
Affairs versus Wu Shan Liang [(1996) 185 CLR 259] @ 275-6 and Australian Heritage Commission versus Mount Isa Mines Ltd <case>; [(1997) 187 CLR 297] @ 301 and referred to in other judgments.

In this case, the statute imposes a very low threshold for the formation of the "opinion". It need only be that Parliament could consider removal.
Not that it should remove.

Mr R Conti QC Senior Counsel for the Plaintiff put the administrative law challenge in a number of different ways. Every one of them involved a challenge to the Division's finding of fact that Justice Bruce's unquestioned prior incapacity, continues to exist. Even in a case where a full appeal is available, there are significant restrictions on the ability of an appellate court to interfere with a finding of this character. In the exercise of the supervisory jurisdiction, the restrictions are even greater.

In cases which engage the sense of compassion of a judge such as this, it is necessary to avoid the temptation to express a conclusion in terms of one of the recognised grounds for judicial review, whilst in truth making a decision based on the merits. In a democratic society such conduct transgresses the proper limits of judicial intervention. It will, if often repeated, undermine the basis for judicial independence and the fundamental role which judicial impartiality plays in the social stability of the nation and the maintenance of personal freedom of its citizens.

Where, as here, the case directly involves the independence of the judiciary, it is particularly important that this Court be, and be seen to be, punctilious in this regard.

I mean no disrespect to the submissions of Mr Conti when I note that his submissions involved a tour of obiter dicta and judgments at the boundaries of accepted administrative law, each of which invokes language of indefinite application and, accordingly, permits a decision in truth based on the merits to be more readily disguised.

Mr Conti invoked the concept of `proportionality', as explicating the well known ground of unreasonableness based on the formulation of Lord Greene MR in
Associated Provincial Practice Houses Ltd versus Wednesbury Corporation [1948]
KB 223 @ 229-230. It can be accepted that a complete lack of proportion between the consequences of a decision and the conduct upon which it operates may manifest unreasonableness in that sense. However, the Plaintiff also invoked `proportionality' as a new and separate ground of review.

The concept has proven to be useful in the Constitutional context for purposive powers and, for not dissimilar reasons, in the context of judicial review of subordinate legislation. (See Leask versus Commonwealth <case>; [(1996-7) 187 CLR 579] @ 593-5; 600; 612-5; 624; South Australia versus Tanner <case>; [(1989) 166 CLR 161] @ 165, ; Minister for Urban Affairs and Planning versus Rosemount Estates Pty Limited <case>; [(1996) 91 LGERA 31] pp37-8, -6, 81-4; Bayne "Reasonableness Proportionality and Delegated Legislation" [(1993) 67 ALJ 448.] 
Proportionality has not been adopted as a separate ground for review in the context of judicial review of administrative action, notwithstanding a considerable body of advocacy that it be adopted. See State of New South
Wales versus Macquarie Bank Ltd (1991) 30 NSWLR 302 p321-5; Minister of State for
Resources versus Dover Fisheries Pty Ltd <case>; [(1993) 43 FCR 565] @ 575-8; R versus Secretary of State for the Housing Department ex parte Brind [[1991] 1 AC 896] pp762, 766-7, , 769, 750; New South Wales versus Law [(1992) 45 IR 62] @ 63; Craig
Administrative Law 4th ed 1994 pp411-421; Aronson & Dyer Judicial
Review of Administrative Action 1996 @ 375-9.

The concept of proportionality is plainly more susceptible of permitting a court to trammel upon the merits of a decision than Wednesbury unreasonableness. This is not the occasion to take such a step in the development at administrative law, if it is to be taken at all.

There is no disproportion between the consequences of the expression of the statutory opinion by the Conduct Division and the inordinate delays in the delivery of judgments. It is those delays, as par80 of the Report makes clear, that formed the basis for that aspect of the Report. Even if it is accepted to be a separate ground for review, "proportionality" would not impinge upon the process by which the majority of the Division in this case concluded that the uncontested prior incapacity was continuing.

Mr Conti also invoked the well known ground of taking into account irrelevant considerations, and failing to take into account irrelevant considerations. In this regard, he invoked a formulation which finds its origin in an unreported judgment of Gummow J then of the Federal Court of Australia: Kahn versus Minister for Immigration & Ethnic Affairs, unreported, 11 December 1987, in which his Honour said that a decision must give "proper, genuine and realistic consideration to the merits of the case". This particular formulation of words has been applied in a number of subsequent judgments of the Federal Court, including Hindi versus The Minister for Immigration [(1988) 20 FCR 1] @ 13 per
Sheppard J, Surinokova versus Minister for Immigration <case>; [(1991) 33 FCR 87] @ 96 per Hill J; Pattanasri versus Minister for Immigration Local
Government and Ethnic Affairs [1993 34 ALD 169] @ 178-9 per
Burchett J.

The special characteristics of the applicable statutory framework in the [Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/adra1977396/) , require particular care before applying the administrative law jurisprudence of the Federal Court to the common law . There is specific provision in s5(2)(f) of the ADJR Act that a finding of improper exercise of power may be based on: "5(2)(f) An exercise of a discretionary power in accordance with a rule or policy without regard to the merits of the particular case." 
The Federal Court cases involved the alleged application of a policy in this sense, as is made clear by the words "to the merits of the case", in the formulation of Gummow J in Kahn.

Nevertheless, a similar proposition may be appropriate in the context of the relevant/irrelevant considerations ground at common law. See eg "any real sense" Turner versus Minister for Immigration <case>; [(1981) 55 FLR 180] @ 184 per Toohey J; "genuinely and realistically" Howells v
Nagrad Nominees Pty Limited [(1982) 66 FLR 169] @ 195 per
Fox and Franki JJ; "proper consideration" Kioa versus West <case>; [(1985) 159 CLR 550] @ 604 per Wilson J; and in this court, the formulation " no real opportunity ...to give consideration to" in Parramatta City Council v
Hale [(1982) 47 LGRA 319] @ 331 per Street CJ, see also 335-6.

These particular formulations must be treated with care, so that the relevant/irrelevant considerations ground is not expanded to permit review of the merits. That ground is restricted in accordance with the now classic judgment of Mason J in Minister for Aboriginal Affairs versus Peko Wallsend
Limited <case>; [1986 162 CLR 24] @ 39-42, to matters which the decision maker was obliged to take into account.

In the present case, the Division was relevantly limited to the issue of the capacity - referred to as "ability" in [s15(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/joa1986155/s15.html) of the [Judicial Officers
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/joa1986155/) - of his
Honour to perform his obligations as a judicial officer. The parts of the
Report to which the Plaintiff made reference in its submissions in this regard, involved the Division's consideration of an alleged character trait of "procrastination" and of Justice Bruce's failure to comply with a Schedule of
Judgments agreed with the then Chief Justice. I will deal with these issues fully below. However, neither of these matters suggests any failure to take into account relevant considerations which the Division was bound to take into account. Nor does either suggest that it took into account any irrelevant considerations. It can scarcely be contended that if the finding of fact that his Honour's prior incapacity was continuing could be justified on the evidence, that that was in any way an irrelevant consideration. On the contrary, it would plainly be determinative.

Mr Conti also urged the adoption of a doctrine developed by Lord Diplock to the effect that a logically probative decision was a requirement of natural justice. (See R versus Criminal Injuries Compensation Board ex parte Moire [1965]
QB 456 @488; Mahon versus Air New Zealand [1984] AC 808 @ 821. Mr Conti relied on a passage in the judgment of Justice Deane in Australia Broadcasting
Tribunal versus Bond <case>; [(1990) 170 CLR 321] @ 367). However, in Bond, Mason CJ expressly left open the issue of whether this third limb should be added to the doctrine of natural justice. Indeed, it may not be consistent with the orthodox position set out in Mason CJ's judgment in Bond to which I will refer below. (See also Bowen
James versus Delegate Department of Health [(1992) 27 NSWLR 452] @ 475;
Aronson and Dyer supra @ 275-7, 286-7; Bayne "The Court, the Parliament and the Government - Reflections on the Scope of Judicial Review" [[1991] FedLawRw ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/journals/FedLRev/1991/1.html "View Case" ); [1991 20 Federal Law Review 1] @ 20-21; McMillan "Recent Themes in Judicial Review of Federal Executive
Action" [1996 24 Federal Law Review 367](/cgi- bin/LawCite?cit=1996%2024%20Federal%20Law%20Review%20367 "View LawCiteRecord" ) esp @ 380). The Diplock doctrine has been accepted in the Federal Court, most recently by Finkelstein J in Epeabaka versus Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural Affairs [(1997) 150 ALR 397.] 
This doctrine must be confined in order to avoid impermissible merits review.
For the reasons outlined below, it will become clear that in my opinion, if the critical findings of fact were open to the Conduct Division, no logical defect in the reasoning is suggested.

The Finding of Continued Incapacity 
The only aspect of the Plaintiff's challenge to the Report on administrative law grounds which is capable of constituting a relevant error is the submission - expressed in various ways - that there was no proper basis for a finding that matters other than the medical condition played a sufficiently significant part in causing the incapacity during the period in which such incontestably prevailed, and that this other factor continued to cause a sufficient degree of incapacity subsequent to the alleviation of the medical condition.

This is a finding of fact. If it was not open to the Conduct Division to make that finding then, in my view, the statutory "opinion" which the Division formed "could not reasonably have been reached", to adopt the words of Gibbs J in Buck versus Bavone (supra) @ 199, and the opinion was not "justifiable" to adopt the word used by Menzies J in Parramatta City Council versus Pestell @ 323. I have already indicated that I accept the proposition, explicit in Mr Mahoney's Reasons and implicit in the Report, that if his
Honour was no longer incapable of discharging his duties as at the date of the
Report, then no reasonable decision-maker could form the opinion that the matters "could justify parliamentary consideration of (his) removal".

Restrictions on judicial review of findings of fact have long been acknowledged. The present state of the law is not entirely clear. In Bond supra @ 355-7 Mason CJ sought to summarise the relevant principles. The matter remains one of some difficulty. (See Aronson and Dyer supra @ 281-9, Bayne "The Court, the Parliament and the Government" supra @ 19-26). The principles
I apply are as follows: 
There is no error of law in making a wrong finding of fact. (See eg
Waterford versus The Commonwealth <case>; [(1986-7) 163 CLR 54] @ 77; Bond (supra) @ 356; 
An inference of fact must be open to be drawn. (Bond, supra, @ 356 per
Mason CJ: See also Minister for Immigration versus Teo supra @ 199; S v
Crimes Compensation Tribunal [[1998] 1 VR 83] esp @ 90-1).

The making of findings and the drawing of inferences without any evidence to support them is an error of law. (See eg Sinclair versus Maryborough Mining
Warden <case>; [(1975) 132 CLR 473] @ 481, 483; Bond supra @ 355-6).

Acting without probative evidence is the equivalent of no evidence. This point requires some elaboration.

It is convenient to begin with what Lord Brightman said in Puhlhofer v
Hillingdon London Borough Council <case>; [[1986] AC ] @ 518: "Where the existence or non-existence of a fact is left to the judgment and discretion of a public body and that fact involves a broad spectrum ranging from the obvious to the debatable to the just conceivable, it is the duty of the Court to leave the decision of that fact to the public body to whom
Parliament has entrusted the decision-making power save in a case where it is obvious that the public body, consciously or unconsciously, are acting perversely." 
In this Court there is a well established body of jurisprudence that even a perverse finding of fact does not constitute an error of law. In Azzopardi v
Tasman UEB Industries Limited [(1985) 4 NSWLR 139] @ 156,
Glass JA with whom Samuels JA agreed said: "To say of a finding that it is perverse, that it is contrary to the overwhelming weight of the evidence, that it is against the evidence and the weight of the evidence, that it ignores the probative force of the evidence which is all one way or that no reasonable person could have made it, is to say the same thing in different ways. Upon proof that the finding of a jury is vitiated in this way, it will be set aside because it is wrong in fact. Since the Act does not allow this Court to correct errors of fact, any argument that the finding of a Workers Compensation Commission Judge is vitiated in the same way discloses no error of law and will not constitute a valid ground of appeal. It is also pointless to submit that the reasoning by which the Court arrived at a finding of fact was demonstrably unsound as this would not amount to an error of law.
 ..................

A finding of fact in the Commission may nevertheless reveal an error of law where it appears that the trial judge has misdirected himself ie as defined otherwise than in accordance with law the question of fact which he has to answer. A possibility of this kind exists with ultimate findings of fact but not with respect to primary findings of fact such as whether the applicant suffered injury or on a particular date. Further an ultimate finding of fact, even in the absence of a misdirection, may reveal error of law if the primary facts found are necessarily within or outside a statutory description and a contrary decision has been made. Hope versus Bathurst City Council <case>; [(1981) 144 CLR 1] at 10; Australian Gas Light Co versus Valuer General (1940)
SR 126 at 138. The decision here is not of that character." 
His Honour went on to further rely on Hope versus Bathurst City Council and AGL v Valuer General for the following general proposition: "It is only in marginal cases that the statutory test is satisfied or not satisfied as a matter of law, because no other application is reasonably open." 
His Honour concluded: 
Accordingly, this Court will not entertain unexplained perversity of result as a ground for intervention although it will correct perverse or unreasonable applications of law to the facts found. (p157).

It may be that the word "perverse" is used in different senses in the line of authority in this Court stemming from Azzopardi (note also Edelsten versus Ward (No 1) [(1988) 63 ALJR 345)] and the line of authority in the Federal Court stemming from the passage of Lord
Brightman in Pulhlhofer. (See eg Broadbridge versus Stammers [(1987) 16 FCR ];
Australian Conservation Foundation versus Forestry Commission [(1986) 19 FCR ] @ , 133; Teo, supra, @ 199). The latter is to be explained as Sir Anthony
Mason did in Bond namely, the word "perversely" signifies "acting without probative evidence". (Bond p359; also Teo supra @ 149). On this basis there is no necessary conflict between the two lines of authority.

Azzopardi and subsequent cases involved the proper construction of a statutory formula which limits appeals to "errors of law". The issue turned on the intention of Parliament. Different considerations arise in the development and application of common law principles identifying the proper basis for judicial review of administrative action. In my opinion, at common law, a decision-maker who acts without probative evidence - to which conduct the word "perversely" has appropriately been attached - does not make a valid decision.
It is the equivalent of acting without evidence.

I accept that a finding of primary fact by the Conduct Division will be vitiated if there was no probative evidence to support it. Similarly an inference of fact is vitiated if it is not open on the primary facts properly so found. In this case the finding of continued incapacity was an inference.

There is also a statutory context to the Division's fact finding. The statutory opinion is to the effect that "the matter could justify
Parliamentary consideration of the removal of the judicial officer". Such "parliamentary consideration" of removal is now governed by [S53(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s53.html) of the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/)
Act which identifies the contents of an address as "seeking removal on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity". The use of the word "proved" in s53(2) establishes that a Conduct Division may only form its opinion on the basis of probative evidence.

Furthermore, the statutory context suggests that the common law principle, that an illogical inference does not in itself constitute an error of law, does not apply. As Chief Justice Mason put it in Bond supra @ 356: "So long as there is some basis for an inference - in other words, the particular inference is reasonably open - even if that inference appears to have been drawn as a result of illogical reasoning, there is no place for judicial review because no error of law has taken place." 
The fact that the statutory opinion relates to a process in which "proved incapacity" must be established requires a logical process of reasoning to draw an inference. There is a statutory standard by which the fact finding of the Conduct Division must be measured.

In the formation of the statutory opinion, a Conduct Division must be guided by the "gravity of the consequences flowing from" its finding that the incapacity continued to exist in a relevant degree. As Dixon J put it in a frequently cited passage in Briginshaw versus Briginshaw <case>; [(1938) 60 CLR 336] @ 361-2: "The truth is that, when the law requires the proof of any fact, the tribunal must feel an actual persuasion of its occurrence or existence before it can be found. It cannot be found as a result of a mere mechanical comparison of probabilities independently of any belief in its reality. No doubt an opinion that a state of facts exist may be held accordingly to indefinite gradations of certainty; and this is led to attempts to define exactly the certainty required by the law for various purposes. Fortunately, however, at common law no third standard of persuasion was definitely developed. Except upon criminal issues to be proved by the Prosecution, it is enough that the affirmative of an allegation is made out to the reasonable satisfaction of the tribunal. But reasonable satisfaction is not a state of mind that is attained or established independently of the nature and consequence of the fact or facts to be proved.
The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood of an occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of the consequences flowing from a particular finding are considerations which must affect the answer to the question whether the issue has been proved to the reasonable satisfaction of the tribunal. In such matters `reasonable satisfaction' should not be produced by inexact proofs, indefinite testimony, or indirect inferences.
Everyone must feel that, when, for instance, the issue is on which of two dates an admitted occurrence took place, a satisfactory conclusion may be reached on materials of a kind that would not satisfy any sound and prudent judgment if the question was whether some act had been done involving grave moral delinquency...This does not mean that some standard of persuasion is fixed intermediate between the satisfaction beyond reasonable doubt required upon a criminal inquest and the reasonable satisfaction which in a civil issue may, not must, be based on a preponderance of probability. It means that the nature of the issue necessarily affects the process by which reasonable satisfaction is attained." 
In this case the formation of the opinion is one of the essential preconditions for the dismissal of a Judge of the Supreme Court of New South
Wales. The gravity of the consequences for the individual judge would be sufficient to indicate that any decision-maker of fact would be restrained in forming the opinion, in accordance with the approach as set out by Sir Owen
Dixon. This is reinforced by the weight which must be attributed to the public interest that is served by ensuring that the step of removal is only taken in the clearest case.

The Report set out with clarity the basis upon which the majority drew the inference that his Honour's the incapacity remained an extant condition to a relevant extent. There were four grounds upon which the Division relied, as I understand the Report, alternatively and cumulatively. These are set out respectively in pars71-73, 75, 76 and 77, with the conclusion set out in 78.
The findings of primary fact on which the inference of continued incapacity is based are set out in these paragraphs.

I mention one other submission in order to dismiss it. Mr Conti attacked the suggestion made by Counsel assisting the Division that as at April and May the depression was only a "light depression" (Report pars34, 56).
Although the Report indicated that "there is some substance in the thrust of the submission" (par57), the Report went on to conclude that it was not necessary to decide this issue. It does not avail the Plaintiff to now attack a submission made to the Division, when that submission was not adopted as part of the reasoning of the Division in its Report.

Nothing in the reasoning of the Report suggests that the Division proceeded on any basis other than that Justice Bruce had had a significant and longstanding incapacitating medical condition. The issue was whether or not that was the only factor which caused his inability to deliver judgments within an acceptable time.

The findings of primary fact, on which the inference of continued incapacity was based can be conveniently discussed under two sub-headings: "The
Procrastination Issue" and "The Schedule of Judgments".

The "Procrastination Issue" 
The first finding was that Justice Bruce has what the Division called in par71 an "ingrained personality attribute of procrastination". This it said was what
Dr Gilandas, a consulting psychologist, to whom Justice Bruce was referred at the instance of the Crown Solicitor, had "identified".

It is clear from reading the Report as a whole, as submitted by Ms R McColl SC on behalf of the Attorney General of New South Wales, that the Division proceeded on the basis that Dr Gilandas had made a diagnosis of Justice Bruce as having such an "ingrained personality attribute". It is not suggested that
Dr Dent did anything which can be described as a "diagnosis" of such a character trait. Rather, he proceeded to give evidence in a form which is accurately described in par77 of the Report, relating to the interaction of the medical condition of depression and a pre-existing character trait of procrastination.

One of the submissions made by Mr Conti QC was to the effect that the character trait of procrastination could not constitute a relevant form of incapacity. I reject this submission. The relevant manifestation of incapacity is an inability to write judgments within an acceptable time. There can be no doubt that Justice Bruce demonstrated such an inability. A personality trait described as "procrastination", of itself and without the intervention of a medical condition of depression, could entail such inability.

The real issue in my mind is whether or not Dr Gilandas' views can be appropriately described as a diagnosis, rather than as a mere hypothesis, and, accordingly, whether it was open to the Division to find that his Honour suffered from the character trait of procrastination to a relevant degree.

The first occasion on which the word "procrastination" appears in Dr Gilandas' report is at p5 of his first report dated 25 March 1998. Under the heading "Psychological Assessment" and the sub-heading "Clinical Assessment", which deals with the examination of Justice Bruce by Dr Gilandas, this paragraph appears: "Judgment and insight also appear to be generally in tact. However, he may be over optimistic regarding the amount of behaviour change and self- discipline that will be required to change his alleged habits of procrastination. There was no evidence of major psychiatric disorder at the time of assessment." 
It is not clear what Dr Gilandas was referring to by the use of the words "alleged" and "habit". No letter of instructions to Dr Gilandas prior to his first consultation with Justice Bruce was tendered before the Division. The most likely explanation is that the "alleged habit" is a reference to a passage appearing at p3 of the first report under the heading "History of the
Present Problem" to the following effect: "Complaints have been received about Justice Bruce's failure to write judgments, some of which have been outstanding since 1995.

Justice Bruce has reputedly assured authorities that the outstanding judgments would be completed, however such promises were not kept." 
As I read Dr Gilandas' report, he was intending to say no more than he accepted as an instruction, without verification by himself, that Justice
Bruce had failed to write judgments and that his assurances to deliver outstanding judgments had not been kept. It is in that sense that procrastination was "alleged" and the suggestion of frequency implied that this conduct was `habitual'.

The second, and only other, occasion in the first report on which reference is made to the word "procrastination" is on the last page where Dr Gilandas makes some "recommendations" on the basis that he has accepted that the prior medical condition of depression is no longer extant. In par2(e), in the context of making a recommendation to Justice Bruce's treating psychiatrist to take steps to "counteract perfectionism", Dr Gilandas said: "There are also suggestions of perfectionism which can paradoxically create procrastination".

In my opinion, although it is not absolutely clear, the use of the word "procrastination" in this first report did occur as part of a process which can appropriately be described as "diagnosis". The contents of the Report under the heading "Personality Organisation" pp7-8 clearly indicate such a process. In this respect, the first report establishes a context for the second..

It was Dr Gilandas' second report of 4 May 1998, to which the Plaintiff's submissions were primarily directed. This stated (emphasis added): "Thank you for asking me to comment upon the additional materials referred to in your letter of 1st May, 1998.

I was surprised that recent promises to deliver judgements have not been met by Justice Bruce. ......

If it is correct that Justice Bruce is no longer clinically depressed then the most plausible explanation for lack of progress in delivery of judgements is no longer medical. Rather, it appears to be that most common problem of everyday life ... ingrained habits of procrastination. Procrastination has been recently more technically defined as "learned helplessness". Perhaps
Justice Bruce has been demoralised by a number of traumatic life experiences (severe motor vehicle accident compounded by migraine, backache and relationship problems). Such experiences may have compromised his drive for achievement. There is also the possibility that there may be an organic contribution (frontal lobe damage). Frontal lobe damage is known to impair planning functions and drive. However, I note that he has been able to function successfully as a QC following his frontal lobe injury.
 "Learned helplessness" is relatively reversible via cognitive behaviour therapy but does require a high degree of motivation and commitment to change.
I have formulated a plan of action in my previous report (25.3.98). Justice
Bruce retains the capacity to perform his duties. Unless he shows significant improvement in his work capacity within a reasonable amount of time, I can only conclude that he lacks the motivation and time management and planning skills to take the required action to resolve his ingrained procrastination.
These are problems of everyday living and not strictly medical, if it is correct that he no longer has major depression.

It is difficult to answer you question, "if delays are still occurring, were the delays in the past for reasons other than depression?" It is probable that the answer is multifactorial depression and procrastination might have interacted with each other and it is difficult to isolate the relative contributions of such factors.

The "Matters for Consideration" raise equally difficult questions of isolating the multifactorial contributions to poor work output. For example,
Justice Bruce may have believed in good faith that he could meet the deadlines he himself nominated. However, his lack of motivation, poor time management and planning skills may have let himself and others down.

I realise the above hypotheses may lack precision but as stated above we may be dealing not only medical problems (depression) but also with the common problems of everyday living (procrastination and the promise of more than one actually delivers)." 
As indicated, this report was based on a letter of instructions from the Crown
Solicitor of 1 May. That letter included the following: "... I enclose a Schedule of Judgments indicating that recent promises to deliver judgments have not been met. If his Honour has "recovered" what is the reason for current delays? If delays are still occurring, were the delays in the past for reasons other than depression?".

After cross-examination of Dr Gilandas before the Division, it was common ground that he did not, prior to delivering his report, have the Schedule of
Judgments to which reference was made in the letter of instructions. Page 2 of that document had been forwarded to him, but it was of no assistance and he ignored it.

Accordingly, Dr Gilandas did not have before him any information about the extent and nature of the failure to deliver judgments in accordance with what was described in the letter of instructions as "recent promises". Furthermore, it was common ground that he did not have before him any information concerning matters such as the occurrence of back pain and migraine, which
Justice Bruce had proffered as explanations of his failure to abide by the dates in the Schedule. Although, subsequently, the Conduct Division dealt with and rejected these matters as satisfactory explanations, they were not put before Dr Gilandas at all.

In the report of 4 May, the first reference to "procrastination" appears in a context which seems to constitute a definitive statement: "the most plausible explanation" and "it appears to be". Thereafter, the report uses the word "may" to qualify most of the propositions it contains. The concluding paragraph uses the word "hypothesis", and goes on to say that "we may be dealing not only medical problems (depression) but also with the common problems of everyday living (procrastination and the promise of more than one actually delivers)". It is this last use of the word "may" which gives me considerable pause, because it refers expressly to the two matters which had earlier been stated in language that was not so qualified ie the reference to "the most plausible explanation ...is no longer medical", and "it appears to be that most common problem of everyday life." 
Nevertheless, there is also the passage in which there is a further reference to "ingrained procrastination" as something which Justice Bruce needs to "take the required action to resolve". This does suggest an element of diagnosis.
The statement appears in a context where a conclusion would be reached as to "lack of motivation and time management and planning skills" to overcome the personality attribute referred to in terms of "procrastination": "Unless he shows significant improvement in his work capacity within a reasonable amount of time".

On balance, I accept that this is an indication that Dr Gilandas was accepting as instructions that Justice Bruce was not acting in accordance with the requirements of judicial office but, because it was outside his field of technical expertise, was not able to say whether or not this was so. It is in that context that his use of the word "may" in the last paragraph of the report should be understood. It is only if it be the case that the judge's failure to produce judgments was in breach of some standard of judicial conduct, which breach Dr Gilandas could not himself confirm, that the diagnosis of an actual habit of procrastination would have a relevant consequence for the matters on which Dr Gilandas was asked to advise.

This interpretation is confirmed by a review of the course of cross- examination of Dr Gilandas. The deficiencies of the information which had been provided to him by reason of the failure to attach relevant documents, was drawn to his attention. He was asked, over objection, to proffer an opinion as to the future prognosis for Justice Bruce, on the basis of the clinical examination conducted some months before, and any additional matter that had been brought to his attention, including in the course of his cross- examination.

He indicated in answer to this that he "would have to qualify my statement", which I understand to be a reference to his second report. He indicated that he would need to "measure degree of progress", by which I understand him to mean the progress made since the success of the treatment for his Honour's medical condition. He said: "The greater the degree of improvement the better the prognosis. If treatment is started and there is no progress, then prognosis is poor. If treatment is started and there is moderate, in terms of improvement, in speed of judgment, may be not quite up to speed, then the prognosis is moderate." (p88 lines 5-15) 
Dr Gilandas then went on to say: "It would require somebody beyond myself who could look at these, what has been happening over the last four weeks and say, "things are better" and the prognosis would hinge on how much better it is." (p88 lines 15-20) 
The "person beyond myself" to whom Dr Gilandas referred is a person who is capable of assessing the improved performance of a judge in complying with his duties to produce judgments within an acceptable time. This is a matter which a clinical psychologist would accept on instructions, without having the expertise to assess the degree of improvement against such a standard.

In view of the higher standard of satisfaction required on the Briginshaw test, my mind has fluctuated on this matter. In the event, I am satisfied that it was proper for the Conduct Division to accept that Dr Gilandas provided them with a diagnosis to the effect that Justice Bruce did have a personality trait of "procrastination".

Dr Gilandas did not, and could not, assess whether this trait affected his
Honour in the performance of his judicial functions to an unacceptable degree.
This was beyond his area of expertise. It is not unusual for an expert to give an opinion on the basis of factual assumptions. This is what happened in this case.

There was no challenge before us to the ability of the Conduct Division to draw upon its own knowledge and experience in order to provide the element which Dr Gilandas indicated he could not provide. Nor could such a challenge be made. The structure and purpose of the [Judicial Officers
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/joa1986155/) and the requirement that the Conduct Division consist of other judicial officers and at most, one former judicial officer, indicates a Parliamentary intention that the members of such a Division can draw on their own knowledge and expertise of judicial conduct. This Division did so in the instant case and was entitled to do so. The way in which it chose to do so was the subject of the
Plaintiff's other line of attack.

The Judgments Schedule 
Having determined that an unacceptable degree of delay occurred in delivery of judgments up to February 1998, the Conduct Division did not focus its attention on any further delay beyond that time, being the time at which
Justice Bruce's medical condition was accepted to have been alleviated.
Indeed, the period of further delay for these reserved judgments was measured in weeks. This came after delays of many months, even more than a year.

The logical structure of the issue before the Commission can be described in the following way. Fact A and fact B were each capable of being - either alone or in combination - the substantial cause of conduct C. The issue was whether fact B (procrastination) would have been of sufficient significance to cause C in the absence of fact A (depression). Where, as here, fact A is no longer operative, the obvious way in which to determine the significance of fact B, is to wait to see whether, under ordinary conditions, Conduct C manifests itself in the absence of fact A.

The Division chose to approach the matter in a different way. In March, April,
May 1998, the position of Justice Bruce cannot be described as ordinary conditions. The number of reserved judgments was large and his Honour was still not undertaking the normal burdens of office pending their delivery.

The Conduct Division focused on the arrangements made between Justice Bruce and Chief Justice Gleeson for the delivery of judgments in accordance with a
Schedule, and the failure of Justice Bruce to comply with that Schedule. It was this failure which, the Conduct Division concluded, established that
Justice Bruce's prior failure to deliver reserved judgments within acceptable times, was to such a measure attributable to a personality characteristic of "procrastination", that the Division could conclude that the prior incapacity to perform the functions of judicial office continued to a relevant degree.

The Schedule of Judgments reflected an arrangement between Chief Justice
Gleeson and Justice Bruce, in which the Chief Justice acted on the basis of his authority, indeed his responsibility, to ensure the effective operation of the Court. The exercise of this role is well set out in Canada (Minister of
Citizenship and Immigration) versus Tobiass (1997) 142 DLR (4th) 270.

In the Federal Court of Appeal Marceau JA said: "In my judgment, a Chief Justice cannot entirely disinterest himself or herself from the pace of progress of a timeliness of disposition of the cases the court has to deal with. He or she has a responsibility to ensure that the court provides "timely justice". Indeed, it is his or her duty to take an active and supervisory role in this respect. Obviously, given the profound affect the decisions relative of the timely management of a proceeding can possibly have on its ultimate outcome, this role would normally be exercised at a general overseeing level and only quite rarely will it need to be exercised with respect to specific cases. But, if a matter appears to a Chief
Justice to be moving abnormally slowly, a perception that is dependent on the subject matter of the proceedings, and if he or she has grounds to suspect that the duties of the court are not being carried with due dispatch, then his or her mandate not only authorises, but, I believe imposes a positive duty to investigate. Of course, if the Chief Justice's inquiries reveal that the delay has even a remotely adjudicative cause, then he or she must immediately desist, but the simple act imposing a question can certainly not be considered, in itself, an interference with the judicial independence of the presiding judge." (pp282-283) 
To a similar effect is the reasoning of Pratte JA when his Honour said: "Out of the pace of the proceedings before the Associate Chief Justice had been so slow as to certainly give rise to a suspicion that justice was not rendered with reasonable diligence. In nearly a year, the references had made no real progress ... Once the Chief Justice had learned of that situation, irrespective of the circumstances in which the information had been conveyed to him, he was duty bound to intervene even though his intervention might frustrate the respondent's attempts to put off the hearing of the references for as long as they could. The respondent's interest in delaying the proceedings was not a legitimate interest worthy of protection. All parties were entitled to insist that justice be administered with diligence; none could claim a right to delayed justice." (pp277-288) 
On appeal, the Supreme Court of Canada delivered a joint judgment, Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) versus Tobiass (1997) 151 DLR (4th) 119, which found that certain aspects of the Chief Justice's conduct in that case was not appropriate. However the Court affirmed the basic principle: "We agree with Pratte JA that a Chief Justice is responsible for the expeditious progress of cases through his or her court and may under certain circumstances be obligated to take steps to correct tardiness." (p143) 
The Schedule of Judgments agreed between Justice Bruce and Chief Justice
Gleeson was not directly relevant to the statutory investigation undertaken by the Division. Nor was it directly relevant to the formation of the statutory opinion. It's function was as a proxy for the directly relevant conduct, ie excessive delay in delivery of judgments.

The [Judicial Officers
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/joa1986155/) confines the opinion which may be formed by a Conduct Division by the use of the word "matter", which appears in each of [ss28](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/joa1986155/s28.html), [29](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/joa1986155/s29.html)(2) and [41](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/joa1986155/s41.html).
The relevant opinion is stated in terms of "....forms an opinion that the matter could justify ...". This is a reference back to the word "matter" in [s15(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/joa1986155/s15.html) which provides: "15(1) Any person may complain to the Commission about a matter that concerns or may concern the ability or behaviour of a judicial officer." 
The scheme of the Act is to restrict consideration to the "matter" or "matters" which is or are the subject of a complaint, and those to which the inquiry is extended under s31 which provides: "31(1) In dealing with a complaint about a judicial officer, the Conduct
Division is not limited to the matters raised initially in the complaint, and the Division may treat the original complaint as extending to other matters arising in the course of its being dealt with." 
In the present case the Conduct Division dealt with two "matters", each the subject of a complaint, and also with 27 "matters" to which it decided the initial complaint should extend. None of these "matters" involved in any way the failure to adhere to the Schedule of Judgments with the Chief Justice.
Each involved the failure to deliver judgment after long delays. Some also referred to a failure to deliver judgments in accordance with undertakings given to the Chief Judge at Common Law. Ms R McColl SC appearing for the
Attorney relied on the content of the complaints relating to the failure to adhere to undertakings as extending the relevant "matters" to such failure generally.

The Report of the Conduct Division did not rely on the failure to comply with undertakings to the Chief Judge at Common Law in this way. This conduct would have been directly relevant to an allegation of misbehaviour. It does not itself constitute incapacity, in the sense that the failure to deliver judgments in a timely way was properly held by the Division to constitute incapacity. However, the failure to adhere to undertakings to deliver judgments made to the Chief Judge at Common Law may constitute evidence of an underlying condition or personality trait one of the manifestations of which is incapacity to perform the functions of a judicial office.

In the present case there was no finding of misbehaviour. The failure to fulfil undertakings of delivery to the Chief Judge at Common Law was not, in the light of the contents of the Report, a "matter" in the relevant sense.
That does not however prevent the subsequent failure to meet the timetable for delivery set out in the Schedule of Judgments with the Chief Justice, from being evidence of a continued incapacity that had earlier reflected itself in the long delays in delivery of the judgments, which, indisputably were "matters" within the meaning of the statutory provisions.

I emphasise again that it is not permissible for this Court to proceed by asking itself whether it would come to the same conclusion on the basis of the material before the Division. The issue is whether or not the Division drew the inference of continued incapacity from primary facts which were themselves based on probative material.

The Schedule, to which the Division referred, found its origins in a document prepared by Justice Bruce and settled with the Chief Justice. In a letter of February 1998 from the Plaintiff's solicitors to the Crown Solicitors
Office the following appeared: "Attachment 2 is a Schedule of Judgments prepared by Bruce J. It lists the judgments which are outstanding. The column headed `Reserved' records the dates on which each of the judgments in the list was reserved. The column headed `To be Delivered' records the dates on which it is proposed the judgment in each matter will be delivered.

Bruce J has consulted the Chief Justice in relation to the Schedule and he has a copy." 
The letter went on to outline the assumptions on which the Schedule had been prepared and added: "The Schedule has also been discussed by Bruce J with Dr Dent. From a clinical point of view the doctor has endorsed the delivery programme contemplated by the Schedule.

The dates on which it is proposed that each of the judgments be delivered have been scheduled by selecting the less difficult cases and arranging for judgments to be delivered then at an earlier point in time. At a later point, the more difficult judgments will be delivered.

The proposal to deliver the less difficult cases first has been discussed by
Bruce J with the Chief Justice and the Chief Justice has authorised to say that he agrees with this Schedule.

We are also instructed to inform you that the Chief Justice has spoken to Dr
Dent generally about the position." 
The letter concluded: "It is proposed that when each of the outstanding judgments is delivered in accordance with the judgment schedule that the Chief Justice will be informed of the fact of delivery of each of the judgments identified in Schedule 2." 
The attached Judgment Schedule had three columns the first was the name of the case, the second was headed "Reserved" and the third was headed "To be
Delivered". The Judgment Schedule so annexed was reproduced in par44 of the
Report as Table B.

As recorded in par51 of the Report, on 18 March Justice Bruce provided his explanation as to why the times in the Schedule had not been complied with and presented a further Schedule with amended dates. This is set out as Table C in the Report. However it was the failure to comply with the original Schedule of dates to which the Division referred in its critical findings.

In submissions, Mr Conti QC acknowledged that the Conduct Division had purported to deal - with the exception of one day of delay only - with the explanations proffered by Justice Bruce. However he submitted that they merely "referred" to the matters without "assigning significance" to them. The sense in which he said they failed to "assign significance" was in not computing in any systematic way a notional extension of time.

Mr Conti QC handed to the Court a detailed document analysing the effect of
Justice Bruce's explanations on delivery times of the Judgment Schedule which, was said to lead to the conclusion that the inferences which the Division drew from the Judge's failure to comply with the times in the original Judgment
Schedule were without factual foundation.

The matters which it was submitted that the Report failed to give adequate credit in terms of independent causation of delays included: 
Migraine attack.

Recurrence of back complaint.

A day long medical examination by Dr Gilandas.

The Schedule upon which Mr Conti QC relied was based on a number of assumptions including: * No work should reasonably be expected to be done on any weekend. * No work could reasonably be expected to be done on any day on which either migraine or back pain occurred. * No work could reasonably be expected to be done after 5.00pm, or thereabouts, on a day on which some other activity occurred eg delivery of ex tempore judgments as Duty Judge or the day of the medical examination. 
The matters referred to in these submissions, and computed in a precise way in the detailed document on which Mr Conti relied were, with the exception of the one day of the medical examination, all dealt with in pars73 and 74 of the
Report. Mr Conti's submission was that the Division had failed to assign "appropriate significance" to the matters and that any computation giving proper acknowledgement for causes of delay not involving any alleged incapacity, must lead to a conclusion that only a handful of judgments were delayed beyond the original agreed time, as so extended.

There is no legal error in failing to carry out a computation of the precision for which Mr Conti contended. These are quintessentially matters of weight.
The Report expresses the majority conclusion in general terms in par74, to the effect that the cumulative effect of these matters were not a "satisfactory explanation" of the delays beyond scheduled times. There is no legal reason why this general assessment could not permissibly occur. Matters of this character are plainly matters on which minds can differ. The three assumptions on which Mr Conti's schedule was based, as set out above, were in any event, neither obvious nor necessarily correct. It was well within the Conduct
Division's proper sphere of decision to reject them either generally or in the circumstances of the particular case.

It must be emphasised that, on this matter, the Division was not dealing with delays in the delivery of judgments themselves, which delays were measured in many months. Rather it was concerned with delays in the failure to deliver judgments in accordance with a new Schedule, which delays were measured only in days.

In this regard the primary submission of the Plaintiff was that there had been substantial compliance with the Schedule, particularly once proper allowance is made for the various matters which caused delay and which were beyond his
Honour's control. Whatever allowance is proper to be made for such matters is something on which reasonable minds can differ, even having in mind the
Briginshaw test. It appears that the fact that the precise dates did matter.
It is clear that the Chief Justice was acting on the basis that the Schedule of Judgments would be complied with. Indeed, he had acted on the precise dates in the Schedule by advising solicitors who inquired about a particular reserved judgment, that Justice Bruce expected to deliver it on the day identified in the Schedule (Report, par47).

Further, the Conduct Division had primary facts before it in addition to the mere failure to comply with the dates in the Schedule. First, it noted what it described as: "...the failure or inability to confront and give a timely explanation for that departure ..." (par78) being the departure from the dates for delivery in the Schedule.

On 20 February 1998 the Conduct Division adjourned until 1 May. However it was reconvened on 19 March, after Justice Bruce's failure to adhere to the
Schedule became known. It was at this point that the Division began the process of reclassifying the complaints as "serious" and extending the original complaint to additional matters. Thereafter Justice Bruce did provide the Chief Justice with lists of his progress with reserved judgments, (Transcript p182.45), all but two of which were delivered before the Conduct
Division reported. (The outstanding two were not then due under the Schedule).

On 19 March the Division was provided with Justice Bruce's explanation of his failure to comply with the Schedule and his proposals for delivery of judgments. (par51) It was also provided with a letter from his Honour's solicitors to the Crown Solicitor which said: "We acknowledge receipt of your letters of 4, 12 and 17 March 198, copies of which have been forwarded to our client for his comment and instructions. We have, of course, forwarded a copy of the letter from the Chairman of the
Conduct Commission (sic) to our client at his Supreme Court changes.

We have been trying to reach our client on the telephone but unfortunately his associate informs us that he is away ill. She says he has been ill for some time and literally has not been in Chambers for any length of time in the passed (sic) week or so." 
The three letters of 4, 12 and 17 March from the Crown Solicitor referred to the failure of his Honour to hand down judgments in accordance with the
Judgment Schedule agreed with the Chief Justice. The letter of 4 March referred to four such judgments. A letter of 10 March referred to ten such judgments and asked for an "urgent reply". In the letter of 12 March the Crown
Solicitor's Office referred to the earlier letters and stated: "The undertakings that are in place in this matter have been breached" and indicated that it would notify the Conduct Division to "reassemble at the earliest possible time", but that that notification would not be made to the
Division until 19 March. On 17 March a Schedule of 11 delayed judgments was forwarded. It was not until 18 March that Justice Bruce gave instructions to his solicitors with regard to these matters.

The Conduct Division found some similarity between this conduct and an earlier refusal by his Honour to address his problems when he refused to open letters which had come from the Judicial Commission. Counsel appearing for Justice
Bruce before the Conduct Division had informed the Division that Justice Bruce had told him: "he did not feel able to face up to what he figures was in them". (par35) This had occurred at a time when, according to the case made on behalf of Justice Bruce, the only operative cause of his incapacity was his medical condition.

The Division noted: "Failure to confront departures from the Schedule agreed with the Chief
Justice or to respond to his solicitor's request for instruction seems to us to be not dissimilar to the failure to confront the expected unpleasantness anticipated in the letters from the Judicial Commission to Justice Bruce in
May 1997 which he felt unable to open." (par76) 
There is no error in the Division taking into account similar conduct occurring after the medical condition is said to be cured, in order to determine whether or not there was evidence that the earlier incapacity was occasioned by other factors.

What weight should be attached to this conduct was a matter for the Division.
However, in my opinion, the conduct was sufficiently similar to the earlier conduct, for the Division to be entitled to take it into account in deciding whether or not the medical condition of depression had been the sole source of his Honour's uncontested incapacity. In my opinion, the facts and matters upon which the Conduct Division chose to rely in reaching the conclusion it reached, were within the range of matters permissible to be taken into account.

The matter that has caused me to hesitate in finally rejecting the Plaintiff's submissions in this regard, is the refusal of the Conduct Division to expressly make a finding, in terms, that the personality trait of "procrastination" was a substantial cause of the excessive delays in delivery of reserved judgments - the "matters" to which the statutory opinion must alone relate.

In par78, as quoted above, the Report concludes that the "incapacity satisfactorily to perform the judicial function" cannot be said to have been "removed" by the new medical treatment. The next sentence is particularly significant. The Report says: "That is so whatever may have been the cause of that incapacity prior to treatment by Dr Dent." 
This sentence is consistent with a statement in par57 of the Report: "... the Division does not think it necessary to reach a firm conclusion regarding the operation of any element of procrastination during that period ..." 
That was said in the context of concluding that the incapacity to perform judicial functions up to February 1998 was so patent that the precise cause did not have to be determined.

It does not appear from the Report that the Division ever resolved the issue of the comparative significance of "depression" and "procrastination" in the delays until February 1998, with respect to any of the matters the subject of complaint or the additional matters. Indeed, it states positively that it did not do so.

The Division identified the failure to adhere to the agreed Schedule of
Judgments as "indicative" or "strongly indicative" of a continued incapacity.
However the failure to comply with this Schedule was not the subject of any complaint, nor was it otherwise a "matter" to which the Division was permitted to have regard for the purpose of forming the statutory opinion.

What is required is that the Division form an opinion with respect to any matter, or combination of matters, before it to the effect that those matters could justify parliamentary consideration of removal.

The Division relied in this regard on the failure to adhere to the agreed terms on the Schedule of Judgments, which delays it described as "significant" and "extensive" (par74). These delays ranged from 3 to 29 days and are not comparable to the many months of delays involved in the delivery of reserved judgments themselves. Whether delays measured in days, in all the circumstances of the case, can be given the weight attached to them is a matter on which reasonable minds may differ, as the Reasons of Mr Mahoney plainly show. In addition to the period of delay, the Division took into account the nature and purpose of the arrangement with the Chief Justice. It also took into account his Honour's "failure or inability to confront" the issue. I am not prepared to find that the Division was not entitled to give this conduct the weight that it did.

It was with respect to the delays that the Report concluded that with respect to the period after February 1998: "The Division thinks that there was also operating as a significant factor what Dr Gilandas called procrastination" (par74) 
This conclusion was made in the context of the other conduct on which the
Division relied to infer its ultimate factual finding that his Honour's incapacity "remains" (par48) and "continues" (par80)..

Notwithstanding the failure of the Report to expressly state that the factor of "procrastination" was a substantial cause of the incapacity to deliver reserved judgments in the "matters" before it, a fair reading of the Report indicates that the Conduct Division did form an opinion to this effect.

In light of the possible consideration of these very matters by Parliament, it is not appropriate that I indicate my own views as to the weight that I would have given to the conduct on which the majority relied. In accordance with the strict legal tests applied in this area of law, there was before the Division probative material capable of supporting the conclusion that his Honour's incapacity continued after his medical condition had been alleviated. I have concluded that this is so even on the Briginshaw test, appropriate to the gravity of the consequences which may flow from the formation of the statutory opinion. There was probative material before it to ground such a conclusion and accordingly to infer that incapacity continues.

Further assessment of the strength of the evidence - which I have found to reach the relevant standard of being capable of supporting the conclusion drawn by the Conduct Division - is a matter for Parliament. The opinion of the
Division that the evidence could justify consideration of his Honour's removal must await the consideration of each House of Parliament, and then the
Governor in Council, to determine whether it should do so.

In this regard it is pertinent to recall the cautionary remarks of Chief
Justice Gleeson in relation to the [Independent Commission Against Corruption
Act 1988](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/icaca1988442/) in Greiner versus Independent Commission Against Corruption [(1992) 28 NSWLR ]
@129: "The ICAC Act contains a definition of corrupt conduct which is both wide and, in a number of respects, unclear. One of the most striking aspects of the legislative scheme is that a conclusion that a person has engaged in corrupt conduct, which is unconditional in form, is necessarily based upon a premise that it must be conduct which `could' constitute or involve a criminal offence, a disciplinary offence or reasonable grounds for dismissing or terminating the services of a public office. Thus, for example, where an alleged criminal offence is involved, a determination that a person has engaged in corrupt conduct is necessarily based upon a finding that the conduct of the person could constitute a criminal offence. In the public perception, the conditional nature of the premise upon which it is based could easily be obscured by the unconditional form of such a conclusion." 
So here, the unconditional form of the opinion should not obscure the conditional nature of the opinion which the Conduct Division formed.

In my view, the second basis for challenging the validity of the Report fails.

The summons should be dismissed.

MASON P: I agree with Spigelman CJ. 
PRIESTLEY JA: The Chief Justice has stated the relevant circumstances of this case and has dealt with the issues in a way making it unnecessary to go over all the ground again. 
There are three matters about which I will shortly state my opinion. One is the question of construction of the [Judicial Officers Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/joa1986155/) raised by the plaintiff Justice Bruce; the second concerns the plaintiff's principal administrative law submission; and the third is the difference in the roles in this State of the executive, the parliament and the judiciary when the possible removal of a judge is under consideration. These matters must all be considered by reference to the New South Wales [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/)
Act and the [Judicial Officers
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/joa1986155/).

Since 1992 the possible removal of a judge from office has been governed primarily by [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/joa1986155/index.html#p9), entitled The Judiciary, of the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/)
Act. Part 9 contains the basic constitutional proposition that no judge can be removed from office except as provided by Part 9 itself (s 53(1)). What Part 9 then lays down about removal of a judge is that the only way it can be done is by the Governor, (which means the executive government) on an address from both Houses of Parliament in the same session, seeking removal on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity (s 53(2)).

The importance of Part 9, in a constitutional sense, is shown by the fact that no law can be passed to change it unless a majority of the electors in New
South Wales first approves of the proposed law intended to change it (s 7B, which is itself similarly entrenched).

Part 9 also provides that legislation may lay down additional procedures and requirements to be complied with before a judicial officer may be removed from office (s 53(3)). [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/joa1986155/s41.html) of the [Judicial Officers
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/joa1986155/) (the Act) lays down one such additional requirement. This requirement is that a judge may not be removed from office in the absence of a report first made under the
Act to the Governor by a Conduct Division constituted under the Act setting out the Division's opinion that the matters referred to in the report could justify parliamentary consideration of the removal of the judge being reported on, on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity: (s 41(1)).

The Conduct Division is defined (s 3(1)) as the Conduct Division "of the
Commission". The Commission is defined (s 3(1)) as the Judicial Commission of
New South Wales and consists of eight members (s 5). The Conduct Division is next mentioned in <case> where it is made clear that although it is "of the
Commission" it is also independent of it: (s 10(3)).

The Conduct Division is constituted by <case> of the Act. Its functions may be exercised by three persons in accordance with Pt 6 (which consists of ss -39) and not otherwise: (s 13(3)). The functions of the Conduct Division are to deal with complaints referred by the Commission: (s 14).

The procedure of the Conduct Division is to be governed by Schedule 3 of the
Act: (s 13(4)). Schedule 3 is headed "Provisions Relating To The Procedure of the Conduct Division". Clause 2 of Schedule 3 provides that all three members of the Conduct Division must be present at a meeting of the Division. Clause 4 provides that a decision supported by a majority at a meeting of the Conduct
Division "shall be the decision of the Division".

Part 6 deals with the way in which the Commission is to handle complaints (ss to 20) and then in <case> with the reference of certain complaints to the
Conduct Division. Section 22 provides that particular complaints referred to the Conduct Division will be considered by a panel of three judges (only one of whom may be retired) appointed by the Commission "to be members of the
Conduct Division for the purpose of exercising the functions of the
Division".

Sections 23 to 29 then make a variety of provisions about the functions and duties of the Conduct Division. Sections 26-29 are of sufficient importance to the construction question to warrant being set out in full: "Dismissal of complaint by Conduct Division
The Conduct Division shall dismiss a complaint to the extent that the
Division is of the opinion that: the complaint should be dismissed on any of the grounds on which the
Commission may summarily dismiss complaints; or the complaint has not been substantiated.

Substantiation of minor complaint
If the Conduct Division decides that a minor complaint is wholly or partly substantiated, it shall either so inform the judicial officer complained about or decide that no action need be taken.

Substantiation of serious complaint
If the Conduct Division decides that a serious complaint is wholly or partly substantiated, it may form an opinion that the matter could justify parliamentary consideration of the removal of the judicial officer complained about from office.

Reports .(1) The Conduct Division shall, in relation to a serious complaint, present to the Governor a report setting out the Division's conclusions.

If the Conduct Division decides that a serious complaint is wholly or partly substantiated and forms an opinion that the matter could justify parliamentary consideration of the removal of the judicial officer from office, the report shall set out: the Division's findings of fact; and that opinion.

The Minister shall lay the report or cause it to be laid before both
Houses of Parliament as soon as practicable after the report is presented to the Governor.

The Minister may present the report to the Clerks of both Houses of
Parliament when Parliament is not sitting, and thereupon the report shall for all purposes be deemed to have been laid before both Houses of Parliament, but the Minister shall nevertheless lay the report or cause it to be laid before both Houses of Parliament as soon as practicable after Parliament resumes.

A report presented to the Clerk of House of Parliament may be printed by authority of the Clerk of the House and shall for all purposes be deemed to be a document published by order or under the authority of the House.

A copy of any report presented to the Governor shall also be furnished forthwith to the Commission.

The Conduct Division shall, in relation to a minor complaint, furnish a report to the Commission setting out the action taken by the Division.

A copy of any report referred to in this section shall also be furnished to the judicial officer concerned." 
The evidence in the proceedings before this court shows that two members of the Conduct Division formed the opinion that, upon the findings of fact set out in the Conduct Division's report to the Governor, the matters of complaint before them could justify parliamentary consideration of the removal of
Justice Bruce. The third member did not form that opinion and his findings were not identical with those of the majority. It was submitted for Justice
Bruce that before there could be a report by the Conduct Division within the meaning of <case> which would qualify as a report under <case> fulfilling the condition precedent to the power of parliament to consider removal of a judge, the opinion referred to in <case> and <case> must be unanimous.

If this point of construction could be considered without regard to cl 4 of
Schedule 3, and without regard to decisions in past cases which this court must take into account in deciding the question here, it would be arguable that a report of a majority of the members of the Conduct Division is not a report of that Division, and the plaintiff's unanimity submission would be quite strong.

The two matters I have mentioned, in combination, seem to me to make the argument too difficult to accept. First, cl 4 of Schedule 3 seems clear in its terms and can most easily be read, in its overall context, as applying to all questions and matters upon which the Conduct Division is required to come to a conclusion is carrying out its functions.

Clause 2 of the Schedule insists that all three members of the Conduct
Division must be present at any of its meetings. Once a meeting is under way many matters may have to be decided. Some of these may be procedural as distinct from substantive, others will be substantive matters that the
Division must decide in the course of its proceedings. I do not think that the heading of Schedule 3 can be used to confine the operation of cl 4 to the first class of matter only. It seems to me that the provisions of Schedule 3 relate to the procedure of the Conduct Division in carrying out its proceedings, including the sense of the way in which the Division decides to fulfil its functions. The opinions that must be formed and the decisions that must be made under ss 26, 27, 28 and 29, as well as the various actions permitted or required under ss 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36 and 38, all seem to me to be matters upon which the Conduct Division must arrive at conclusions in proceeding to carry out its functions. All of these seem to me to be procedure (although often substantive procedure) for the purposes of Schedule 3.

Thus, it seems to me, Schedule 3 taken by itself goes a long way towards showing that the Division's findings of fact and opinion referred to in s (2) need only be by majority.

Even if Schedule 3 were to be left out of account altogether on the construction point, there would still be a common law rule to deal with, sometimes called the rule in Grindley versus Barker <case>; [(1798) 1 B & P 229] The case concerned the interpretation of a statute which provided for the appointment of a number of persons to carry out public duties, but which did not say whether those persons should be unanimous in carrying out their duties. The court seems to have accepted that the ordinary meaning of the words governing the appointments of the persons would require, if the question were one of private law, that they should act unanimously. However, relying on a sentence in Coke's notes upon Littleton, the court took the view that in regard to public law, and where public duties were concerned, convenience required only that a majority would be sufficient, in the public interest. The court also recognised that the words of a statute could be sufficiently clear to require unanimity, but did not think they were of that necessary clarity in the instant case.

Although Grindley versus Barker is not in itself a particularly persuasive decision, it has from time to time been followed by courts of high authority.
The report of the Privy Council decision In the Matter of an Arbitration and
Award between the Province of Ontario and the Province of Quebec (Vol IV,
Cases Decided on the British North America Act 1867 (ed Cartwright 1892) 712) although rather muddled, makes it clear that the rule was there followed (see in particular Lord Selborne at 721); also, many of the cases referred to in argument, reported at 716-717, are on the point, and lend it considerable support. Since then the rule has been followed by the New Zealand Court of
Appeal, Atkinson versus Brown [[1963] NZLR 755]; by a three member Divisional Court of the Queens Bench Division in England, Picea
Holdings Limited versus London Rent Assessment Panel [[1971] 2 QB 216]; and by this court in Bowen-James versus Delegate of the Director General of the Department of
Health, [(1992) 27 NSWLR 457.] I think this court must accept it as an established common law rule.

My conclusion is therefore that the words themselves of the Act and the operation of the common law rule in Grindley versus Barker make it necessary to reject the plaintiff's unanimity submission.

The various bases on which the plaintiff submitted this court should hold, on administrative law grounds, that the Conduct Division's report was of no legal effect are set out in detail in the reasons of the Chief Justice. The accepted rules governing administrative law review limited the available arguments and, to my mind, left the plaintiff in the position where only one of them needed any detailed consideration.

This argument was as follows. The reasons of the majority in the Conduct
Division show that their conclusion that there was continuing incapacity in the plaintiff to perform the judicial function was significantly influenced by what they took to be the view of Dr Gilandas that the plaintiff had an "ingrained personality attribute of procrastination" independent of his depressive illness and continuing following the relief he had obtained from that illness in the early months of this year. This view of the effect of Dr
Gilandas's evidence was derived in particular from a letter dated 4 May 1998 written by Dr Gilandas to the Crown Solicitor in response to questions in a letter dated 1 May 1998. The letter of 4 May 1998, although on the face of it it justified the view taken in par 71 of the report, contained opinions based either on misleading or incomplete material. Therefore, the opinions expressed in it were of no value, and the report, being significantly influenced in its conclusions by such opinions, was relevantly flawed.

The reason this argument warranted further consideration is that it was correct to say that when Dr Gilandas spoke in his letter of 4 May 1998 of recent promises to deliver judgments not having been met by Justice Bruce, he was not referring to the most recent factual examples of unmet promises, which the Crown Solicitor was intending him to take into consideration, but to a less specific and somewhat earlier state of affairs. For the most recent unkept promises there were excuses and explanations which Dr Gilandas had not taken into account in arriving at his opinion. It was argued that had he had the full picture he may well have expressed quite a different opinion on the "ingrained ... procrastination" issue.

The argument however fails, it seems to me, when the transcript of what happened in the Conduct Division on 7 May 1998, following the tender of Dr
Gilandas's letter, not objected to, is considered. The mistake which had led to Dr Gilandas not having received all the material upon which he was asked to comment was made known to Dr Gilandas, the Conduct Division, and the parties.
There was cross examination upon it and, although it does not emerge particularly clearly, it seems to me there was undoubtedly material before the
Conduct Division at the end of Dr Gilandas's evidence upon which it was properly open for the Conduct Division to take the view that Dr Gilandas had then had the opportunity to take the full picture into account and had nevertheless remained of the same opinion.

This aspect of the challenge to the Conduct Division's report therefore fails.
The other aspects of the challenge also all fail in my opinion, for the reasons given by the Chief Justice.

My conclusions on the first two matters I have discussed are sufficient to lead me to agree with the Chief Justice that the plaintiff's summons should be dismissed. However, I wish to state briefly my views on the third matter to guard against possible misunderstanding of the respective roles of the Conduct
Division, this court, parliament and the executive in dealing with the question of the possible removal of Justice Bruce from judicial office.

The Conduct Division, as an administrative (that is executive) body had the duty and function of making findings of fact and of forming an opinion to be set out in a report to the Governor (that is the executive government). If, and only if, the Conduct Division's report set out the opinion that the matters referred to in it could justify parliamentary consideration of the removal of Justice Bruce on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity, each House of Parliament could consider whether it would address the
Governor seeking removal on the ground (in the present case) of proved incapacity.

The function of this court in hearing and deciding Justice Bruce's claims that the report of the Conduct Division was either not a report at all within the meaning of the Act, or was flawed in a way requiring this court to declare it of no effect, was to consider whether the Conduct Division had made an error of law in carrying out its function or had made a report significantly affected by mistake misunderstanding or oversight of fact, or influenced by irrelevant consideration, or overlooking relevant consideration, or otherwise so unreasonable in result that some legal error or misconception on the part of the Conduct Division in arriving at its conclusions must have been involved. It was not the duty of this court to do over again the fact finding and opinion forming tasks of the Conduct Division; indeed the court has no power to undertake such activity. The proceedings before it were not an appeal and were limited to an examination of the kind just described. Its function was very different from that of the Conduct Division.

Quite different again will be the role of parliament, if both Houses decide to undertake it. In that event there will be a motion before each House that the
House should address the Governor seeking removal of Justice Bruce on the ground of proved incapacity. Each House will also have before it the report of the Conduct Division setting out the Division's opinion that the matters referred to in the report could justify parliamentary consideration of the removal of Justice Bruce on the ground of proved incapacity. The fact of that report having been to the Governor empowers each House to consider whether it will address the Governor. It does not oblige either House to do so. The material before each House will not necessarily be the same as that before the
Conduct Division (nor perhaps the same as that before the other House). For instance, there is no reason why a House, in considering what to do, should not take into account events bearing upon the incapacity of the judge which have taken place since the giving of the evidence before the Conduct Division, upon which its report of 15 May1998 was based.

I am not expressing any opinion upon the question whether such material would have to be taken into account by each House, still less what effect it might have. I am saying, however, both that the material each House takes into consideration may be different from that on which the Conduct Division based its report and, whatever the material is that each House considers, the decision to be made on such material will be quite a different kind of decision from that of the Conduct Division.

The Conduct Division's report was based on the opinion that the matters referred to in it could justify parliamentary consideration of removal. The very different question for decision which will face each House is whether the material before it, including but not necessarily limited to the Conduct
Division's report, leads the House to decide that it will address the
Governor seeking removal on the ground of incapacity of the judge which the
House itself has judged to be proved.

I wish also to express explicit agreement with what the Chief Justice has said concerning the opinion formed by the minority member of the Conduct Division and its availability in any consideration of the possible removal of Justice
Bruce from office.

I agree with the orders proposed by the Chief Justice.

SHELLER JA: I agree with the Chief Justice. 
POWELL JA: I agree with Spigelman CJ. * * * 
