

Regina versus Baartman Matter No 70368/93 [1998] NSWSC 654 (23 October 1998) 
Last Updated: 12 January 1999 
REGINA versus JON LESLIE BAARTMAN (NO. 2) /93 October 1998 
Dunford J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Criminal Division 
JUDGMENT: - (See p 189 of transcript.) 
HIS HONOUR: On the first day of this trial, 19 October, before the jury was empanelled I heard argument pursuant to <case> [Criminal Procedure Act, 1986](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/) on a number of preliminary and evidentiary issues set out in a document headed Notice of Motion filed in Court on 12 October last. 
In relation to the evidentiary matters I delivered judgment on Tuesday 20
October, and in relation to the other preliminary matters, on Monday I ruled against the applications on behalf of the accused and indicated I would give my reasons later. I now do so.

Items 1 and 3 may conveniently be dealt with together. They sought directions in specific terms in my opening remarks to the jury prior to the Crown
Prosecutor's address, and, in relation to one of them, remarks to the entire jury panel before it was selected. The specific terms sought are set out in the notice of motion.

A trial judge is not obliged to make any opening remarks to the jury, and until about 10 to 15 years ago in my experience did not do so. The jury was sworn, the accused formally put in their charge by the Associate, and the
Crown Prosecutor then opened the case.

The only obligation on the Judge is to sum up at the end of the case, although a practice has grown up, said to be desirable by the Court of Criminal Appeal, of giving appropriate directions during the course of the trial on particular pieces of evidence, such as when the evidence is given that an accused person declined to be interviewed, that he was entitled to do so and that no adverse inference should be drawn against him for that reason.

It is in fact my custom to make preliminary remarks to the jury, and in those remarks I do refer to the onus of proof on the Crown to prove the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt, although not in the formula of words sought in the notice of motion on behalf of the accused.

I believe it is undesirable to clutter criminal trials with any further directions, introductory remarks or such beyond those which are necessary to ensure that the accused receives a fair trial according to law. Jurors are generally persons of average intelligence and I believe that, without being told, they would realise that they should not make a decision until they had heard the evidence for both sides. In any event, the accused's counsel has the right of final address and can draw their attention to this matter.

There is no requirement that I give the directions sought at the beginning of the trial, and I am not persuaded that in this trial I should depart from my usual practice.

Item 2 in the Notice of Motion sought that I direct the jury before the indictment was read that the indictment is not evidence, but only a document listing the charge brought by the Crown, and also that I should not read the indictment more than once, and not send the indictment into the jury room.

Once again, I would have thought it obvious to anyone with a modicum of intelligence, such as the average juror, that the indictment is not evidence, particularly as when it is read by the Associate on arraignment of the accused it is preceded by the words "XX you stand charged for that ...".

It is not my practice to send the indictment to the jury room in cases where, as here, there is only one count, although I often do so where there are multiple counts as a convenient aid for the jury to work through the different charges on which their verdicts are required. I also find that it is often convenient to refer to the terms of the indictment in the summing up when giving directions of law, especially as to the essential elements of the offence to be established by the Crown, and I can see no reason why this should not be so.

Item 4 sought an order pursuant to <case> [Crimes Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) to allow the accused to remain seated on the floor of the Court. Section 400 is as follows: "In every case, whether of felony or misdemeanour, the presiding Judge shall have power to order the accused to enter the dock or usual place of arraignment, or to allow the accused to remain on the floor of the Court, and in either case to sit down, as such Judge shall see fit." 
Except for a proviso to the effect that the accused in cases of libel or assault, not being indecent assault, could remain on the floor of the Court, which was repealed by the [Defamation Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/) <case>
Schedule 1, the section has been in its present form since 1900. The practice in my experience has generally been, particularly in the case of persons charged with offences of violence, for the accused to be required to enter and remain in the dock, but to be allowed to sit down. I see no reason why this practice should be departed from in this case.

It was suggested that jurors may think there is an element of danger to them from the accused, and the dock represents a presumption of guilt. I regard those suggestions as fanciful. A dock, particularly one constructed as is the present dock in No. 5 court, King Street, is hardly likely to prevent danger to jurors or other persons in the court room, if there is such a danger; and I am not persuaded that anyone in this community would regard it as representing a presumption of guilt, particularly when the person occupying it is referred to throughout the trial until verdict, not as the prisoner, but as the accused, and the jury are reminded of the presumption of innocence and the onus on the Crown to prove the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt on many occasions throughout the course of the trial.

I am informed that other judges at times allow accused to sit on the floor of the Court; it is not my practice. My practice has been that all accused, irrespective of the nature of charges, remain in the dock unless there is some special reason obvious to all those present, for example, physical infirmity or extreme youth or old age.

In particular it has been my practice to require accused persons charged with white collar crime to remain in the dock during the trial. There are some accused, not so far as I know including the present accused, who because of their history of escape or attempted escape are needed to be kept securely in the Court. If the submissions for the accused were to be accepted and the majority allowed to sit outside the dock one wonders what juries could be expected to make of an accused being required to be kept in the dock. I believe there is a very real danger in permitting the accused in some but not all trials to sit outside the dock, as the jury may speculate that such course indicates the judge believes those outside the dock are innocent and those in the dock are guilty.

For these reasons my practice, as I say, has been that all accused persons remain in the dock subject to the exceptions noted above.

Item 5 in the notice of motion sought an order that : "The volume of directional material prepared for the use of Supreme Court judges in giving directions to the jury be made available to the accused for examination and copying in connection with the preparation and trial of the case".

The Criminal Trials Bench Book is a manual prepared for and made available to judges of this division of the Supreme Court and judges of the District Court for them to use if and as they see fit. There is no obligation to use the formulae of words set out in the suggested directions contained therein but, as the High Court has said on more than one occasion, summings up are not required to follow any particular form of words provided they are appropriate to the circumstances of the case: Domican versus the Queen <case>; [(1992) 173 CLR 555] at 561-2.

It is in the interests of justice to maintain as much as possible the freedom of the trial Judge to tailor his summing up to the exigencies of the particular case, lest it degenerate into a mechanistic recitation of abstract propositions: Carr versus the Queen <case>; [(1988) 165 CLR 314] at 319.

A summing up should include directions as to the ingredients of the offence which the Crown has to establish and how the relevant law must be applied to the facts of the particular case: R versus Zorad [(1990) 19 NSWLR 91] at 105. As the summing up must relate the law to the facts of the particular case any general formula of words will often require modification to make it relevant and intelligible to the jury in relation to the facts of the particular case.

It was submitted that unless the Bench Book were made available as requested the trial counsel would not know in what terms the judge was going to sum up; but even if it was made available in many cases trial counsel would be none the wiser. Often a judge does not finalise the content of his or her Summing
Up until after the evidence is concluded and he or she has heard the addresses of counsel, which hopefully have identified the issues in the case. But even apart from these considerations, it must be borne in mind that the Bench Book does not contain a set of standard directions to be recited parrot fashion in every case. Some judges use it most of the time, some never use it, some, including myself, use it as a reference or starting point on some issues and not at all on other issues.

To suggest, as counsel for the accused did, that he cannot defend his client to his maximum capacity unless he knows in advance what the judge's directions are going to be is not only wrong but missing the point, because access to the
Bench Book will not disclose what my directions will be. As I have already said, I am not bound to, and may not, use the formula in the Bench Book, and on some issues I never do.

In an appeal against conviction on the ground of misdirection the issue can never be whether the trial judge has summed up in accordance with the suggested directions in the Bench Book, but whether or not he or she has summed up in accordance with the law, and the law is to be found not in the
Bench Book, but in the judgments of the High Court of Australia and the Court of Criminal Appeal and is summarised in text books, including Watson,
Blackmore & Hosking: Criminal Law NSW (LBC), and Howie and Johnson:
Criminal Practice & Procedure NSW (Butterworths). See also Glissen and
Tilmouth: The Right Direction (1990 - Butterworths).

We do not in this State, as apparently is the case in some other parts of the common law world, have a standard set of directions authorised by statute to be used without deviation in all cases, and the Bench Book should not be regarded as if it was such.

If a practice grew up of it being made available, one could anticipate lengthy arguments in advance as to whether the judge should vary the formula, and, as
I said, some judges, at least in respect of some issues, do not use the Bench
Book at all. It is the duty of counsel when preparing a case to familiarise themselves with the relevant law, to listen carefully to the summing up and if they are not satisfied with it to seek that the directions be corrected or further directions be given: see [Criminal Appeal
Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/), r 4.
 * * * 
