

Regina versus Gaitano Modica aka Gary Modica No. 60474/94 [1998] NSWSC 1050 (22
November 1998) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
GROVE(3), JAMES(1) AND HULME(2) JJ
HRNG
SYDNEY, 1 September #DATE 1:9:1995 #ADD 10:10:1995
ORDER
Appeal allowed
JUDGE1
JAMES J This is an application by Gary Modica for leave to appeal against sentences imposed upon him by Judge Flannery in the District Court on 31
August 1994. The applicant had pleaded guilty to each of two counts in an indictment charging offences under Commonwealth law.
In the first count the applicant was charged that between 5 June 1987 and February 1992, he was engaged in organised fraud in that he committed three or more public fraud offences, namely offences under s.29D of the Commonwealth
Crimes Act of defrauding the Commonwealth by evading customs duty and sales tax on goods imported into Australia.
In the second count in the indictment the applicant was charged that between 1 May 1991 and 11 February 1992 he had conspired with two other persons, Enzo Robert Modica, who is the applicant's brother, and Jin Hui "Freddie"
Chen to import prohibited imports being not less than a commercial quantity of cocaine.
Under s.83 of the [Proceeds of Crime Act, 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/poca1987160/) (Commonwealth) a person engages in organised fraud if he engages in acts that constitute three or more public fraud offences, from which he derives substantial benefit and the expression "public fraud offence" is defined as including an offence under s.29D of the Crimes Act. It is an offence under s.29D of the Crimes Act to defraud the Commonwealth. The maximum penalty for the offence of organised fraud is a fine not exceeding $250,000 or imprisonment for 25 years or both.
By virtue of s.233B(1)(bc) and s.235 of the Customs Act, conspiring with another person to import prohibited imports into Australia, where the prohibited imports are not less than the commercial quantity of a narcotic substance, carries a maximum penalty of imprisonment for life. The commercial quantity applicable to cocaine is 2 kilograms.
On the second count Judge Flannery imposed a sentence of five years imprisonment to date from 22 November 1993, the date when the applicant was taken into custody. On the first count his Honour imposed a sentence of five years imprisonment to date from the 22 November 1998, that is a sentence fully cumulative on the sentence imposed on the second count. His Honour specified an aggregate non-parole period of five years from 22 November 1993.
On the hearing of this application no criticism has been made of the facts found by his Honour which his Honour recorded in his remarks on sentence.
Those facts had been taken by his Honour from statements of the facts of the offences which had been prepared by Federal Police officers and admitted in the proceedings on sentence, apparently without objection.
The facts of the offence charged in the first count are complicated but it would appear to me that the facts of the offence can, very compendiously, be stated as follows.
The applicant caused three forged replicas of Australian Customs Service stamps to be made. He disposed of one of those stamps. He used the other two stamps to defraud the Commonwealth of duty in the following way.
The applicant offered to consignees of imported goods a customs clearance service at very reasonable rates. The imported goods were mainly Italian shoes but also included other goods. The applicant or an accomplice, instead of arranging for payment of duty in the ordinary way, would stamp waybills for the goods with one of the forged stamps and present the stamped waybills to freight forwarders who were holding the goods in bond stores, representing by reference to the impressed stamps on the waybills that duty had been paid, thereby obtaining the delivery of the goods.
From late 1991 onwards, an electronic system for clearing goods was introduced by the Customs Department, which was known as the "EFT" or electronic funds transfer system, whereby clearance advices were sent by the
Customs Department to customs agents over a computer network after duty had been paid by electronic transfer.
After the introduction of this system, the applicant produced bogus clearance advices on a computer to obtain delivery of goods on which duty had not been paid.
On 11
February 1993, Federal Police searched the applicant's home pursuant to a search warrant, took possession of the two forged replica stamps and arrested the applicant.
When interviewed by the Federal Police later on 11 February 1992, the applicant made a number of admissions. He admitted he had used the stamps over a period of 24 months to clear seven shipments of imported goods. The sentencing judge, however, found that the applicant had used the forged stamps or bogus clearance advices in relation to approximately importations over a period of nearly five years and that approximately three and a half million dollars duty had been evaded.
His Honour said in his remarks on sentence that he was unable to determine how much money the plaintiff had himself received, either gross or nett, from his fraudulent acts. The applicant had, of course, by pleading guilty to the charge of organised fraud conceded that he had derived substantial benefit from the public fraud offences.
The facts of the second offence were, as his Honour remarked, less complicated and not unusual. I propose simply to refer to the part of his
Honour's remarks on sentence in which his
Honour summarised the facts of that offence. His Honour said:- "There is no doubt that of the three alleged co-conspirators, the prisoner, Mr Gary Modica, was the principal. He organised the proposed importation of cocaine. He was a shipping clerk of import/export experience. He worked for Hoover Australia
Pty Ltd in its shipping department. He had, for some years, been using Australian Customs Service stamps to clear goods through customs without paying the relevant customs duty or sales tax. I have already dealt with that. He planned to create false entries on the documentation through customs, clearing the package containing cocaine without the package being scrutinised. He had contacts in the drug world in New
South Wales and in the United States.

His brother played a subordinate role. He was a go-between, acting on the prisoner's instructions for the importation.

Mr Chen was sought out. He had been engaged in commercial drug dealing and was a vendor of cocaine and other narcotics. The agreement was to bring in 2.5 kilograms. They needed initially $15,000 to purchase the cocaine.
There were a lot of negotiations between these three people commencing from May, still continuing close to the time of arrest in February 1992.
Mr Chen provided $9,000 in or about July of 1991 for the purpose of the importation. The importation never took place".
As regards subjective matters, the sentencing judge noted that the applicant was 33 years old at the time of sentencing, that he was married but separated and that he had no significant criminal record. His Honour observed that the pleas of guilty were not early but said that nevertheless the applicant should get credit for his pleas of guilty.
Later in his remarks on sentence his Honour said that the applicant's plea of guilty to the first count had saved the Court system the large amount of time which would have been required, if the Crown had been put to strict proof of the organised fraud offence.
In his remarks on sentence, his Honour considered in relation to the second offence the question of parity with the co-offenders, Enzo Robert
Modica and Jin Hui "Freddie" Chen, both of whom had already been sentenced by another District Court judge. Robert Modica had been sentenced to four years imprisonment with a two and a half years non-parole period. His Honour Judge
Flannery considered there was no real parity between the applicant and his brother, who had been a "subordinate member of the triumvirate of conspirators".
Chen had been sentenced to six and a half years imprisonment, with a non-parole period of four and a half years. I However, it was difficult to compare the applicant and Chen, because Chen was also sentenced for other offences, including a number of offences of supplying heroin. He had previous convictions for drug offences and he was on parole when he entered into the conspiracy charged in the second count and he had not provided any assistance.
On the other hand, his Honour found that Chen had not been a principal in that conspiracy, the applicant being the sole principal. On the hearing of this application, no argument was really put to us based on any alleged disparity.
His Honour observed in his remarks on sentence that the most dramatic feature of the case was the assistance the applicant had provided. This assistance was outlined in two timetables which became exhibits in the proceedings on sentence and was described in an affidavit by a lawyer who had helped the applicant in his dealings with the Federal Police. His Honour felt at liberty to expatiate in his remarks on sentence on the assistance the applicant had provided, because the applicant had himself disclosed part of what he had done to the media and his Honour was informed during the proceedings on sentence that those against whom the applicant had provided assistance were already aware of what the applicant had done.
After the applicant was arrested on 11
February 1992, an arrangement was made between the applicant and the Federal Police that the applicant be released on bail to assist the Federal Police in other investigations. The applicant remained at liberty for a period of about 20 months between 11
February and 22 November 1993. For most of the period of 20 months, the applicant assisted the Federal Police in relation to a man who his Honour, in his remarks on sentence, referred to simply as "C". C was not himself a violent or dangerous person. However C introduced the applicant to other persons, one of whom, a well-known criminal, was said by police to have a fearsome reputation and to be suspected of having committed a number of murders and to be reputed to be a major heroin distributor. The applicant had a number of meetings with C and reported to the police a number of plans to import drugs.
From about July 1993 onwards the applicant pretended to participate in a conspiracy by C, the well-known criminal I have already referred to and a second well known criminal to import cocaine into Australia. The applicant covertly recorded conversations with the conspirators and later attended a meeting of the conspirators while fitted with a listening device. The information the applicant obtained was highly incriminating of the conspirators. His Honour found that the applicant's assistance to the police had resulted in the arrest of the conspirators, following the arrival in
Australia of four kilograms of cocaine. C has pleaded guilty to a drug offence and criminal proceedings against the other two conspirators are still pending.
His Honour accepted that the providing by the applicant of this assistance put the applicant and his family in great personal danger. The Federal Police had warned the applicant at the outset of the extreme danger to himself of what he was undertaking.
His Honour noted that certain differences had arisen between the applicant and the Federal Police, perhaps, although his Honour refrained from making any finding, because the plaintiff wished to be indemnified against the offences with which he had been charged but was not being granted any indemnity. The applicant declined to make a statement which he had helped to prepare and declined to give evidence against the conspirators. However, it was common ground in the proceedings on sentence that the applicant had provided so much information that the actual giving of evidence by the applicant would not be critical to a successful prosecution of the conspirators who had not pleaded guilty.
His Honour appears to have accepted evidence by the applicant's lawyer that the applicant had spent about 1000 hours of his time in assisting the
Federal police, that he had not been recompensed, and that there was a serious risk of reprisals against the applicant both while he is in prison and particularly after he is released. His
Honour recommended that the applicant serve the sentence his Honour was about to impose in a Special Purposes Unit.
Some evidence was given before his Honour in the proceedings on sentence that the applicant was a compulsive gambler. The applicant did not himself give evidence in the proceedings on sentence and the evidence on this point of his mother, his wife and a friend of the applicant would seem to me to be far from compelling. For example, the applicant's wife, while claiming that the applicant was a compulsive gambler, said she did not find out that the applicant was a compulsive gambler until after he was arrested. Nevertheless, his Honour in his remarks on sentence said: "I have no hesitation in finding that he was a compulsive gambler," and his Honour held that the applicant's gambling problem appeared to be a most significant factor. However, even giving full weight to his Honour's finding, it seems to me that there is a considerable difference between the position of the present applicant and the position of the prisoner in R versus Purnell (unreported, CCA 29 September 1994).
The process by which his Honour arrived at the sentence he imposed for the offence of conspiracy in count 2 of the indictment, was to take as a head sentence a term of eighteen years as being appropriate to the principal of a conspiracy to import a commercial quantity of cocaine into Australia, to reduce that to twelve years in order to take into account s16G of the Crimes
Act, to make a further reduction to 10 years because of the plea of guilty and because no narcotic substance had actually been imported, and then to reduce the head sentence to five years by allowing a 50% discount for the assistance the applicant had provided.
It was suggested on the hearing of this application that his Honour should have taken the steps that he did in a different order but I do not think that it is necessary for the disposition of this appeal to rule on this submission.
As to the offence of organised fraud in count 1 of the indictment, his
Honour considered that for this offence also, after allowing a discount for assistance, a sentence of five years imprisonment was appropriate. His Honour then said, according to the transcript of his remarks on sentence: "The principal of totality, I propose to endeavour to apply the non parole period" . His Honour then proceeded to impose two cumulative sentences of five years imprisonment, with an aggregate non parole period of five years.
The first ground of appeal relied on by counsel for the applicant in written submissions was that the sentencing Judge had not properly taken into account the principle of totality. The sentencing Judge was sentencing the applicant for two offences and his Honour made the sentences for the two offences fully cumulative.
It was not submitted by counsel for the applicant that his Honour erred in making the sentences cumulative, although it was submitted that it would have been preferable to make the sentences concurrent. However, it was submitted that if the sentences were to be made cumulative, there was a need to observe the sentencing principle of totality. This principle, as stated by
Sir Laurence Street in R versus Holder [(1983) 3 NSWLR 245] at 260 requires a sentencing Judge who is sentencing an offender for a number of offences and who intends to impose cumulative sentences, "to evaluate in a broad sense the overall criminality involved in all the offences and, having done so, (to) determine what, if any, downward adjustment is necessary in the aggregate sentences in order to achieve an appropriate relativity between the totality of the criminality and the totality of the sentences".
In the present case the sentencing Judge referred to the principle of totality in his remarks on sentence. However, it was submitted that near the conclusion of his remarks on sentence, the sentencing
Judge, although what he said had become somewhat garbled in the process of being transcribed, had merely said that he would endeavour to apply the principle of totality to the non-parole period he would set and it was further submitted that the only way the sentencing
Judge had applied the principle of totality was in relation to setting the non-parole period.
It was submitted his Honour should have applied the principle of totality in determining the aggregate head sentences and that if he had so applied the principle of totality, he would have imposed total head sentences of less than ten years, and then, consistently with the approach he adopted in his remarks on sentence, set a non-parole period of less than two-thirds of the reduced total head sentences.
It was submitted on behalf of the Crown that the principle of totality requires a sentencing Judge, having considered what would be the appropriate sentence for each offence considered separately, to consider whether any downward adjustment in any of the individual sentences is required, so as to achieve an appropriate relativity between the totality of the criminality and the totality of the sentences but does not necessarily require that there in fact be any reduction in the individual sentences.
It was further submitted by the Crown that the head sentences imposed were in each case towards the bottom of the range for the applicant's criminality and that the non-parole period of 50% of the total of the head sentences was also towards the bottom of the range.
I am conscious of the need not to subject remarks on sentence by a busy
Judge to too refined an analysis, especially in a case where it is clear that an experienced Judge has expressly referred in his remarks on sentence to the principle of sentencing which, it is submitted, he failed properly to apply.
It is at least arguable that his Honour's remarks should be treated as being elliptically expressed and that if the steps in his Honour's reasoning process are spelt out, it can be seen that his Honour, having recognised the need to apply the principle of totality, considered that sufficient effect could be given to the principle in the present case by making a reduction in the non- parole period, without reducing the aggregate head sentences.
I am, however, troubled that it would appear from his Honour's remarks on sentence that his Honour, having independently determined what would be an appropriate head sentence for the offence in count 2 and what would be an appropriate head sentence for the offence in count 1, did not apply the principle of totality in relation to the head sentences by inquiring whether any downward adjustment was required in relation to the head sentences, as distinct from the non-parole period, in order to achieve an appropriate relativity between the totality of the criminality and the totality of the head sentences. I consider that if the principle of totality is applied to the head sentences, there should be some downward adjustment of the head sentences and I would propose that the head sentence for the offence in the first count be reduced to three years, so that the total of the head sentences is eight years. That leaves outstanding the question of whether the aggregate non-parole period of five years should be varied.
It was contended in written submissions that his Honour has failed to take properly into account what was submitted to be the period of "quasi-custody" to which the applicant had been subject between 11 February and 22 November 1993. It was submitted that the applicant had spent much time assisting the police, that the time spent assisting the police amounted to a form of quasi-custody and that this quasi-custody should have been taken into account by the sentencing
Judge, quite separately from the discount for assistance. Reference was made to R versus Cartwright [(1989) 17 NSWLR 243] at 259.
There is no doubt that in appropriate cases a sentencing Judge should allow a discount for a period spent by a prisoner before he is sentenced in conditions which can truly be described as amounting to quasi-custody.
However, I do not consider that between 11 February 1992 and 22 November 1993 the applicant could properly be described as having been in quasi-custody. He was living at his home, the conditions of his bail were not onerous, for most of the time he was not engaged in assisting the police and he spent some of his time with a friend at the T.A.B or the race course.
In Cartwright's case, on the other hand, Cartwright was required by his bail conditions to live in Canberra, away from his home in Sydney, to report daily to the Federal Police in Canberra and to obey the directions and to accept the supervision of the Federal Police.
In any case, in R versus Stansfield (unreported,
CCA 8 June 1993) Sheller JA, with the approval of the other members of the Court including the Chief
Justice, said that time spent by a prisoner who provided assistance could appropriately be included in assessing the discount to be allowed for assistance. In my opinion, it is clear that in the present case the sentencing
Judge took into account the amount of time which the applicant had spent in providing assistance and the conditions in which he had provided that assistance, in arriving at the high discount of 50% for assistance. I reject this ground of appeal.
A variation of this last argument was put in oral submissions by counsel appearing for the applicant. It was submitted that a number of features or consequences of the assistance provided by the applicant, including the amount of time he had devoted to assisting the police, the more than usually onerous conditions under which the plaintiff would serve his imprisonment and his exposure to the risk of reprisals after being released, should have resulted, not merely in producing a substantial discount in the head sentences, but also in producing a proportionately longer than usual parole period.
I do not consider that this argument should be accepted. A liberal discount of 50% on each of the head sentences that his Honour would otherwise have imposed was allowed by his Honour for the assistance provided by the applicant. In fixing the amount of this discount, his Honour took into account the features and consequences which counsel mentioned in his argument. I do not consider that any further allowance should be made for the assistance, by way of reducing the non-parole period. In my opinion, having considered the amount of criminality disclosed in the offences, the minimum period of imprisonment the applicant should serve should be five years. This period is still somewhat less than the usual proportion of the reduced total head sentences of eight years.
I would accordingly propose that leave to appeal be granted, that the appeal in relation to the first count be allowed, that the head sentence imposed by Judge Flannery on the first count be quashed, that in lieu of the head sentence imposed by Judge Flannery on the first count, the applicant be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of three years to date from 22 November but that otherwise the appeal be dismissed and that in particular the appeal against the non parole order be dismissed. I propose time served should count. As an alternative way of producing the same result, all the sentences imposed in the District Court could be quashed, and this Court could re-sentence, imposing the same sentence on the second count but a lesser sentence on the first count.
JUDGE2
HULME J: I agree with the conclusions which have been reached.
JUDGE3
GROVE J The orders of the Court then are as follows: 
The application for leave to appeal against sentence is granted. The appeal is allowed. The sentences imposed in the District Court are quashed and in lieu thereof we impose the following sentences: 
On the second count the appellant is sentenced to 5 years imprisonment to date from 22 November 1993 ;  (b) on the first count the appellant is sentenced to three years imprisonment to commence on 22 November ;  (c) we specify an aggregate non parole period in respect of both sentences of five years to commence from 22 November 1993 and;  (d) we repeat the commendation of the sentencing Judge in relation to the custody of the appellant and  (e) time served to count. 
In light of the nature of the variation in practical terms, I do not propose to say anything further and we note Mr Game has indicated that legal representatives will explain to the appellant the detail required by the statute.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1998/1050.html  
