

Regina versus R B Ritchie [1996] NSWSC 603 (5 December 1996) 
REGINA versus Robert Bruce RITCHIE /95 
FRIDAY 26 July 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
McINERNEY J, ABADEE J 
JUDGMENT 
ABADEE J: The applicant seeks leave to appeal from a sentence imposed by Judge Madgwick QC in the Wollongong District court on 20 June 1995. The sentences constituted a minimum term of five months and sixteen days imprisonment from 20 June 1995, and an additional term of eighteen months. When sentencing, his Honour took into account pre-trial custody for two weeks.

The applicant pleaded not guilty to two charges, one of cultivating a prohibited plant (cannabis) and a further count of supply prohibited drug, namely, cannabis leaf.

The maximum penalty for both offences is a fine of $200,000 or imprisonment for ten years, or both. Sentences were imposed after a trial that lasted two days. The jury found the applicant guilty of both offences which were alleged to have been committed between 1 January 1994 and 5 May 1994.

The applicant was granted bail on 26 July 1995 pending appeal to this Court.
He has served one month and twenty-two days, including the period of pre-trial custody for those offences.

His Honour, when sentencing the applicant, observed that the Crown case was, amongst other things, a compelling one. His Honour also observed that one of the problems in sentencing was that nobody, except the applicant in the courtroom, knew "exactly what was going on". Despite this his Honour, doing the best he could, described the factual situation as follows: "There were too many plants in a condition and of a size for them to have been growing at Bellambi. It seems likely, therefore, that the garage at the
Bellambi flat was being used as a temporary place of storage of the plants in the course of their being relocated and, I would think, replanted elsewhere.
Some, however, were being grown in a device known as a terrarium, a kind of small forced growth hydroponics system, utilising a bright light and cabinet arrangement in the garage, indeed inside a wardrobe. The prisoner has said that another person was involved in this and there is no real reason to disbelieve that.

As to the supply, it seems highly likely that the prisoner and another person, a female - which one I do not know, but I am very suspicious - were involved together in drug dealing over a considerable period at the Bellambi house. The indicia of drug dealing over a period, but on a small scale, were found." 
His Honour, whilst noting that the applicant aged fifty-three at the time of sentencing, was a social smoker of cannabis, also observed that the evidence would suggest that he had not been a long time drug dealer. Indeed, his Honour found the contrary to be the case. He concluded that the applicant was a drug dealer for some time on a small scale who was getting himself involved in some kind of cultivation operation which was not the smallest instance of crime. He had one minor offence for smoking Indian hemp many years before.

His Honour had regard to the various subjective factors, including the fact that the applicant's business had failed, that he had been a hard worker, his age, background, intelligence and fundamental decency, and considered that these matters in particular warranted a dramatic reduction in the minimum term.

Several submissions have been made on behalf of the applicant. It is submitted that the findings of fact made in relation to the offences, to which I have earlier made reference, were made in error. In support of that submission we were taken to the directions that were given by the trial judge during the course of his summing-up to the jury at the trial. However it seems to me that it was for his Honour to determine the facts relevant to sentencing pursuant to the jury's verdict.

Mr Skinner submitted that from the way the matter was left to the jury, his
Honour was prevented from finding beyond reasonable doubt that the applicant had cultivated 134 plants or that the applicant had supplied more than the drugs found in the floral velvet bag - Exhibit B.

It was submitted by Mr Skinner that, having regard to the way the case was put to the jury, the only facts of which his Honour could be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt were that the applicant was guilty of cultivating a quantity of cannabis leaf found in a brown bag, that is 3.1 grams, and further that the applicant was guilty of supply on the basis of having in his possession the quantity of cannabis leaf found in the floral velvet bag, that is 53.3 grams.

With respect, I do not agree with these submissions. His Honour, in sentencing, was entitled to have regard to the material that had been adduced in evidence and to find the appropriate facts. His Honour felt indeed there was evidence before the jury on which they could well and truly find that there were 134 plants that were located. In this connection I note the record of interview which went before the jury as an exhibit. Question and answer 20 referred to 134 cannabis plants being discovered at the Bellambi premises and the response of the applicant when he was told about this was, "Yeah, but that he had not counted them". In relation to the matter of growth of the cannabis plants, at question and answer 34, it appears that the applicant admitted that he had done what was necessary to assist in the growth of the cannabis plants.

There was also material revealing that the applicant had agreed that he had been shown a floral quilted bag found in a pantry cupboard which contained four resealable plastic bags, each with varying amounts of cannabis leaf.
There were scales, $550 in cash, a number of unused resealable bags, a small resealable bag containing a number of seeds, and two pieces of paper with names and figures.

It seems to me that, in the circumstances, it was for the trial judge to decide upon what facts he would sentence on each offence.

His Honour also had before him what had been before the jury, namely, the applicant's statement, which was a short statement containing an opening paragraph of considerable brevity in which the applicant denied he was a drug supplier and asserted that he did not grow or cultivate "those plants".
Although the applicant had to be given the benefit of any doubt, the sentencing judge was not bound to act on the basis of any version most favourable to the applicant. It seems to me in the circumstances what he did was entirely open and seems to have accorded with the facts as revealed by the evidence. The first submission should be rejected.

The next submission is that his Honour failed to mention in his remarks on sentence the medical condition, despite the evidence that had been given by the applicant's brother to the effect that at some stage the applicant had received highly intensive care for coronary matters, had developed a serious psoriasis and that he had a history of asthma. No evidence was given as to the ongoing effects, if any, of those health problems. No medical evidence was adduced at the trial. No evidence was given by the applicant as to the extent of the medical conditions or as to whether they were of an ongoing nature.
Indeed, the evidence at the trial was to the effect that the applicant, according to his statement, on the night in question was staying at his girlfriend's place, albeit that he had a skin condition, and notwithstanding that skin condition there was also evidence that he was looking for work at
Neat.

It seems to me that in the circumstances the applicant's counsel at the trial and during the course of the sentencing proceedings did not consider it was a matter of any moment to put before the sentencing judge the matter of the applicant's health, presumably upon the basis there was nothing available to show that imprisonment would in fact have had any grave effect on his health.
In any event clearly his Honour was aware as to the health situation of the applicant. Indeed, he made reference, when sentencing, to the applicant's background. The submission in relation to the medical condition should be rejected.

Next, it was submitted there was no reason why a pre-sentence report was not called for. There are several answers to this. Firstly, none was sought and, secondly, his Honour was not bound to seek one. This submission should be rejected.

Then it was submitted that his Honour was not bound to impose a full time custodial sentence. Well, to answer that, it seems to me that the two year sentence imposed in the light of his Honour's findings was well within his
Honour's sentencing discretion and, as will be observed, the minimum term component had been substantially reduced.

Finally, it seems to me, in relation to the statistics provided by the applicant, none of them go to a suggestion that the sentence was outside the range of sentencing discretion. It is also to be remembered that the applicant was convicted of an offence of cultivate and supply, and concurrent sentences were imposed.

For all these brief reasons it seems to me that no ground of complaint has been validly made out and I would propose that the application for leave to appeal against the sentence should be refused.

In the light of the fact that the applicant was granted bail by this Court on July pending an appeal, in order to give effect to the fact that the applicant has been on bail, it becomes necessary to recalculate the sentence.

The sentence should be recalculated as follows. Minimum term of four months and nine days to be imposed commencing 26 July 1996 and expiring 4 December , on which date I direct that he be released to parole, and an additional term commencing 5 December 1996 of one and a half years should be imposed.
They are the orders that I would propose.

McINERNEY J: I agree with the orders proposed by Mr Justice Abadee and the reasons he has advanced. The order of the court will be those proposed by Justice Abadee.
 * * * 
