

Gladio Pty Ltd versus Buckworth (No 2) [2015] NSWSC 1462 (8 October 2015) 
Last Updated: 16 October 2015 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Decision: the orders sought by SCTM
For the reasons I have given, the first order to be made in respect of SCTM's costs of the cross-claim (by Ashdown) against it is that Ashdown should pay those costs; there should be no Sanderson order. The question of a Bullock order has no application as between SCTM and Ashdown.
The second order sought by SCTM is that the costs so payable should be assessed on the indemnity basis from 31 March 2015. SCTM relies on offers made to settle.
Leaving aside evidence as to various conversations on the question of settlement, it is uncontested that SCTM made five offers of settlement to Ashdown. Each of them was, as Ms Horvath of Counsel for SCTM submitted, clear and unambiguous, and capable of immediate acceptance so as to give rise to a binding contract. Each of them involved genuine compromise, and (with a possible qualification as to the last two offers) was open for a reasonable time. Each was rejected, either expressly or by implication.
The first three offers can be considered together. They were made, respectively, on 30 March, 30 April and 25 May 2015. They offered either to pay a sum of money or to contribute in a stated share to any judgment against Ashdown (and costs). However, each of them required, among other things, that Ashdown provide SCTM with an indemnity. The scope of the requested indemnity was narrowed, but not removed.
The first offer articulated in detail the reasons why it was made and why it warranted acceptance. At least by implication, those reasons should be taken to apply equally to the second and third offers (and, for that matter, to the last two offers). In some cases, Ashdown made a reasoned response, and there was some debate as to the respective merits of the two parties' cases.
The first offer was made after the first day of hearing. On that day, each party (having provided a written outline of its case) was given the opportunity to open orally; some of them did so. The evidence of a witness, Ms Kritikos, who could not be available later in the year, was taken.
Thus, when the first offer was made, the parties had had the benefit of considering all the evidence in chief in the matter, the way in which each other party articulated its case, and the whole of the evidence of a key witness on one important factual question: namely, whether the records made available by SCTM to Gladio's legal searcher included the letter of 24 April 2009.
However, in my view, it was not relevantly unreasonable for Ashdown to reject those offers. It is clear that Ashdown was prepared in principle to compromise with SCTM. It is clear that Ashdown was prepared to compromise either on the basis of payment of an agreed sum or on the basis of an agreed percentage contribution to any adverse outcome. What Ashdown was not prepared to do was offer the indemnity sought by SCTM.
I do not think that it was relevantly unreasonable for Ashdown to decline to compromise on terms that might have exposed it to future liability arising out of the subject matter of the litigation. And the matters referred to at [86] and following below are relevant to the first three offers as well. They provide both cumulative and alternative support for the conclusion just expressed.
The fourth offer was made on 10 June 2015. It offered payment of $100,000.00, and also a contribution of 30% of any costs that might be ordered against Ashdown (with presently irrelevant exceptions). There was no request for an indemnity. It did however require judgment in SCTM's favour on the cross-claim.
That offer was expressed to be open for two days. However, it was rejected the day after it was made, on 11 June 2015. The fact that Ashdown was able to consider and reject the offer would suggest that, even though the time allowed for acceptance was short, it was sufficient.
In response to the rejection, SCTM made the fifth offer, on 11 June 2015. Relevantly, it increased the offer to contribute to costs from 30% to 50% (with the same exceptions).
The fifth offer was open for one day. It was rejected on 12 June 2015. Again, I infer that although the time allowed for acceptance was short, it was sufficient.
Mr Izzo, for Ashdown, submitted that even though the requirement for indemnity had been removed, it was not unreasonable for Ashdown to reject the fourth and fifth offers, because, if it did accept one or the other, it would remain embroiled in the proceedings at the suit at Gladio, and as a cross-defendant at the suit of Ms Buckworth.
The fundamental question between Ashdown and SCTM was whether the latter had made the letter of 24 April 2009 available to Gladio's legal searcher. I concluded that it had. But at the time all the offers were made, the only testimonial evidence on the point that had been tested in cross-examination was from Ms Kritikos, who was the human agency by whom the search was carried out. Her evidence was to the effect that the letter had not been among the records that she remembered seeing; and that, had she seen it, she would have remembered it because of its subject matter.
Ultimately, after detailed analysis of the evidence given by SCTM's witnesses (including in cross-examination), the documentary evidence and Ms Kritikos' evidence, I concluded, on the balance of probabilities, that the letter had been among the records made available to Ms Kritikos. However, it cannot be said that this must have been obvious to Ashdown at the time, had it considered the position objectively and dispassionately. On the contrary, as I see it, Ashdown was entitled to take the view, based on the evidence of Ms Kritikos, that its prospects of success as against SCTM were good.
Mr Izzo elaborated on that theme in his submissions. It is not necessary to go to the detail. I should however record that Ms Horvath's costs submissions, did not analyse why it was that, as she contended, it was relevantly unreasonable for Ashdown to have rejected the offers.
There is however another aspect of Mr Izzo's submissions that, in my view, is correct, and that does bear mention. At the time the fifth offer was made, it is likely (on the basis of the evidence that has been served on the costs question) that Gladio's costs, on the ordinary basis, would have been of the order of $400,000.00. Of course, the parties did not know that back in June 2015. But that is not the point.
The point is, rather, that acceptance of the fourth or fifth offers would have left Ashdown (had it lost) with a liability to pay in excess of $50,000.00 by way of damages (allowing for interest, and allowing for the offer of $100,000.00) and with a liability for costs. With the benefit of hindsight, the latter liability can now be recognised as having been of the order of $200,000.00, subject to assessment.
Mr Izzo submitted that a settlement along those lines did not reflect the view that Ashdown was entitled to take, based on the evidence that had been given, of the strength of its case against SCTM. In my view, that submission is substantially correct. And it is correct even if one substitutes, for the seemingly precise quantification, the words "many thousands of dollars".
The question, whether or not it was unreasonable to reject an offer of settlement, cannot be answered without attention to the particular facts of the case. In this case, the two matters to which I have referred justify the conclusion that it was not relevantly unreasonable for Ashdown to reject the offers. First, acceptance of them (any of them) would not have removed it as a party to the proceedings. It would have continued to be involved in any event. All that settlement would have done was buy off the prospects that (as happened) it might lose against SCTM.
That reason is not, of itself, a particularly powerful justification for the conclusion that rejection of the offers was not relevantly unreasonable. That is because, in my view, the question of reasonableness should be assessed with particular reference to the particular dispute, in connection with which the offers to settle were made. Although that particular dispute was one conducted in the context of the overall litigation, nonetheless, it was a confined dispute between Ashdown and SCTM, based on confined facts.
However, in my view, the second reason has much force. Although the offers put by SCTM were genuine offers of compromise (and Mr Izzo did not submit otherwise), the fact is that, at the time each was made, Ashdown was entitled to take the view, reasonably, that its prospects of success were good. Ms Kritikos' evidence would give support to such a view.
As things turned out, the evidence overall led to a different conclusion. But looking at the offers (in particular, the last two) at the time they were made, and looking at the position that Ashdown would have been in had it accepted the offers and then lost as against Gladio, I do not think that the implied view as to Ashdown's prospects of success vis a vis SCTM, as manifested by its rejection of the offers, was in any way unreasonable.
I conclude that SCTM should not have any part of its costs assessed on the indemnity basis.

Orders
Before I make orders to reflect what I have said, there is one more matter that should be noted. The hearing on 2 March 2015 was necessitated because Ms Kritikos (a witness called by Gladio) could not give evidence when the hearing was fixed to commence on 15 June 2015. It was not suggested that her unavailability for that hearing could not have been ascertained before the original hearing dates were allocated. On the application of Gladio, I made 2 March 2015 available, and the hearing on that day proceeded as I have described it at [77] above. I did so on the basis that Gladio should pay the other parties' costs of that day in any event, and made an order accordingly, on 13 February 2015.
The orders that I am about to make must be taken to be in addition to the costs order in respect of 2 March 2015 (and, for that matter, in addition to any other costs orders made from time to time on interlocutory applications).
Accordingly, I make the following further costs orders: * (1) as between the plaintiff and the first defendant: make no further order as to the costs of the plaintiff's claim against the first defendant and the first defendant's cross-claim against the plaintiff.
* (2) As between the first and second defendants: order the first defendant, as cross-claimant, to pay the second defendant's costs, as cross-defendant, of her cross-claim against it.
* (3) As between the second defendant and the plaintiff: order the plaintiff to pay the costs of its claim against the second defendant.
* (4) As between the second defendant and the cross-defendant to the third cross-claim: order the second defendant as cross-claimant to pay that cross-defendant's costs of that cross-claim.
* (5) Order the plaintiff and the first defendant jointly and severally to indemnify the second defendant for costs payable by it as cross-claimant to the cross-defendant on the third cross-claim, but only in respect of the period from the date of service of that cross-claim up until and including 30 March 2015.
* (6) Otherwise, and as between all parties, make no further order as to costs.
 
Amendments October 2015 - Amendment to formatting of paragraph [13].
 * * * 
