

Robertson versus Yamaha Motor Australia P/L [1996] NSWSC 139 (17 May 1996) 
Robertson versus Yamaha Motor Australia Pty Limited /94 
Friday 17 May 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
JAMES J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: These proceedings pursuant to the Compensation to Relatives Act have been brought by Mrs Jean Kerr Robertson, the widow and the administratrix of the estate of the late David King Robertson for the benefit of herself and two of the children of her marriage to the deceased. The deceased died on 20 December 1993 when he suffered fatal injuries in a collision between a jet ski being ridden by him and another jet ski. The defendant, Yamaha Motor Australia Pty Limited, which had provided the jet skis for use by the deceased and others, has admitted liability. The Court papers disclose that various cross-claims were brought in the proceedings but I was informed at the beginning of the hearing that all those cross-claims had been settled. Accordingly, the hearing before me was limited to the assessment of the amount of damages the plaintiff should recover from the defendant.

The plaintiff and the deceased were both born in Scotland, on 15 August 1947 and 30 August 1947 respectively. They were married in Scotland on 11 February and they migrated to Australia in 1970. There were five children of the marriage of whom two, Kirsty born on 20 March 1978 and Sarah born on 3 June were dependent on the deceased at the time of his death.

The deceased had worked as a journalist in Scotland and after migrating to
Australia he continued to work as a journalist. In 1972 he became the motoring editor of the Sydney Morning Herald and the Sun newspapers. In the mid 1980's he joined Australian Consolidated Press as the motoring editor of two magazines. In 1989 he became the editor of the Motor, a magazine published by
Australian Consolidated Press, and he continued to hold this position until his death. As the editor of the Motor magazine the deceased, apart from his regular salary, was provided almost every week, free of charge, with the use of a new motor vehicle which he test drove during that week and of which he had unlimited use during that week. The deceased and the plaintiff also had a Mercedes Benz motor vehicle. In her evidence the plaintiff described the
Mercedes Benz as "her" car, although in an affidavit sworn by her in support of her application for a grant of letters of administration she disclosed the
Mercedes Benz as an asset of the deceased's. The plaintiff was the sole beneficiary in the deceased's estate.

At the time of the deceased's death the deceased and the plaintiff were the owners as joint tenants of the family home at Castle Hill. In December 1995 the plaintiff moved out of the home at Castle Hill into another house which she had purchased. She intends to sell the former matrimonial home at Castle
Hill.

As I have already indicated, the plaintiff was married to the deceased when they were both only eighteen years old. During the marriage she worked for two periods only, a period as a full-time clerical worker between 1970 and 1973 (that is, soon after she and the deceased migrated to Australia) and a period between 13 September 1993 and 18 December 1993 when she worked part-time at
Amway at Castle Hill, packing goods which had been ordered. I accept the plaintiff's evidence that she took the part-time job with Amway in 1993 in very special circumstances, to help pay off bills which she had incurred on a trip with some of her children to the United States and that it had been a term of her employment by Amway that the employment would be temporary and would end before Christmas 1993.

The plaintiff gave evidence, which was unchallenged, that her daughter Kirsty had completed her Higher School Certificate in 1995, would be travelling overseas this year and would commence a tertiary librarian's course in 1997.
It was accepted by both counsel in the submissions they made to me that Kirsty would remain a dependent for the next four years.

The plaintiff gave evidence, which was similarly unchallenged, that her daughter Sarah was in Year 8 at high school. Both counsel in their submissions to me accepted that Sarah would remain a dependent for the next eight years.

There was no dispute at the hearing that the notional life expectancy of the deceased at the time of the trial was 29.78 years, that his notional net income from his salary was $943 per week and that an average of the rates of interest in Schedule J to the Supreme Court Rules for the period from the date of the deceased's death to the date of the hearing could be taken to be 11 percent per annum. Although I reserved giving judgment and although I will be delivering judgment approximately a month after the date of the hearing, I do not propose, for that reason, to make any adjustments to the figures used by counsel in their calculations of damages.

Counsel for the plaintiff in written and oral submissions contended that the plaintiff should be awarded damages under five heads, being damages for:-
Loss of superannuation benefit
Loss of domestic and handyman assistance
Loss of use of car
Loss of support
Interest on damages for past losses 
In this judgment I will, in general, deal with these claims one by one in the above order. Some issues are of course common to more than one claim. I will also have to consider such questions as whether the damages recoverable by the plaintiff should be reduced because of any accelerated receipt of benefits by her by reason of the deceased's death and what discounts or adjustments should be made to the damages otherwise recoverable to take into account contingencies and vicissitudes. It was agreed that in this judgment I should not announce a final verdict, so that some matters such as apportioning the verdict between the plaintiff and the children and applying any discount for the plaintiff's prospects of re-marriage could be left to the parties.

Loss of Superannuation Benefit 
This claim can readily be disposed of. The parties agreed that the amount that should be awarded is $62,500 and that this amount should be awarded, irrespective of whether I concluded that the deceased would have retired at age sixty-five or some later age.

Loss of Domestic and Handyman Assistance 
The plaintiff claimed that because of the deceased's death she had lost the benefit of domestic and handyman assistance which but for his death the deceased would have continued to provide, in the form of lawn mowing, gardening, maintaining the home swimming pool, caring for the dog which was kept as a pet (feeding, washing and walking the dog), maintaining and washing the plaintiff's car and doing home repairs.

At the hearing the plaintiff's original claim was that the deceased had spent a total of nine and a half hours a week performing these various kinds of assistance and that damages for both past and future loss of assistance should be assessed on that basis. However, in the course of final oral submissions to me, counsel for the plaintiff reduced the claims for both past and future loss of assistance so that the claims were based on an alleged loss of five hours a week of assistance.

Counsel for the defendant accepted that some damages should be awarded under this head. However, he submitted that I should simply award a lump sum of $10,000 to $20,000 as a buffer to cover both past and future loss.
Alternatively, he submitted that, if damages under this head were to be calculated on a weekly basis, then, on the evidence given by the plaintiff, I should find that the deceased had spent only between one and two hours a week performing such assistance.

The plaintiff's evidence about the amount of time which the deceased had during his lifetime spent performing these various kinds of assistance was, almost inevitably, somewhat vague.

In her evidence in chief she said that the amount of time the deceased had spent mowing the lawn of the house at Castle Hill was one hour per week. In cross-examination she said that it took only about fifteen minutes for the deceased to mow the lawn at Castle Hill and that he would mow it only once a fortnight in winter. Elsewhere in her evidence she said that after the deceased's death she had spent only about an hour a fortnight mowing the lawn and she accepted that that would have been about the amount of time the deceased had spent. There was no evidence about any lawn at the house she has moved to.

In her evidence in chief the plaintiff estimated that the deceased spent a few hours gardening every two to three weeks and accordingly on average would have worked about one hour a week gardening. In cross-examination she said that after the deceased's death she herself had worked about an hour every two weeks in the garden and that that was about the amount of time the deceased had spent gardening.

In her evidence in chief the plaintiff said that the deceased had spent about half an hour a day every day in attending to the home swimming pool. She adhered to this evidence in cross-examination. The new house to which she moved in December 1995 does not have a swimming pool.

In her evidence in chief the plaintiff said that the deceased spent a total of two hours a week walking, feeding and washing the dog. In cross-examination she accepted that the children sometimes fed the dog and that she herself sometimes washed the dog.

In her evidence in chief the plaintiff maintained that the deceased had spent an hour a week maintaining and washing her Mercedes Benz motor vehicle and that the deceased had spent on average an hour a week performing such tasks as repairing gutters, making other repairs, changing light bulbs and changing washers. In cross-examination she accepted that changing light bulbs does not take very long and that it was rare to have to change washers.

It is obviously impossible to make any precise determination of the number of hours per week of assistance the benefit of which the plaintiff lost by reason of the deceased's death. As I have already indicated, the number of hours claimed by counsel for the plaintiff in his opening address and by the plaintiff in her evidence in chief was almost halved in counsel for the plaintiff's final submissions.

I accept that the deceased spent sometime almost every day attending to the swimming pool although I think it is probable that the plaintiff has considerably (but unconsciously) exaggerated the amount of time spent on each occasion by the deceased. In December 1995 the plaintiff and her children moved out of the house at Castle Hill into another house which has no swimming pool. Counsel for the plaintiff accepted that this fact affected the plaintiff's claim for damages for loss of assistance but submitted that I should allow for the contingency that the plaintiff might have a swimming pool built at her new home or buy another house which has a swimming pool. It was suggested that the plaintiff might like a swimming pool for the benefit of her grandchildren. However, the plaintiff has just moved to a house which does not have a swimming pool. She gave no evidence of any intention to build a swimming pool or to buy another house which has a swimming pool and there was no evidence about what grandchildren she has or where they live. I reject this particular submission by counsel for the plaintiff.

I have concluded that I should find that the number of hours of assistance the benefit of which the plaintiff has lost was four hours per week from the deceased's death up to December 1995, while the plaintiff and her family continued to live in the house at Castle Hill with the swimming pool, and since then has been two hours per week and for the future will continue to be two hours per week.

As I have found that the plaintiff has lost and will continue to lose assistance which would have taken at least two hours a week to perform, I do not consider that I should award the plaintiff merely a lump sum as a buffer but that I should award the plaintiff a sum calculated on a continuing weekly basis.

A further issue between the parties was the hourly rate at which I should calculate damages for the loss of domestic and handyman assistance, if I assessed such damages on an hourly basis. Counsel for the plaintiff submitted that I should adopt the hourly rate charged by the Dial-An-Angel organisation, which was said to be $20 per hour. Counsel for the defendant accepted that the hourly rate charged by Dial-An-Angel could be taken to be $20 but disputed that that was a reasonable rate.

The defendant called as a witness a Mrs Christie who gave evidence that she was a care consultant, providing assessments of the needs for care of disabled persons. She said that the base award rate under the Miscellaneous Workers'
Home Care Award was $10.97 an hour and that an individual not using an agent could procure home care services at that rate. In cross-examination Mrs
Christie said that her knowledge was derived from the Award itself and from reports by organisations providing care which were to be found in files that came to her for assessment. She agreed that Dial-An-Angel is the largest provider of domestic services in New South Wales.

I consider that I should adopt the hourly rate said to be charged by Dial-An-
Angel of $20.

As regards damages for future loss, I consider that the only discount which should be allowed is a small discount of 5 percent to allow for the contingency that the deceased if he had lived, might have become incapable of performing some of the services towards the end of his life.

I calculate damages for the loss of domestic and handyman assistance as follows:- 
Damages for past loss for two years from December 1993 to December 1995 - four hours per week at $20 per hour for two years $8,320 
Damages for past loss from December 1995 two hours per week at $20 per week for approximately eighteen weeks $720 $9,040 
Damages for future loss $40 per week for 29.78 years (multiplier 1033) $41,320 less discount for contingencies $39,254 
Interest computed on the two components of damages for past loss of assistance with some rounding off totals $1,200 
Loss of use of car 
I have already referred to the evidence that as editor of Motor magazine the deceased was provided, free of charge, on an approximately weekly basis, with the use of a new motor vehicle which he test drove during that week and of which he had unlimited use. The cars provided to the deceased covered a wide range, from very small cars such as Suzukis and Daihatsus to luxury cars. The plaintiff agreed with a figure put to her that the deceased himself drove forty to fifty thousand kilometres a year in the test cars, driving the cars to and from work and driving the cars while he was at work. However, the use which the plaintiff had of the test cars was quite limited. If she went out with the deceased by car when he was not at work, they would generally use the test car, which the deceased would drive, rather than the Mercedes Benz. The plaintiff estimated that on average the use by her or the family of the test car would amount to fifty to sixty kilometres a week. They had no use of a test car during periods totalling about six or seven weeks a year when the deceased was overseas. The plaintiff used the Mercedes Benz to transport the children and to do shopping.

I have already referred briefly to the circumstances in which the deceased was killed. The deceased had been attending a function to mark the launching of a new Toyota motor vehicle and after his death and up to the present the Toyota company has provided the plaintiff with a Toyota motor vehicle, on the basis that the plaintiff pays the running expenses but otherwise free of charge.

A question which arises is whether after the conclusion of this court case
Toyota will continue to provide the plaintiff with a vehicle. The plaintiff said in her evidence that she did not know what arrangement there was with
Toyota. A Mr Tighe was called as a witness in the plaintiff's case. He gave evidence that he was a media liaison supervisor employed by Toyota. He gave hearsay evidence that his understanding was that once the plaintiff's court case was concluded, a Toyota vehicle would be offered to the plaintiff at its written down value. Mr Tighe implied that Toyota would not continue the present arrangement.

Because Toyota has, up until now, provided the plaintiff with a free vehicle (apart from running costs), the plaintiff did not make any claim for damages for the past loss of the use of a car. However, she made a claim for damages for the future loss of the use of a car, on the basis that by the deceased's death she had lost a benefit, namely the use of the test cars, which she might reasonably have expected to continue to receive and that Toyota would no longer continue to provide her with one of its vehicles.

It was submitted, firstly, on behalf of the defendant that the plaintiff will not suffer any loss unless Toyota terminates the arrangement whereby it provides one of its vehicles to the plaintiff and that I would not be satisfied that Toyota will terminate this arrangement. Counsel for the defendant pointed out that the plaintiff said that she had no knowledge of what the arrangement was. Counsel criticised Mr Tighe's evidence and the failure by the plaintiff to call a witness better qualified than Mr Tighe to give evidence about Toyota's intentions, and in particular a Mr Smailes, who was mentioned in Mr Tighe's evidence.

There is some force in these submissions by counsel for the defendant.
However, I consider I should find that Toyota will terminate the arrangement, once the plaintiff's court case is concluded. It is understandable why Toyota has provided a vehicle in the past. However, I do not consider that Toyota will be prepared to provide a vehicle in the future, after the plaintiff has received what will necessarily be a substantial award of damages.

Counsel for the plaintiff based the plaintiff's claim for damages for the future loss of the use of a car on a report by Mr Wood, the manager of the
Vehicle Economics and Fleet Automotive Technical Services of the N.R.M.A. In his report Mr Wood explained that because the deceased had been provided with a wide range of vehicles, ranging from very small vehicles to luxury vehicles,
Mr Wood had selected a Holden Berlina as an example of a middle of the range car. In his report Mr Wood assumed an on the road price of $38,000, a six year ownership cycle and a distance travelled each year of 15,000 kilometres. On these assumptions Mr Wood calculated average standing costs of $119.90 per week over the six year period and average running costs of $44.73 per week. In calculating average standing costs he adopted the method used by the
Australian Taxation Office in allowing income tax depreciation on motor vehicles of 221/2 percent per annum calculated on diminishing balances. Mr
Wood calculated the combined average standing costs and average running costs at $164.63 per week. The plaintiff's claim for damages for the future loss of the use of a car was that the plaintiff should be awarded damages calculated at the rate of $164.63 for every week until the deceased would have retired, either at age sixty-five or age seventy, less any discount for contingencies.

I have already indicated that I reject the first submission which was made by counsel for the defendant that I would not be satisfied that Toyota would terminate the present arrangement, under which the plaintiff concedes that she suffers no loss. Counsel for the defendant then sought to rely on a report by a Mr Best, in opposition to the report by Mr Wood. In many respects Mr Best, who had been asked to comment on Mr Wood's report, did not disagree with Mr
Wood. One respect in which he did disagree with Mr Wood related to the allowance for depreciation as a cost. Using what he said were actual figures stated in a publication described as the "Red Book" for a six year old Holden
Berlina manufactured in 1989, Mr Best said that according to the Red Book the written down value of a Holden Berlina at the end of six years would be 45.12 percent of its original cost, whereas if Mr Wood's report was adopted, the written down value of a Holden Berlina after six years, using the Australian
Taxation Office method of calculating depreciation, would be only 22.9 per cent of the original cost. Mr Best implied that in his opinion the Australian
Taxation Office method of calculating depreciation produced excessive depreciation costs.

Neither Mr Wood nor Mr Best gave oral evidence before me. I consider that I should prefer Mr Wood's report. He is an officer of an experienced and reputable organisation. Such qualifications as Mr Best may have are not stated in his report and what the Red Book is is not explained in his report. In his report Mr Best appears to place some reliance on circumstances peculiar to a
Holden Berlina, whereas the whole point of choosing a Holden Berlina was to choose a fair, representative example.

The next submission made by counsel for the defendant was that, even if I preferred Mr Wood's report to Mr Best's report, the whole basis of the plaintiff's claim for damages for future loss of a car was ill founded and that I should award only such damages as would represent the running costs for a weekly distance of fifty to sixty kilometres, which had been the full extent of the plaintiff's use of the test cars. Counsel submitted that I could adopt the figure of 15.51 cents per kilometre for average running costs of a Holden
Berlina set out in Mr Wood's report.

In my opinion, I should find that the basis on which counsel for the plaintiff put the plaintiff's claim for damages for future loss of a car is erroneous. I accept that the plaintiff will in the future suffer some loss consisting of the loss of the use she would otherwise have had of the test cars and she should receive some compensation for that loss. However, it is important to note how limited her use of the test cars was. It was limited to travelling in the test cars with the deceased on an average of about fifty kilometres a week (allowing for the deceased's absences overseas) at times when the deceased was not at work and not using the test cars exclusively for his own purposes.
Neither the deceased nor the plaintiff had any proprietary interest in the test cars. To award the plaintiff a sum of money such as would provide the plaintiff with a car, of which she would be the owner, which would be available for use by her at all times and which she could drive for 15,000 kilometres a year without incurring any expense, would, in my opinion, be seriously to over compensate her for her loss.

I consider that I should award the plaintiff damages broadly based on average running costs of 15.51 cents per kilometre for a distance of fifty kilometres a week. However, this could only be a rough basis for calculating such damages and damages calculated on such a basis would not provide the plaintiff with a full measure of compensation for the loss which she has suffered. For example, the plaintiff has been deprived of travelling in a wide range of brand new cars including luxury cars. Accordingly, a further amount of compensation should be allowed.

A question which arises under this head of damages and also in relation to the claim for damages for loss of support is the question of when the deceased would have retired, in which event both his regular salary and the provision to him of test cars would have ceased.

Counsel for the plaintiff prepared two schedules of damages, one based on the deceased retiring at age sixty-five and the other based on the deceased retiring at age seventy. Counsel for the plaintiff submitted that I should adopt the schedule based on the deceased retiring at age seventy. Counsel referred in particular to evidence that the deceased was forty-six years old at the time of his death, that he had a long employment history as a motoring journalist, that he had been editor of the Motor magazine for four years, that he loved his work and that he had said that he never wanted to retire.

I have, however, concluded that I should primarily assess damages on the basis that the deceased would have retired at age sixty-five. This is the age usually conventionally chosen for male workers. The deceased would have become entitled to superannuation when he reached the age of sixty-five and he would not have received any further superannuation if he had worked longer. It seems to me much more probable than not that the deceased would not have continued past the age of sixty-five in an occupation which involved the constant testing of motor vehicles, including driving them at speed and putting them through manoeuvres designed to test their performance.

Although I have selected sixty-five as the age at which the deceased would probably have retired, I consider that there was a chance that the deceased might not have retired at the age of sixty-five. I will consider what allowance should be made for this chance, when I deal generally later in this judgment with the subject of discounts or adjustments for contingencies and vicissitudes.

Subject to any discount for contingencies, I award damages for future loss of the use of the car at $10,000.

Loss of support 
It was agreed that the salary figure on which damages for past and future loss of support should be calculated was $943 per week.

Evidence was adduced in the plaintiff's case that the deceased had spent only percent of his income exclusively for his own benefit. It was clear that some of the supporting figures in this evidence were "guess work".

Although this evidence had been adduced, counsel for the plaintiff expressly limited the plaintiff's claim to the mid points of the ranges set out in the righthand column of the table at p396 of Luntz Assessment of Damages for
Personal Injury and Death (3rd edition). Counsel accordingly submitted that during the period of the dependency of the plaintiff and both Kirsty and
Sarah (that is from the date of death of the deceased up to the present and for the next four years) the percentage of the deceased's income which would have been spent for the benefit of the dependants was 77.5 percent, that during the dependency of the plaintiff and Sarah (that is for a period of four years commencing in four years time) the percentage would have been 72.5 percent and that during the dependency of the plaintiff alone (commencing in eight years time and continuing until the deceased's retirement) the percentage would have been 66 percent.

Counsel for the defendant accepted that, subject to any evidence in the present case, I would be entitled to adopt the percentage figures in the table in Luntz. However, he submitted that I should adopt lower figures, namely percent, 65 percent and 60 percent respectively. This submission was said by counsel to be based on evidence which had been given about a personal bank account of the deceased and on the failure by the plaintiff to call Mr Smailes as a witness.

I accept that if the deceased had not died the plaintiff would have been fully dependant on him. I have already stated my finding that the plaintiff worked in late 1993 only because of the very special circumstances in which she then found herself. I accept, as was unchallenged, that Kirsty and Sarah would be fully dependant for the periods mentioned in counsel for the plaintiff's submissions.

There was only a little evidence in the case about the deceased's personal bank account. It was kept at a city bank and in it the deceased banked money he received from writing articles as a freelance journalist. There was no evidence about how much money was or had been in the account. The plaintiff as administratrix of the deceased's estate should have been in a position to lead further evidence about the bank account but she did not do so. However, I do not think that the state of the evidence about the bank account or any inference that might be drawn from the paucity of the evidence should affect my conclusion about the extent of the dependency of the plaintiff and her children. The failure to call Mr Smailes as a witness seems to me even less related to the issue. I propose to adopt the percentage figures for dependency contended for by counsel for the plaintiff.

In dealing with the claim for damages for loss of the use of a car I have already found that the deceased would probably have retired at age sixty-five, although there was a chance that he might have continued working past the age of sixty-five and retired later.

I accordingly calculate damages for loss of support as follows, reserving until later the question of any discount for contingencies. As I indicated earlier in this judgment, I have retained the figures in counsel for the plaintiff's calculations which were based on the hearing date of 17 April .

Past loss of support $943 x 77.5% from 20 December 1993 to 17 April 1996 (figure supplied by plaintiff's counsel) $87,406 
Future Loss of support $943 x 77.5% for four years $143,899 $943 x 72.5% for four years, deferred for four years $119,539 $943 x 66% for nine years, deferred for eight years $202,463 $465,901 
Interest on damages for past loss of support 
In the present state of the evidence it is unclear whether the plaintiff should receive interest and if so how much, particularly having regard to the receipt by her of workers' compensation benefits which were not quantified in the evidence. As the evidence is defective and the question was not really argued before me, I propose to allow the parties a further opportunity to address the question of interest on damages for past loss of support.

Acceleration of Benefits 
Counsel for the defendant submitted that there should be some deduction from the amount of damages which would otherwise be awarded because of the accelerated receipt of benefits by the plaintiff by reasons of the death of the deceased.

The most substantial assets in the deceased's estate were life policies, the proceeds of which could not be offset against the plaintiff's damages. However a small amount of personal property was also included in the assets of the deceased.

The plaintiff and the deceased had been the joint owners of the matrimonial home at Castle Hill and hence upon the deceased's death the plaintiff became the sole owner of that property by survivorship. The approximate value of the home was $210,000 and it was subject to a mortgage under which about $30,000 was outstanding. It was contended by counsel for the defendant that the plaintiff's half interest in the net value of the matrimonial home and in some personal assets in the estate of the deceased had a value of $110,000, that the present value of the sum of $110,000 received at the end of the notional life expectancy of the deceased would be $223,000 and that a sum equal to about a quarter of that amount should be deducted from the plaintiff's damages.

I do not consider that any deduction should be made from the plaintiff's damages either on the grounds of an accelerated receipt by her of benefits in the deceased's estate or an accelerated receipt by her of full ownership of the matrimonial home. The tendency in the authorities has been not to allow any deduction for an interest in the family home and its contents acquired in consequence of the death of the deceased. See Luntz at pp426 and 427 and the cases there cited.

Discounts or Adjustments 
I turn to the question of what discounts or adjustments should be made to the plaintiff's damages. This question is relevant to the amount of damages which should be awarded for future loss of the use of a car and future loss of support.

A particular adverse contingency is the plaintiff's prospects of re-marriage.
However, I find that the plaintiff's prospects of re-marriage are slight. She was married at the age of eighteen. The marriage lasted nearly twenty-seven years and produced five children. The plaintiff is now forty-eight years old.
She has not re-married since the deceased's death. She gave evidence that she has no single male friends and that she has no intention of re-marrying. When asked whether that was a view which she would hold for the rest of her life she, not surprisingly, answered "I don't know". I assess the discount which should be made for the widow's slight prospects of re-marriage at 3 percent.

I turn to the question of what other discounts or adjustments should be made.

Factors tending to negate or at least reduce the amount of any discount include that the deceased was forty-six years old at the time of his death, that he had a long history as a motoring journalist, that he was well established as the editor of the Motor magazine and that he was in good health. I find that there was a chance that he would have continued in regular employment after he reached the age of sixty-five. There was a chance that, whether or not he continued in regular employment, he would have earned income as a freelance journalist contributing articles to motoring magazines.

Factors tending to show that a discount should be made or increased would include the following. That the deceased would have continued to be constantly employed as the editor of a motoring magazine until he was sixty-five was not free from contingencies. Adverse contingencies would include the risk of the deceased being injured or becoming ill and the risk that by accident, illness or simply advancing years he might become incapacitated from satisfactorily testing motor vehicles. In this connection I note that an article in the Motor magazine for February 1994 which was admitted into evidence, includes an anecdote about the deceased driving a truck on a gravel road at a speed of seventy kilometres per hour into a sharp turn marked thirty-five kilometres per hour, in order to determine whether the vehicle would under steer or over steer. On the other hand, I infer that the deceased was an expert driver and there was no evidence that he had ever had an accident.

Another adverse contingency is that the continued existence of a magazine over a period of seventeen years is not assured. Sometimes magazines which were well established for a number of years subsequently fail.

I have concluded that on balance I should discount the damages for future loss of the use of a car and future loss of support by 10 percent.

I summarise my conclusions on damages as follows: 
Loss of superannuation benefit $62,500.00 
Loss of domestic and handyman assistance 
Past loss $9,040.00 
Future loss $39,254.00 
Interest on damages for past loss of domestic and handyman assistance $1,200.00 
Loss of use of car, including discount of 10% $9,000.00 
Loss of support 
Past loss $87,406.00 
Future loss, including discount of 10% $419,311.00 
Interest on damages for past loss of support (to be determined) 
Discount for prospects of re-marriage 3% 
Unless there is some application for a special order as to costs, there will be an order that the defendant pay the plaintiff's costs.

The matter can, if necessary, be relisted before me by arrangement with my associate.
 * * * 
