

Rafferty versus Commonwealth of Australia [1996] NSWSC 643 (20 December 1996) 
Rafferty versus Commonwealth of Australia /96 December 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
MASTER MALPASS 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: These proceedings were commenced by Statement of Claim filed on 9 May 1996. This process propounds a claim in respect of malicious prosecution. Section 88 of the [Supreme Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/), 1970 requires that such a claim shall be tried with a jury.

The Statement of Claim contains, inter alia, the following allegations:- "1. On or about 24 October 1994 and on or about 13 April 1995 the Defendant maliciously and without reasonable and/or probable cause brought thirteen charges by way of information and summons against the Plaintiff.

Particulars 
The thirteen informations and charges alleged that the Plaintiff made claims for domiciliary nursing services in various periods between 18 November 1992 and 17 July 1994 and that the said claims were in excess of those provided and therefore contrary to the provisions of Section 29D of the Commonwealth Crimes
Act. Copies of the thirteen charges are annexed hereto." 
The Defence, inter alia, denies the allegations made in paragraph 1. The plaintiff has filed a Reply. The Reply contains, inter alia, the following:- "2. Further in reply to paragraph 1 of the Defence the Plaintiff says that the
Defendant ought not to be allowed to deny that part of paragraph 1 of the
Statement of Claim which alleges the Defendant brought certain prosecutions against the Plaintiff `maliciously and without reasonable and/or probable cause'." 
On 26 September 1996, the plaintiff filed a Notice of Motion. The Notice of
Motion came on for hearing on 9 December 1996. The Court was asked, pursuant to Part 31 rule 2, to determine the following separate question before any trial:- "Whether the issue of estoppel operates to prevent the defendant from denying any or all of the allegations made in paragraph 1 of the Statement of Claim, and if so, which?" 
The hearing of the separate question took place with the consent of the parties. At a stage in the proceedings, I did raise a question pertaining to jurisdiction for the consideration of the parties. Counsel for the parties informed the Court that they were satisfied that I had jurisdiction to hear the separate question and that neither party intended to raise any question of jurisdiction.

One of the informations was laid by Marie Annette Hopkins. The other informations were laid by Michael Pemberton. Both of them were officers of the
Department of Veterans' Affairs and of the defendant. The prosecution of the matters was taken over by the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions (the Director). The committal took place before a Magistrate, Mr Jackson. On 1
December 1995, the learned Magistrate delivered a judgment discharging the plaintiff in respect of each of the informations.

The plaintiff made an application for costs pursuant to [section
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ja119/s41a.html) of the [Justices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ja119/), (the Act). The relevant provisions of that section are as follows:- 
A. (1) The Justice or Justices: when making an order discharging a defendant as to the information then under inquiry; or ...
 may, in and by an order made by the Justice or Justices (which, in the circumstances referred to in paragraph (a), may be the same order as the order discharging the defendant) adjudge that the informant shall pay to the clerk of the court to be paid to the defendant such costs as to the Justice or
Justices seem just and reasonable.

The amount so allowed for costs shall in all cases be specified in the order requiring payment.

Costs are not to be awarded in favour of a defendant unless the Justice or Justices is or are satisfied as to any of the following: ...
 that the proceedings were initiated without reasonable cause or in bad faith or were conducted by the prosecution in an improper manner; 
On 7 March 1996, the Magistrate delivered his judgment on the application. He found, inter alia, that the proceedings were initiated without reasonable cause and in bad faith. He took the view that, by virtue of [section (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/doppa343/s14.html) of the [Director of Public Prosecutions
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/doppa343/), 1983 (the
DPP Act), the Director had become the informant for the purposes of all informations. He ordered that the Director pay to the clerk of the Local Court at Port Macquarie for payment out to the plaintiff the amount of $31,660 as costs.

Generally speaking, there were four principal questions agitated between the parties. Counsel for the defendant have prepared written submissions.
Paragraph 2 of the submissions identifies the four questions. The paragraph is in the following terms:- "2. There are four broad reasons why the defendant says that no such `issue estoppel' operates. These are: (a) issue estoppel is not applicable to criminal proceedings; (b) issue estoppel cannot arise out of a committal hearing; (c) there is no sufficient identity of issues; and (d) the
Commonwealth was neither a party, nor privy to any such party." 
Generally speaking, the principles enunciated in (a) and (b) are not in dispute. The substance of the issue between the parties on these matters turns on a question of the characterisation to be attributed to the costs proceedings determined by the Magistrate. The plaintiff sees it as a discrete piece of civil litigation. The defendant sees it as a dispute ancillary to or arising out of the administrative process of the committal hearing. If the approach taken by the plaintiff is the correct one, it is common ground that the principles have no application to the separate question that is put before the Court.

Section 41A was introduced into the Act to enable the making of an order for the payment of costs by an informant to a defendant. It provides that such an order may be made when, inter alia, the justice is making an order discharging the defendant as to the information then under inquiry.

It was inserted by way of amendment in 1967 (Costs in Criminal Cases Act, ). Since that time, further amendments have been made to the section.
Subsections (2A) and (2B) were introduced by the Justices (Costs) Amendment
Act, 1991.

The section is to be found in Subdivision 7 (Committal Proceedings) of
Division 1 (Indictable Offences) of Part 4 (Procedure Before Justices) of the
Act. Subdivision 7 contains various provisions which, inter alia, deal with the conduct of committal proceedings (sections 32-47).

The Act contains other provisions dealing with costs (see, inter alia, the provisions referred to in subsection (3)). These provisions are to be found in
Division 2 (Offences punishable on summary conviction and complaints).

Subsection (2A) prohibits the awarding of costs in favour of a defendant unless the Justice is satisfied as to any of certain specified threshold matters (including the matters specified in (2A)(b)). When the justice is satisfied as to any one of those matters, he has a discretion to make an order for costs. I should add that subsection (2A) is expressed not to apply to the awarding of costs against an informant acting in a private capacity (subsection (2B)).

For present purposes, the relevant threshold requirements are "that the proceedings were initiated without reasonable cause or in bad faith". What may be necessary to satisfy each of the requirements is a matter for statutory construction.

In the interpretation of a provision of an Act, a construction that would promote the purpose or object underlying the Act is to be preferred (section of [Interpretation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ia191/), 1987). The
Court may look to other material (inter alia, [sections ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ia191/s34.html) and [35](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ia191/s35.html)).

Section 41A must be seen in context (as part of a subdivision dealing with committal proceedings). It follows [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ia191/s41.html) (Procedure on hearing of charge of indictable offence) and precedes [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ia191/s42.html) (Person committed for trial to be committed to prison). The words which express the relevant threshold requirements are to be seen in the context of the section and of other provisions of the Act. Subsection (2A) has the effect of restricting the exercise of the power to order costs against an informant who was not acting in a private capacity (to those cases in which one of the threshold requirements has been satisfied).
 [Section 3](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ia191/s3.html) provides a definition of "Committal proceedings" as follows:- "Committal proceedings" means a hearing before a Justice or Justices for the purpose of deciding whether a person charged with an offence should be committed for trial or for sentence, and includes any proceedings that are preliminary thereto or ancillary thereto.

The question of an order for costs arose whilst the Magistrate had the matter of the committal before him. The parties had legal representation. It seems that the Magistrate had regard, inter alia, to what happened during the committal (including findings made by him) and to other relevant material.
There was probably not any formal identification of issues. It could be expected that regard was had to the rules of evidence. The decision was final (subject to the pursuit of the available appellate process). In this case, there was no appeal.

It is common ground that a committal is an administrative process and that, generally speaking, no issue estoppel arises from the exercise of the administrative powers of the Justice.

The authorities show that estoppel is not restricted to judicial decisions (Ex parte The Amalgamated Engineering Union Re Jackson (1938) 38 SR 13 at 17 and The Administration of the Territory of Papua and New Guinea & Anor v
Daera Guba 130 CLR 353 at 453). There is serious doubt as to the applicability of principles of issue estoppel to proceedings before bodies or decision makers which are not courts of record (Wiest versus DPP <case>; [23 FCR 472] at ).

It has been said that issue estoppel arises only in relation to facts fundamental to a decision made in earlier proceedings (see Commonwealth of
Australia versus Sciacca [17 FCR 476] at 478-479 and the cases referred to therein). It applies only as to issues. The expression "ultimate issue" is often used. It has been said that an "ultimate issue" is one the proof of which was legally necessary to establish a cause of action, defence or reply in proceedings between the parties (Cachia versus Isaacs & Ors [(1985) 3 NSWLR 366] at 386).

The relevant considerations throw up questions that are not lacking in complexity. There are aspects of the relevant law which presently stand in an unsettled state. The authorities do not provide a ready answer to the problem.
There are matters upon which I have experienced fluctuating views. I bear in mind that I am required to determine the issue on the basis that it has been presented before me.

In the circumstances, I have come to prefer the view that the order made on 7
March 1996 cannot be seen as involving a discrete civil dispute concerning a question of costs. Rather, the exercise of the power to award costs should be seen as part of the process provided by the statute for the conduct of committal proceedings. The costs decision cannot be hived off and seen as something separate from the committal proceedings.

I now turn to the question raised by (c) of paragraph 2 of the submissions.
The authorities demonstrate that there must be a precise identity of issues (see, inter alia, Kosanovic versus Sarapuu <case>; [(1962) VR 321] at 328-329; Ramsay versus Pigram <case>; [118 CLR 271] and
Stewart versus GIO of NSW [(1996) 39 NSWLR 531).] 
In deciding the question of costs, the learned Magistrate found that the proceedings had been initiated without reasonable cause and in bad faith.
These were findings that saw threshold requirements to the making of an order for costs under section 41A being satisfied. The relevant issues in this case are matters pleaded in paragraph 1 of the Statement of Claim (that the 13 charges were brought maliciously and without reasonable and/or probable cause).

It is common ground that the expressions "reasonable cause" and "probable cause" are interchangeable. Their user is ascribed to being a heritage from old pleading redundancies (The Law of Torts, Fleming, 8th Ed at p 616).

The plaintiff contends that the word "malice" and the words "in bad faith" have the same meaning. It is not said that the contention is supported by any authority. It is said to be a matter of logic. Further, it is said that the words "reasonable cause" raise the same issue in both contexts.

The expressions "without reasonable cause" and "in bad faith" appear in a statute and their meaning is to be determined by proper construction of statutory provisions.

The matters pleaded by the plaintiff are certain of the elements which must be satisfied to succeed in a common law action founded on malicious prosecution.
The plaintiff must show that, not only was the prosecution devoid of reasonable cause, but also that it was animated by malice. The definition of the issues thrown up by these matters is to be found in case law.

The element of malice has been considered in many cases. It is said that the word "malice" has proved a slippery word in the law of torts (Fleming, p 620 et seq). "Malice", in this context, has a wider meaning than spite, ill-will or a spirit of vengeance and includes any other improper purpose (see, inter alia, Fleming (Supra)). The only proper purpose for the institution of criminal proceedings is to bring an offender to justice and thereby aid in the enforcement of law.

It seems to be common ground that "bad faith" should be seen as the antonym of "good faith". "Good faith" has been defined as meaning, inter alia, honesty or sincerity or the absence of bad faith (mala fides) (Words and Phrases Third
Edition, Volume 2: D-J, pp 321-322). A Legal Thesaurus (William C Burton,
Second Edition, pp 43-44) throws up a number of synonyms for "bad faith" ("malice" is not one of them). The dictionary meaning of "malice" is, inter alia, desire to hurt or harm another person.

I am not satisfied that the finding made by the Magistrate (that the proceedings brought by the charges were initiated in bad faith) and the issue to be decided in the present proceedings (that the charges were brought maliciously) are identical. In fact, I am of the view that they are different.

There remains the question of whether the other finding made by the Magistrate (that the proceedings brought by the charges were initiated without reasonable cause) is identical to another of the issues to be decided in these proceedings (that the charges were brought without reasonable or probable cause).

The element to be proved in a claim for malicious prosecution requires that certain conditions should exist (Mitchell versus John Heine & Son Ltd (1938) SR 466 at pp 469-471). Jordan CJ identified five conditions. At p 469, the
Chief Justice observed that:- "In order that one person may have reasonable and probable cause for prosecuting another for an offence, it is necessary that the following conditions should exist: (1) The prosecutor must believe that the accused is probably guilty of the offence. (2) This belief must be founded upon information in the possession of the prosecutor pointing to such guilt, not upon mere imagination or surmise. (3) The information, whether it consists of things observed by the prosecutor himself, or things told to him by others, must be believed by him to be true. (4) This belief must be based upon reasonable grounds. (5) The information possessed by the prosecutor and reasonably believed by him to be true, must be such as would justify a man of ordinary prudence and caution in believing that the accused is probably guilty." 
What is necessary to establish this element of without reasonable or proper cause is something that has been developed over the years by judicial authority.

As I have said, the threshold costs question decided by the Magistrate involves a matter of statutory construction. The application of this process need not produce a result identical to the approach developed by the Judges.
The statutory words can be given a literal meaning in their context which may not embrace the gloss (or all of it) that has developed at Common Law. The similarity of the language indicates that there will be common areas. However, despite the similarity of the language, I am not satisfied that there is the precision of identity that is required to found an issue estoppel.

The fourth question concerns the identity of the parties. The decision of the
Magistrate determined a question between informant and defendant in the committal proceedings. For the purposes of these proceedings, the hearing has been conducted on the basis that the Director duly became the informant.

The plaintiff advances alternative contentions. Firstly, it is said that the defendant was in fact the informant. Secondly, it is said that, in the relevant sense, the defender is a privy of the defendant. It is said that the
Director is an agent of the defendant and that it is vicariously liable for the acts and omissions of the defendant.

The parties are at issue on these contentions. The defendant says that the
Director is an independent statutory authority and a legal entity who is liable to be sued. There is dispute as to whether or not the costs could be recovered from him.

I have been referred to various provisions of the DPP Act (including sections 5 and 6). Section 5 establishes an Office (known as the Office of the
Director of Public Prosecutions). It provides that the Director shall control the Office. The functions of the Director are set forth in section 6 (these functions include the institution and the carrying on of specified proceedings (prosecutions on indictment for indictable offences against the laws of the
Commonwealth) and the doing of anything incidental or conducive to the performance of the specified functions). There is no express provision which imposes liability to be sued. I am informed that he is regularly sued. There is express provision for service of process on him (section 33A).

I do not accept the contention that the defendant was in fact the informant.
In the circumstances of this case, it cannot be maintained. I now turn to the alternative contention.

In Stewart, at p 533-534, Mahoney P said:- "The determination of who is a privy and in what circumstances is not easy to determine. It has been said that authorities of assistance in this regard are not extensive: see Carl Zeiss Stiftung versus Rayner & Keeler Ltd (No 2) [[1967] 1 AC 853] at 936, per Lord Guest; see generally G Spencer Bower & A
Turner on The Doctrine of Res Judicata, 2nd ed at 209. There is no golden thread which one may follow through the decisions; in so far as there are categories or descriptions of the classes of cases in which there is or is not privity, the verbal formulae employed in relation to them are, at the least, indeterminate and, no doubt, necessarily so.

In Ramsay versus Pigram <case>; [(1967) 118 CLR 271], Barwick CJ (at 279) saw privies as of three classes: blood, title and interest. These categories are adopted in Spencer Bower & Turner (at 209). In Halsbury's Laws of England, 4th ed, vol 16, par 990, the authors, citing Coke on Littleton (352a), group the instances under blood, law and estate." 
In this case, the class of privity was not identified. However, it would seem that it could only be that of interest. In Ramsay at p 279, Barwick CJ said:- "Of the three classes of privies of blood, of title and of interest, the only one which is submitted and indeed could be submitted to be relevant is that of a privy in interest. But I am unable to conclude that the Government or the
Police Department was in this sense a privy of the police officer. The basic requirement of a privy in interest is that the privy must claim under or through the person of whom he is said to be a privy. Here it is quite clear that the Government had no interest in the action between the respondent and the police officer: nor can it be said that the action brought by the police officer was brought by him in any sense on behalf of the Government or that in relation to the defence of contributory negligence the respondent could have been treating the Government as the real `defendant' to that claim. In every respect the action between the respondent and the police officer was personal to each of them, neither being in any sense in relation to the action or any of the issues involved in it, representative of another. Nor can it be said that the Government in any sense claims under or in virtue of the police officer or of any right of his, or that it derives any relevant interest through him." 
The argument that the defendant was not relevantly privy to the initiation or continuation of the prosecution has some force. However, I need not express any concluded view on it. The findings that I have made are sufficient to determine the separate question that I am called upon to decide. In these circumstances, it is unnecessary for me to give further consideration to this remaining matter. It is a matter upon which I would have appreciated the benefit of further argument.

I answer the separate question in favour of the defendant. I find that the issue of estoppel does not operate to prevent the defendant from denying any of the allegations made in paragraph 1 of the Statement of Claim. The plaintiff is to pay the costs of the Notice of Motion and of the separate question.
 * * * 
