

Sylvia Amos versus Joanne Catherine Lillyman [1997] NSWSC 149 (18 April 1997) `SYLVIA AMOS versus JOANNE CATHERINE LILLYMAN ` ``1859/97 
Friday 18 April 1997 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: Proceedings in this matter were commenced on 27 March, 1997. On that day Santow J, ex parte, granted an order that, upon the plaintiff giving the usual undertaking as to damages, the defendant be restrained from carrying out any further building work on her property which is next door to the plaintiff's property. That injunction has been continued until today.

Today Mr Evans, counsel for the plaintiff, indicated that he did not wish to seek a continuation of the injunction because of various site inspections and conversations, and the fact that there has been no recent wet weather. He wished the matter to stand over generally. That means, of course, for six months with liberty to restore to see what the winter would bring.

Mr McKenzie of counsel for the defendant opposed this course, and said that the plaintiff had virtually acknowledged that she had failed on the interlocutory application. She should thus be ordered to pay the defendant's costs, which costs should be taxed forthwith. He also sought a reference on the undertaking as to damages.

Mr McKenzie thought that Santow J, when first approached, was not given full disclosure of all the relevant material, which material included the fact that the plaintiff had been notified of the building application which the defendant had made to Marrickville Council, and had indeed by herself, and her solicitor, made representations at that time, which had been taken into account by the council when making its decision to grant building approval. He also made other suggestions as to material not disclosed to Santow J, but I accept Mr Evans' assurance that that other material was in fact handed up to his Honour.

There would appear to have been an incomplete disclosure to Santow J, but I would not like to say that categorically, because in these applications for costs one merely looks at the material relatively summarily, and an allegation that matters were not disclosed to the Judge granting ex parte injunctions is a rather serious allegation to make.

I prefer to rest my decision on the ground that, having looked at all the material that was put before me, I would not continue the injunction. There is a paucity of evidence as to a real threat of injury by any nuisance. There is insufficient to show that the balance of convenience favours the grant of an injunction.

The consequence is that the injunction will not continue after today, and the defendant is entitled - provided a motion is filed within 28 days - to refer the question of damages flowing from the undertaking to a Master for assessment.

On the question of costs, the plaintiff having failed, I cannot see any reason why she should not pay the defendant's costs, and as the probabilities are that this will be the end of this part of the litigation, I believe it is appropriate that the defendant have liberty to file a bill and assess those costs forthwith.

I stand the matter over for mention before the Registrar on 20 October 1997, with leave to any party to restore the matter to the Registrar's list earlier on five days' notice. Exhibits may be returned.
 * * * 
