

Regina versus McDonald Matter No Cca 60397/98 [1998] NSWSC 569 (12 October )

Last Updated: 4 December 1998 
REGINA versus MALCOLM JOHN McDONALD 
CCA 60397/98 October 1998 
Spigelman CJ, McInerney J, Sperling J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
HEADNOTE 
The respondent was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of five years consisting of a minimum term of two years and an additional term of three years on a count of aggravated dangerous driving causing death contrary to [s52A(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s52a.html) of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) . He was also sentenced to a period of imprisonment of three years consisting of a minimum term of two years and an additional term of twelve months on a second count of aggravated dangerous driving occasioning grievous bodily harm contrary to [s52A(4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s52a.html) of the Act. The Crown appeals against the inadequacy of this sentence.

Held: 
The sentencing discretion of the trial judge miscarried in a number of respects: . Prior convictions 
There was an error of principle in the reasoning of the trial judge in treating as irrelevant certain past offences committed by the respondent. 
Veen versus The Queen (No 2) <case>; [(1987-88) 164 CLR 465], 477.
 . Period and intensity of consumption 
His Honour erred in stating that he was obliged to accept the evidence of the respondent that he had not been drinking whilst in the car.
 . Inadequacy of sentence 
The total term of five years is beyond the lowest point of any appropriate range for the offence, taking into account both objective and subjective circumstances.
 . Reduction of minimum term 
His Honour's statement that there were "special circumstances" in the instant case justifying a proportionately smaller minimum term did not satisfy the requirement for stating reasons for that decision according to s5(3) of the
Criminal Appeal Act. Soulemezis versus Dudley (Holdings) Pty Limited [(1987) 10
NSWLR 247], 276-281 referred to. What was regarded by the trial judge as "special circumstances" could not be identified. The usual situation which justifies a longer than one-third additional term is the need for an extra period for purposes of rehabilitation: Morrissey NSWCCA 15 July 1994, 7. The findings of fact did not suggest that any such longer period was required. The principles of double jeopardy applied to Crown Appeals should be regarded as constituting special circumstances.

ORDERS
Appeal.
Sentence quashed.
Substitute therefor the following sentence: 
Count 1. Minimum term of three years imprisonment to commence on 8 May 1998 and to expire on 7 May 2001. Additional term of three years to commence on 8
May 2001 and to expire on 7 May 2004.

Count 2. A fixed term of two years and six months from 8 May 1998.
The driver's licence is to be disqualified for five years from 5 November .

REGINA versus Malcolm John McDONALD 
JUDGMENT 
SPIGELMAN CJ: This is a Crown appeal against sentence pursuant to [s5D](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5d.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act 1912](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) . 
The respondent pleaded guilty to one count of aggravated dangerous driving occasioning death contrary to [s52A(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s52a.html) of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) and one count of aggravated dangerous driving occasioning grievous bodily harm contrary to [s52A(4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s52a.html) of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) .

In the Newcastle District Court on 8 May 1998 his Honour Acting Judge Nader sentenced the respondent on the first count to a period of imprisonment of five years consisting of a minimum term of two years and an additional term of three years. On the second count he sentenced the respondent to a period of imprisonment of three years consisting of a minimum term of two years and an additional term of twelve months. Furthermore, the respondent was disqualified from holding a driver's licence for a period of five years.

At approximately 1.56am on Sunday 12 October 1997 a car driven by the respondent collided with another car which was driven by Ms Elizabeth
Delahunty and had one passenger, Mr Michael Venables. As a result of the collision Mr Venables died and Ms Delahunty suffered injuries of some severity.

The respondent was also taken to hospital, but was discharged after about seven hours. A blood sample was taken and returned a positive reading of 0.195 grams of alcohol per 100 mls of blood.
 [Section
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s52a.html) of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) creates four offences in two broad categories. The first category is dangerous driving occasioning death by a person driving, relevantly, under the influence of intoxicating liquor, for which the maximum penalty is ten years. The higher level offence of aggravated dangerous driving occasioning death has a maximum penalty of 14 years. The second category of offence is dangerous driving occasioning grievous bodily harm by a person driving, relevantly, under the influence of intoxicating liquor, for which the maximum penalty is seven years. The offence of aggravated dangerous driving occasioning grievous bodily harm carries a maximum penalty of eleven years.
 [Subsection
A(9)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s52a.html) defines "prescribed concentration of alcohol" as meaning a concentration of .15 grams or more of alcohol in 100 mls of blood. By reason of the positive reading in excess of this level, the respondent was charged and convicted of the aggravated level for each offence.

On the evidence which the respondent himself gave during the course of the trial, he had been drinking for about 12 hours. On Saturday 11 October he said he consumed a stubbie of beer between 2 and 3pm at his partner's mother's house. Afterwards he drove to a house in Glendale, where with some friends he consumed some beers until around 4.30pm. At around 6.30pm he drove to a hotel in West Wallsend to meet friends. Over a couple of hours he drank around four schooners of full strength beer. He then drove to another hotel, which was around one to one and a half kilometres away in Holmesville. At that hotel, over a couple of hours, he consumed three or four schooners of full strength beer. He then drove to a nightclub in Newcastle, which was 10 to 12 kilometres away, and there he consumed what he described as a couple of drinks of beer and bourbon. He left at around 1.15pm. He agreed that he considered himself to be drunk at the time. Indeed, on two occasions during the course of his journey his evidence was that he unsuccessfully tried to ring a taxi. He did not attempt to ring his defacto or obtain any other alternative transport.

It is plain from his own admissions that his conduct over the course of a period of some 12 hours was such that by continuing to drive during that period he abandoned responsibility for his own conduct. During the course of driving to Glendale, to West Wallsend, to Holmesville, to Newcastle, and then on the final fatal journey, he put at risk numerous innocent members of the public. He did so in complete dereliction of his duties to his fellow citizens, which the community as a whole, through the substantial maximum penalties which are now provided in [s52A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s52a.html) of the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/), has indicated that it wishes to condemn and deter in the strongest possible terms.

His abandonment of responsibility for his own conduct was manifest and further aggravated in the last moments of his journey, which culminated in the death of one innocent person and the injury of another. About ten minutes before the final accident the respondent approached the intersection of Tudor Street and
Beaumont Street in New Lambton. He failed to stop at a red light. Indeed, he drove through the intersection a full 9.34 seconds after the traffic lights had changed to red. Another motorist who was approaching the intersection from
Beaumont Street, where the traffic lights were green, estimated the respondent was driving at a speed of 90 kph. This was a 60 kph zone.

The respondent continued to drive. At about 1.50am he was driving along the left lane of Lambton Road and another motorist was driving in the right lane.
The respondent changed lanes without indicating, causing the other vehicle to brake. The driver of the other vehicle estimated that the respondent was driving at a speed of 80 kph. This was also a 60 kph zone. The respondent's conduct was further aggravated by his continuing to drive while knowing he should not have, as shown by his two attempts to call a taxi.

The limitations of a Crown appeal against sentence are well-known and require no repetition. The principles are conveniently collected in this Court's judgment in Allpass (1994) 73 ACrimR 561 at 562-563.

The Crown submitted that his Honour had committed a relevant error of principle in that he had disregarded the fact that the respondent went through a red light on two occasions. Alternatively, it submitted that insufficient weight was given to this matter. This submission is based on the proposition that this particular aspect of the driving on the night in question is not mentioned in the judgment. Similarly, it is stated that his Honour failed to mention the injuries suffered by the driver of the other vehicle.

There is no basis for these submissions. The facts were before his Honour. It is not necessary for his Honour to list every single aspect in his reasons.
His Honour made reference to the course of driving in general terms, which indicated that his Honour had taken into account the gross irresponsibility of the conduct of the respondent. Indeed, his Honour accepted the respondent's admission of "the extreme irresponsibility of his conduct".

Similarly, even though his Honour did not expressly refer to the injuries of the driver of the other vehicle, nevertheless the relationship between the two sentences, a total of five years for the count occasioning death and a total of three years for the count of occasioning grievous bodily harm, indicated that his Honour identified an appropriate relationship between the two counts and accordingly gave the nature and extent of the injuries with respect to the second of the counts appropriate weight.

Another error of principle which it was submitted his Honour made was with respect to his treatment of the respondent's prior criminal history. His
Honour's reasoning in this regard was as follows: "I turn now to the prisoner's history, his antecedents. He has a fingerprint record which starts with a low PCA in 1985, a high PCA in 1989, then there is irrelevant matter, refused breath analysis in 1994, drive whilst disqualified in March 1995 then were some unrelated matters which I will not make reference to. When I say 'unrelated', unrelated to traffic.

There is also a [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s12.html) certificate, which has in it a more detailed traffic record. I do not propose to make reference to that. It is a traffic record which does involve driving whilst having alcohol in his blood and, in that sense, he is deprived of the advantage which he may otherwise have received from having a perfectly clear traffic record. He is not to be punished for his prior record, of course, but he cannot claim perhaps that additional leniency that might be accorded to a person with an excellent relevant record." 
The Crown submitted that this was not a correct statement of principle. The
Crown relied on the following passages in Veen versus The Queen (No 2) <case>; [(1987-88) 164 CLR 465], 477: "Counsel for the applicant submitted that antecedent criminal history was relevant only to a prisoner's claim for leniency. That is not and has never been the approach of the Courts in this country and it would be at odds with the community's understanding of what is relevant to the assessment of criminal penalties." 
The High Court went on to state that criminal history is relevant: "...to show whether the instant offence is an uncharacteristic aberration or whether the offender has manifested in his commission of the instant offence a continuing attitude of disobedience of the law. In the latter case, retribution, deterrence and protection of society may all indicate that a more severe penalty is warranted." 
The first feature to note in his Honour's reasoning is that he appears to select only offences relating to driving under the influence as being relevant for his assessment of sentence in this case. These are the matters, with the exception of "drive whilst disqualified", to which he makes reference.
Specifically in his reasons, his Honour noted that after two PCA convictions there was "irrelevant matter". His Honour had earlier passed over two offences of exceeding the speed limit, one by more than 30 kph. Amongst the "irrelevant matter" to which he referred were two further offences of exceeding the speed limit. He also treated as "unrelated matters" a breach of a condition of a community service order, contravention of a domestic violence order, and an escape from lawful custody.

In my opinion, all of these matters were relevant to take into account on the question of sentence on the Veen test. On this basis the Crown has established an error of principle in the reasoning of the trial Judge. His
Honour underestimated the extent of disobedience of the law which is reflected in the respondent's history. For this reason alone, the exercise of the sentencing discretion miscarried.

Furthermore, the period of time over which the respondent was consuming alcohol, and the intensity of the consumption, were of considerable significance. His Honour treated them as such, save in one respect. His Honour said in the course of his reasoning: "He did testify as to his consumption of alcohol on that day and I have noted that testimony. He denies having been drinking in the car before the accident, notwithstanding the can or stubbie found in the car. I accept that testimony as I have already said." 
His Honour's reference appears to be the following passage earlier in his statement of reasons where, after noting that one of the items found in the car was an empty stubbie bottle, his Honour said: "There is evidence that the stubbie of beer was not consumed in the vehicle and there being no evidence to the contrary, I have to accept it and I do so." 
The evidence "to the contrary" was the self-serving evidence of the respondent. It is not the case that simply because evidence is given contradicting a matter that the contradiction must be accepted. This is an error on his Honour's part. It was perfectly open to his Honour to reject the evidence and, indeed, to draw an inference from the presence of the empty stubbie in the car that the respondent was in fact drinking whilst driving. I am not suggesting that his Honour should have drawn that inference. It appears, however, that his Honour committed an error of law in disenabling himself from putting himself in a position to do so.

The principal submission of the Crown was that the sentences were manifestly inadequate so as to themselves reveal that the trial Judge must have committed some error of principle. It was submitted that the sentence failed to adequately reflect the criminality involved in the objective circumstances of the offence, on the basis that it was a most serious example of aggravated dangerous driving. Indeed, it was submitted that it was in the category of the worst case.

His Honour indicated plainly that he did regard the offences as "extremely serious". References in his reasons on sentence to the fact that a driver's licence is "a weapon almost as lethal as a gun" indicated that his Honour did not underestimate the suffering and death that is sometimes occasioned by irresponsible driving. His Honour made express references to the need for general deterrence. On the basis of his assessment of the respondent, his
Honour found that personal deterrence was not significant in this particular case. However, he emphasised the importance he attached to general deterrence.
He identified the objective as being to: "...punish people so that the message goes out to those people out there who are tempted to drive motor vehicles in that way, and if they do and someone is hurt that they are going to suffer themselves greatly for it." 
No fault can be found with his Honour's expression of this objective.
Nevertheless, the Crown submits that the sentence is so manifestly inadequate as to indicate that his Honour must have committed some error of principle.

The Crown drew the Court's attention to a range of previous cases in which sentences were imposed for this offence in its aggravated form. The circumstances of each individual case - both objective and, particularly, subjective features - differ to a significant extent. This is always the case.
No clear indication arises from these other cases which suggests that the sentence in the present case is disproportionate to any sentencing pattern.
The case of Black NSWCCA 23 July 1998 is perhaps the closest. There, the sentence at trial was four and a half years, divided into a minimum term of two years three months and an identical additional term. The Crown appeal was successful and the sentence was increased to a minimum term of three years and an additional term of two years.

The issue in the instant case is whether the sentence imposed by his Honour is below the lowest point of any appropriate range for the offence, taking into account both objective and subjective circumstances.

In the present case, his Honour gave considerable weight to subjective considerations, as he was entitled to do. Nevertheless, the total term of five years is, in my opinion, so low as to indicate appellable error encompassing, but not limited to, the error with regard to the prior convictions to which I have referred.

There is, however, another defect which the Crown alleged was patent in his
Honour's reasoning.

As indicated, his Honour imposed a two years minimum term and a three year additional term for the first count, and a two year minimum term and a 12 month additional term for the second count.

The introduction of truth in sentencing principles into the [Sentencing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/) did not detract from the purpose of a non-parole period under the previous regime, which was identified by the High Court in Power <case>; [(1973) 131 CLR 623] at 628: "In a true sense the non-parole period is a minimum period of imprisonment to be served because the sentencing Judge considers that the crime committed calls for such attention." 
As this Court said in Morrissey NSWCCA 15 July 1994: "...the decision to vary the statutory proportion requires consideration not only of the desirability of increasing the additional term but also the appropriateness of reducing the minimum term which must nevertheless remain such as appropriately reflects the criminality involved." 
I agree that the objective criminality of the offence should be reflected not only in the full term but also in the minimum term.

His Honour's reasoning with respect to the relationship between the minimum and maximum terms is entirely found in the following passage: "I find special circumstances in this case, so that the minimum term will be considerably less than it otherwise would be." 
The Crown submits that this constituted an error of law and I agree with that submission.
 [Subsections (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5.html) and (3) of the [Criminal Appeal
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) are in the following terms: "5(2) That the additional term must not exceed one third of the minimum term unless the Court decides there are special circumstances.

If a Court sets an additional term that exceeds one third of the minimum term, the Court is required to state the reasons for that decision." 
I agree with the submission of the Crown that the assertion "I find special circumstances in this case" does not satisfied the requirements for the stating of reasons for which [s5(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5.html) provides, as indeed would the common law in the absence of [s5(3).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5.html)
One of the purposes of the statement of reasons in a Court is to ensure that an appellate Court can review the reasoning process. (See Soulemezia versus Dudley
Pty Limited [(1987) 10 NSWLR 247] at -281.) This is an error of law which itself would warrant setting aside his
Honour's exercise of discretion.

In any event, the discretion plainly miscarried. A minimum term of two years from a total sentence of five years could not be justified. I am unable to identify what it was that his Honour regarded as the special circumstances in this case.

In Morrissey (supra) at 7, this Court said: "The special circumstances must be such as lead to a conclusion that an additional term of only one third of the minimum will be inappropriate.
Usually it will be found so only when the effective rehabilitation of the applicant requires a longer rather than a shorter period of supervision.
Although the list of special circumstances is not closed, I agree that the usual position is that rehabilitation requires a longer period." 
His Honour did not analyse the evidence in that way. He did not indicate why a period of rehabilitation of three years was in any way required.

The Crown also submitted that his Honour erred when, after referring to the fact there were special circumstances, he said: "... so that the minimum term will be considerably less than it otherwise would be." 
There is no necessary connection between a finding of special circumstances and a reduction of the minimum term. The process of identifying the appropriate full term and the components in terms of minimum and additional terms is not discrete in the manner suggested by his Honour.

As I stated in my judgment in Hampton NSWCCA 25 June 1998, with which Powell
JA and Newman J agreed: "...if the Court makes a decision that there are 'special circumstances', this triggers the exercise of the discretion as to whether or not the existence of such circumstances justifies an additional term in excess of one- third of the minimum term. It is quite artificial to approach the matter in a two-stage manner. The only point in making the preliminary finding is if it justifies a period in excess of one-third. There is in truth only one question: are there 'special circumstances' which justify a larger additional term than that." 
In Bloomfield NSWCCA 15 July 1998, I said in my judgment, with which Sully and Ireland JJ agreed: "A decision on what is an appropriate total sentence is affected by the process of deciding its allocation to minimum and additional terms and the process of determining minimum and additional terms is affected by the end result in a total sentence. General sentencing principles guide all relevant steps in the process. Accordingly, it should not be assumed that an increase in the additional term will necessarily result in a reduction of the minimum term to the same degree. If the appeal Court comes to exercise the discretion afresh, it is entitled to review the total sentence." 
As indicated in the extract from Morrissey, which I have quoted above, the usual situation which justifies a longer than one-third additional term is the need for an extra period for purposes of rehabilitation. Nothing in his
Honour's findings of fact suggest that any such longer period was required, or indeed, justified the specific period which he provided as an additional term.
Indeed, his Honour's reasoning appears to assume that the process of rehabilitation was complete and that no sentence on the basis of personal deterrence was called for.

On appeal additional issues arise. The principles underlying the doctrine of double jeopardy are themselves matters that can and should be regarded as special circumstances. The respondent has believed that he faced only a two year minimum term, likely to be the actual term of full time custodial imprisonment, and has believed that since he was sentenced on 8 May this year.
That does, in my opinion, justify a longer than one-third additional term, even though I can see no basis for the finding of his Honour at trial that there was justification for changing the statutory ratio.

The relevant limit for present purposes is as stated by Gleeson CJ: "...when re-sentencing a respondent on a successful Crown appeal this Court gives weight to the circumstances of double jeopardy involved in a Crown appeal by imposing a sentence that is the least sentence that could properly have been imposed upon the respondent at first instance." ((Rose) (Mark
Anthony) NSWCCA 23 May 1996, 3).

The decision of this Court is to impose "the least sentence" as referred to by
Gleeson CJ. Nevertheless, this is another case in which the application of the doctrine of double jeopardy results in a sentence which is lower than that which should have been imposed at trial.

The respondent has also relied on a number of matters that go to the exercise of the discretion of this court, particularly with respect to the length of sentence. He has referred to his particular family situation and the difficulty that that occasions in terms of access to his young children whilst he is in prison. Another of the matters, and one to which I give particular weight, is the fact that by reason of his conviction for an escape from lawful custody he is held in maximum security, a matter of substantial significance, and will be so held for a considerably longer period than would usually be the case for a conviction for this offence.

In my opinion, taking into account the above principles the order I propose is:
Appeal allowed.
Sentence quashed.
Substitute therefor the following sentence: 
Count 1. Minimum term of three years imprisonment to commence on 8 May 1998 and to expire on 7 May 2001.

Additional term of three years to commence on 8 May 2001 and to expire on 7
May 2004.

Count 2. A fixed term of two years and six months from 8 May 1998.
The driver's licence is to be disqualified for five years from 5 November .

McINERNEY J: I agree with the orders proposed by the Chief Justice and for the reasons which he has advanced. 
SPERLING J: I also agree with the orders that are proposed and with the reasons that have been given by the Chief Justice. 
SPIGELMAN CJ: The orders will be as I have indicated. The earliest date on which the respondent can be released to parole is 8 May 2001. * * * 
