

Ex Parte Merrett - Re Acn 072 081 111 Pty Ltd Matter No 3242/97 [1997]
NSWSC 355 (1 September 1997) ` 
Ex Parte Merrett - Re A/c No. 072 081 111 Pty Ltd` ` 3242/97` `1 September 1997` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` /97 EX PARTE MERRETT; RE ACN 072 081 111 PTY LTD 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application under s.121 of the [Supreme Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/) to review a decision of the Registrar acting as the court. 
The Registrar was approached by the liquidators of a group of companies, which can conveniently be called the Digicall group of companies. The liquidators sought an order from the Registrar to issue summonses for public examination of various people pursuant to either s.596A or s.596B of the Corporations Law.
One of the persons who received a summons under the latter section was Robert
Leslie Merrett. The summons that he received was addressed: "To: The Managing Partner 
Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu (the "Advisor") George Street, Sydney, NSW, 2000" 
The summons told Mr Merrett that he was not, without reasonable cause, to fail to attend as required by the summons and to attend from day to day until the conclusion of the examination and he was also required to produce the books specified in the second schedule of the summons. The summons was returned on August 1997 and then adjourned for hearing for 10 days commencing on 27
November.

The second schedule was, so far as relevant, as follows: "Any books, journals, minutes, agreements, notes, diaries, bank statements, demands, notices, financial accounts, correspondence, reports, memoranda, ledgers and other documents ... relating to the promotion, formation, management, administration or winding up of the Corporations and, without limiting the generality of the above, in particular all Documents relating to ...
 the state of solvency of all or any of the Corporations during the Period; any advice given by the Adviser to the Creditor about or concerning the
Corporations, including drafts or copies; ...
 any advice given to the Creditor as to its debts with all or any of the
Corporations." 
Mr Merrett only became the managing partner of the accountancy firm, to which
I will refer as Deloittes, on 1 March 1997.

The liquidators say that they wish to investigate transactions between another company, Vodafone, and the group in liquidation, and they have found a document which indicates that Deloittes billed Vodafone for a large number of hours of work done in 1996 with respect to Vodafone's relations to the companies in liquidation. The liquidators say that, based on the account, they "believe Deloittes may have in their possession documents or other material which may assist ... as to the solvency of the group and when it became insolvent and assist ... the granting by (various companies in the group) of fresh securities on 5 September 1996." 
On this basis, the Registrar issued the summons of 30 July 1997.

Mr Merrett seeks to set aside the summons. He says that the learned Registrar could not or should not have been satisfied of the relevant matters under s.596B of the Corporations Law and that he should not have required the managing partner of a firm of accountants to produce the partnership records and that it was more appropriate for the liquidators, had they wanted records, to have proceeded under s.597A of the Corporations Law. He also says that the summons is oppressive. Mr Ryan, the solicitor for the liquidators, objects to that tag being put on the application as he says the correspondence shows that the application was being made on the basis that the Registrar had no warrant to issue the summons, rather than on the basis that it was oppressive.
However, the two really do elide and it is very difficult to separate the two concepts.

Mr Whittle of counsel for the applicant, puts that under s.596B of the
Corporations Law as opposed to s.596A, the court is required to be satisfied of certain matters. The legislation in its current form states the matter of which the court must be satisfied: "that the person: ... has been, or may have been, guilty of misconduct in relation to the corporation, or may be able to give information about examinable affairs of the corporation." 
Mr Whittle says that "satisfied" means that the court must, on the balance of probabilities, come to the view, on the evidence before it, that the prescribed fact has been established. The prescribed fact is that there is a prima facie case or, at least, something approaching a prima facie case that the proposed examinee is able to give the relevant information. On the other hand, Mr Ryan says that the word "may" in the phrase "may be able to give information" means that it is sufficient if the court is satisfied that the proposed examinee could possibly give information.

There is some doubt as to whether the liquidators in the present case were eligible applicants before the Registrar. They are liquidators following an administration and, hence, under the Corporations Law, are voluntary liquidators. "Eligible applicant" is defined in the dictionary section, [s.9](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/s9.html), as meaning various people including "(b) a liquidator or provisional liquidator of the corporation". It is strange to see those two officers put in the one phrase, and it may be that the legislature only intended a court appointed liquidator to have the power to apply for public examination. This may not be so because (c) and (d) give an administrator power and an administrator is not an officer of the court. The matter was not argued. I merely note it in case it be of interest in subsequent cases.

It is necessary, I think, to delve back into the history of s.596B. There has been power in the relevant legislation in England and Australia, ever since the Joint Stock Companies Winding-up Act of 1844 in England, for the court to summon and examine persons who were thought to be capable of giving information about the property and past transactions of the company. It was not, however, until 1890 that the power was expanded to make provision for the public examination of promoters and other officers who had connections with the company in the past; see s.8, Companies (Winding Up) Act, 1890 (Imp).
Thereafter, the Acts, both in England and New South Wales, have permitted liquidators to apply to the court for the examination in public of not only present officers and past officers of the company, but also persons who may give information about the examinable affairs of the corporation.

In s.541 of the Companies Code, which was taken over into s.597 of the
Corporations Law 1989, the scheme was that where it appeared to a prescribed person that a person has or may have been guilty of fraud, et cetera, or may be capable of giving information in relation to the affairs of a corporation, the prescribed person could apply to the court for an order and the court may order that the person attend before the court.

However, after the Harmer Report, s.597 was repealed and was replaced with s.596A and s.596B. The memorandum that accompanied the introduction of the [Corporate Law Reform Bill ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/bill/clrb1992235/) mentioned that the formalities and expense of obtaining a court order may be a deterrent to liquidators and so the procedure should be streamlined. Under the then proposed s.596A, in certain circumstances the court was to have no discretion.
The new s.597A was to cut the cost of the examination procedure by providing for a procedure whereby documents could be obtained without an expensive examination and s.596B was then to allow the court in its discretion to allow examinations outside the mandatory categories of s.596A. The explanatory memorandum, in paragraph 1157, says: "These requirements will largely replicate existing paragraphs 597(2)(a) and , which will be omitted." 
That duly came to pass.

Accordingly, the purpose of s.596B was not to alter the standards that had been set down in earlier versions of the legislation. Section 596B was to cover all situations other than those which were put into the new s.596A or s.597A, but, when s.596B applied, the previously existing law was maintained.

However, when restating the law in s.596B, the legislature has, in fact, gone further by requiring the court "to be satisfied" rather than merely conferring a jurisdiction which was to be exercised as the court saw fit. The change must have been deliberate, even though I have not been able to find anything in the explanatory notes saying why the change was made, but, generally speaking, the
Corporate Law Reform Act of 1992 tended to tell the court in black and white terms what it was to do rather than giving open discretions as previous company legislation had done. But apart from adding the test of being satisfied, the legislature left in place the word "may" as previously existed.

However, in turn, the section, by requiring the court to be satisfied of certain things, removed the initial hurdle that it must appear to the liquidator that the relevant person may have been guilty of fraud or may be capable of giving information. Instead it was put on the court to be satisfied that the liquidator had proved one of those matters.

Accordingly, under s.596B, the liquidator must show to the court facts which satisfy the court that the proposed examinee may be able to give information.

As McPherson on Company Liquidation 3rd ed. (LBC 1987) says at 431 and following, the former procedure was that the liquidator was to give a report to the court reciting in narrative form the facts and matters which he desired to bring to the notice of the court.

McPherson points out that as at the date of writing, only Tasmania and Western
Australia kept the original form, but it is noteworthy that that was originally what the court expected to have before it when making a decision as to whether to issue the summons. The fact that such a report had to be made containing facts indicates that what had to be established was that objectively the proposed examinee was able to give information, not that subjectively the liquidator so thought or that the examinee might possibly give information.

The 1890 version of the section was considered by Wright J and by the English
Court of Appeal in Re Civil Naval and Military Outfitters Limited [[1899] Ch 215.](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1899%5d%201%20Ch%20215 "View LawCiteRecord" ) The decision was that the Official Receiver, as the officer was then called, had not only to state that the relevant person had taken part in the formation of the company and that in his opinion had committed fraud, but he also had to state facts showing a basis for that opinion and so warranting the judge calling upon the person implicated for an explanation.At page 233 Lord Lindley
MR said: "The question we have to consider is whether this report is so flimsy, so sketchy, so unfair that Wright J exceeded his jurisdiction, or exercised his discretion wrongly, in saying that Mr Long ought to be publicly examined under the provisions of the Act." 
Chitty LJ at 234 said that the order should have been made because the liquidator's report manifests a substantial basis for the opinion at which the
Official Receiver arrived. As far as I am aware, the approach taken in that case was never departed from. Accordingly, I believe that the words "may be able to give information" connote the court being satisfied that objectively there are facts before it which show that it is so likely that the proposed examinee can give information that it warrants the court in calling upon the person named to give the liquidator the information he may well have.

It is to be remembered that, whilst sections such as s.596B play a very important role in the process of liquidators administering companies in the public interest, the liquidator and the public interest are not the only matters which need to be considered. It is often a considerable inconvenience, if not more, for a person to be forced, under penalty of law, to devote time to searching out papers, to attending a public hearing, to be cross-examined by adverse counsel, and under s.597 to have to pay any solicitor and counsel whom he has to represent him out of his own pocket. It seems only if the court is satisfied under s.597B, that the summons under s.596B was obtained without reasonable cause that the court may order some or all of the costs of the examinee to be paid by the applicant.

When there is such a burden put on the examinee, the court must be careful to consider the rights of both parties. It must be careful not to fetter a liquidator who is seeking to administer an insolvent company in the public interest on the one hand and, on the other hand, must be careful to see that persons to whom summonses are directed are not oppressed by the procedure.

The only matter before the Registrar was Deloitte's account. In reviewing the decision of the Registrar, I must ask myself whether it was reasonably open to the Registrar to conclude that, because of that account, the present managing partner of a large firm of accountants would prima facie be able to give the liquidators the information that they seek. I think the answer must clearly be in the negative.

The first reason for this is that the person who is managing partner at the time the summons is issued may or may not have been a member of the firm at the relevant date, that is, the date when the transaction, about which the liquidator wishes to interrogate, took place. In the instant case, it would appear that Mr Merrett was, in fact, a partner at the relevant time, but was not the managing partner. The second reason is that it is very doubtful as to whether a "managing partner" is ipso facto in a position to answer a quasi- subpoena to produce the records of the partnership. Mr Whittle has quoted a large number of authorities to the effect that partnership documents are joint property and that no one partner has any right to exclusive possession of the partnership documents and, accordingly, a subpoena or quasi-subpoena requiring the production of those documents is bad if it is merely addressed to one partner. The only persons who can be properly subpoenaed are all the members of the partnership.

As to that, Mr Ryan says, as I understand him, two things. The first is that the practice of addressing a summons to the managing partner is sanctioned by the decision of Mullighan J in Gerah Imports Pty Limited versus The Duke Group
Ltd <case>; [(1993) 10 ACSR 391] at 394 and, secondly, that it is no reason to set aside a quasi-subpoena merely because one has no documents. One is required to attend on the return day and then be examined on oath, if need be, as to why no documents are produced.

The answer to these points is, I think, relatively simple. First, I doubt whether the decision in the Gerah case deals with the situation that arises in the present case. The law is that the person who is to receive the summons and the person who has the information must be identified. It may be that in some cases the secretary of a corporation will be sufficient, but the term "managing partner" is not an office known to the law and is not sufficient identification of a person who may have the information. Insofar as it is said that Mullighan J inferred that a liquidator could subpoena each partner in turn and examine them one by one until the desired information is obtained, I would, with great respect, have thought that any liquidator who did that would be guilty of oppression.

However, the essential issue is whether merely by showing that a person is a partner or a managing partner of a large firm of accountants and that that large firm of accountants has rendered a bill to a claimant against the company in respect of a large number of hours, provides evidence that the person can provide information. Is it more likely than not that that person, who is currently the managing partner, has information? The court must be satisfied on the balance of probabilities under [s.140](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s140.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), and the mere matter to which I have referred, is really, as far as the liquidator's case goes, insufficient.

Secondly, the point that one partner has not the power to produce the partnership documents unless something more is established as to his or her authority, appears to be correct. It certainly was not answered in any way by
Mr Ryan. The submission that it is a matter for the Deputy Registrar at the examination is not only unattractive as a complete waste of resources, but is also contrary to authority. For over a hundred years, it has clearly been the law that a person who is given an examination of this nature, especially a professional person, who is ostensibly required to wait outside a courtroom for 12 days, is entitled to come to the court and say that the order is oppressive and it ought to be set aside; see, for instance, Mayville Homes
Ltd [[1939] Ch 32.] Section 121 of the [Supreme Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/) only makes clear the procedure for such a review.

I have said a couple of times that one of the factors that needs to be taken into account is the fact that this examination is to take place over 12 days.
I have not overlooked the probability that an arrangement would be reached between the solicitors for the liquidators and the solicitors for the examinee, but it does seem to me oppressive that there is power in the form in which this particular summons is issued for a liquidator to put pressure on the examinee by saying that if he did not "co-operate" then he would be required to obey the order to the letter, that is, attend each day for 12 days virtually at his own expense. Indeed, if this sort of application is to be pressed in future, not only should the examinee be actually named but, especially if a person is in full-time employment, some attempt should be made in the actual order to define the time during which the person is to attend.

I have not had to go into the question of what is a managing partner. That is a term that is used more and more frequently amongst firms of accountants and solicitors but, probably, the scope of a managing partner's authority varies from firm to firm. It should not be assumed that just because a person occupies the office of managing partner that he or she should somehow have authority from the whole of the partnership to have custody of the documents of the partnership, make admissions on behalf of the partnership or otherwise to act for them. As was said in the allied field of agency, there is not much purpose in saying that A is agent for B without noting for what matters A's agency is to cover; see Peterson versus Moloney <case>; [(1951) 84 CLR 91], 94.

Accordingly, in my view, the summons issued by the Registrar against Mr
Merrett should be set aside. The liquidators should pay the costs of the applicant.
 * * * 
