

Ampolex Limited versus Perpetual Trustee Company (Canberra) Limited and Others
Application By Alexander Emil Vrisakis No. 50101/1995 [1995] NSWSC 130 (6
November 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COMMERCIAL DIVISION
ROLFE J
HRNG
SYDNEY, 29 September 1995 #DATE 6:10:1995 #ADD 6:11:1995 
The Applicant appeared in person 
Counsel for Australian Securities Commission  Mr S.D. Rares and 
Miss J.S. Gleeson 
Solicitor for Australian Securities Commission Peter Stepek
ORDER
Orders made
JUDGE1
ROLFE J An understanding of the application made by Mr Alexander Emil
Vrisakis, a solicitor of this Court who has been retained by Ampolex Limited, ("Ampolex"), to advise it, and of the Notice of Motion filed in Court on 29
September 1995 by the Australian
Securities Commission, ("ASC"), requires some recitation of the principal allegations made in the proceedings. In setting those matters and the course of the proceedings out I have drawn heavily upon the judgment of Giles CJCommD delivered on 12 September 1995.
 .
The proceedings were commenced in June 1995 and give rise to significant questions for the parties and for dealings in shares and notes of a publicly listed company. On 7 July 1995 they were fixed for hearing commencing on 18
September 1995. Giles CJCommD described their nature, as at 12 September 1995, thus:- "Under its then name Ampol Exploration Ltd, on 30 June 1988
Ampolex Ltd (Ampolex) as issuer and Perpetual Trustee Company
Ltd (Perpetual) as trustee entered into a deed providing for the issue of 22,700,000 unsecured convertible notes of $3.30 face value. According to the trust deed, the notes were convertible under a formula which at least on one view meant that each note would be convertible to 6.6 shares in the capital of Ampolex. The notes bore an endorsement as to conversion reflecting the terms of the trust deed.

On 6 November 1992 Ampolex and Perpetual executed a supplementary deed, amending the trust deed to provide that the notes were convertible "into one Share". It seems that the endorsement on the notes was not amended, and notes re-issued continued to bear an endorsement as to conversion reflecting the terms of the trust deed.

All the notes were originally issued to Pioneer International
Ltd (Pioneer).
In October 1991 Pioneer disposed of the notes, which became publicly listed on the Australian Stock Exchange.
On 12 April Allied Mutual Holdings Pty Ltd (Allied) purchased 20,000 notes, and on 24 May 1995 GPG Nominees Pty
Ltd (GPG) purchased six million notes. On 24 May 1995 GPG gave to Ampolex a conversion notice requesting that one million of its notes be converted into shares, and on the same day
Allied gave to Ampolex a conversion notice requesting that its ,000 notes be converted into shares. GPG asserted, contrary to Ampolex's position, that by virtue of the terms of the trust deed as reflected in the endorsement on the notes it was entitled to have each note converted into 6.6 shares in the capital of Ampolex." .
Ampolex commenced these proceedings seeking relief, which was intended to establish its position, and joined Perpetual as a defendant.
GPG and Allied cross-claimed, claiming relief intended to establish their positions. This gave rise to a series of issues to which his Honour referred at pp.3 and 4 of his judgment.
On 7 July 1995 directions were given for discovery and inspection of documents by 21 July 1995, and leave was given to issue subpoenas returnable on 19 July 1995. Discovery brought to the notice of Ampolex an agreement, dated 25 May 1995, revealing a relationship between GPG and County NatWest
Securities Australia Limited, ("County NatWest"), in connection with GPG's purchase of its notes, and County NatWest became involved in disputes, which arose over confidentiality and claims to legal professional privilege. On 31
August 1995 these disputes were resolved and Ampolex was granted inspection of a number of documents for which privilege had been claimed. These documents were considered by its lawyers during the first week of September 1995 and, as
Giles CJCommD recorded:- "The lawyers had previously given consideration to whether or not there was evidence to support an allegation that GPG and Allied had contravened the 'insider trading'-provisions of the Corporations
Law, but had been of the view that there was not the evidence to warrant the allegation. Upon consideration of the further documents they came to the view that there was evidence to warrant the allegation, that it should be made, and that the summons should be amended accordingly."
This gave rise to applications, to which his Honour referred as "interlocking applications" for:- leave to use the documents obtained on discovery and under subpoena for the purpose of joining and proceeding against
County NatWest and officers of each of GPG, Allied and County
NatWest as additional defendants; and leave to amend the Summons to allege against GPG, Allied and the new defendants contravention of the "insider trading" provisions and to claim relief ultimately destructive of any entitlement GPG and Allied might have to the notes or to conversion of the notes.
His Honour noted the first application was necessary because the new allegations involved the use of documents discovered in the proceedings and produced on subpoena, or the information contained therein, to bring new claims against further defendants.
His Honour also noted the implied obligation of confidentiality, which comes about when a party or its legal representatives are permitted to inspect a document of another person produced under the compulsory processes of the Court in, or in relation to, pending proceedings, by way of discovery or on subpoena, whereby the inspecting party:- "... is taken to have undertaken to the Court that the document or the information therein will not be used for collateral or ulterior purposes (meaning purposes different from the conduct of the proceedings in or in relation to which-the inspection was had)."
His Honour referred to the various authorities, which have established and applied the principle, and, for present purposes its existence is not in dispute.
He referred also to the modifications thereof whereby the person giving discovery or producing the document under subpoena may consent to use for a new purpose, and the Court may give leave to use the document or the information contained therein for a new purpose and, to that extent, release the undertaking in special circumstances and where the release will not occasion an injustice to the person giving discovery or producing the document under subpoena: Halcon International Inc versus The Shell Transport and Trading
Company;
Cres Homes PLC versus Marks [(1981) 1 AC 829]; and Capital Television Group Limited v
Northern Rivers Television Pty Limited (Bainton J - 5 September 1995 - as yet unreported).
In the result his Honour concluded it was appropriate to grant leave to use the documents for the further purpose of making the additional allegations and, accordingly, vacated the hearing date. The Position Of Mr Vrisakis
Mr Vrisakis, as I have said, has been retained by Ampolex to advise it in this matter and, on 24 August 1995, the Court ordered, as a consequence of the
Notice of Motion by County NatWest and Messrs Sly and Weigall, that access to documents produced by them to the Court in answer to subpoenas, and in respect of which a claim for confidentiality had been made, be limited to the persons set forth in sub-paragraph (a) of the order, and that such access only be granted to those persons upon their giving an undertaking as to confidentiality. The Court also ordered, in respect of the Notice of Motion by the second and third defendants, that access to the documents discovered by them and marked "Confidential" be limited to the persons specified therein, and only be provided upon undertakings as to confidentiality being given.
On 11 September 1995 the orders were varied, relevantly for present purposes, by granting access to the documents to
Mr Vrisakis on the same terms. Mr Vrisakis signed an undertaking as to confidentiality, whereby he undertook:- ".. that I will keep the documents and their contents confidential to the following: ...

I confirm that neither the documents nor their contents will be disclosed by me to or discussed by me with any other person."
The persons to whom disclosure could be made did not include ASC.
The judgment of Giles CJCommD of 12 September 1995 received publicity and, not unnaturally, attracted the attention of ASC which, no doubt pursuant to its supervisory and regulatory functions, caused a notice to be issued to
Mr Vrisakis pursuant to s.33 of the ASC Law, ("the Law"), requiring the production of certain documents. The notice is dated 14 September 1995 and required Mr Vriisakis to produce to a named officer of ASC at 4 pm on 18
September 1995 at the place stated all books and records in his possession, which relate to:- 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Commercial Division
No 50101 of 1995 proceedings between Ampolex Limited v
Perpetual Trustee Company (Canberra) Limited and others; and
Trading in Ampolex Limited convertible notes, exchange traded options or over the counter transactions between 31
January 1995 to date."
On 18 September Mr Vrisakis wrote to the officer of ASC stating he had sought advice from counsel as to the effect of producing documents "on the legal professional privilege in Ampolex", and the effect of his confidentiality undertaking to the Court. The letter stated:- "As to legal professional privilege, it may be the case that if privilege is waived, as contemplated by Section 69, that waiver will completely remove the protection of privilege from the relevant documents in the litigation. It also appears to be necessary for the Court to release me from my undertaking to permit production of confidential documents to ASC.
 
I would very much appreciate any assistance that you may give me in respect of these matters."
On 21 September 1995
Mr Vrisakis arranged with my Associate to bring the matter before the Court and, on that date, he gave notice to the various solicitors involved. On the same day Messrs Freehill Hollingdale and Page, who act for County NatWest and certain of its officers, responded:- "We note that you have chosen to re-list this matter without first seeking our views as to the necessity to approach the
Court.

We consider that your compliance with the Notice would not be in breach of the undertakings provided to the Court and accordingly we do not see it necessary that you seek any variation.

We note that our client has no objection in that regard but trust that to the extent confidential documents are produced to the ASC you will draw to their attention that they are subject to a confidentiality undertaking to the Court."
On the same day Messrs Norton Smith and Co wrote to Mr Vrisakis stating, inter alia:- "We consider that your compliance with the Notice pursuant to s.33 of the Australian
Securities Commission Act (the 'Notice') will not constitute a breach of your undertaking to the Court in respect of the confidential documents. Your undertaking cannot, in our view, prevent you from producing the documents under compulsion of law.

Accordingly, we do not consider that it is necessary for you to seek a variation of your undertaking to the Court to comply with the Notice. If such a variation to the undertaking were necessary, we would have no objection to the extent it permitted compliance with the Notice.

We trust that when producing the documents to the Australian
Securities Commission, you will advise them that the confidential documents are the subject of a confidentiality order made in these proceedings." 
The Proceedings on 22 September 1995
The matter came before me on 22 September 1995. Mr Vrisakis appeared in person and each of the defendants was represented by its solicitor. Miss
Munro-Ashman appeared for ASC. She made clear the position of ASC as being a
desire to obtain access to the documents, and that it took the view that production of the documents pursuant to that notice would not breach the undertaking, either express or implied, of confidentiality. It was clear that
Miss Munro-Ashman had not come prepared to argue the substance of the matter, which I do not say in any critical way. It seemed to me that a point of significance and substance may be involved in that Mr Vrisakis was in the invidious position of, on the one hand, having to honour the express undertaking he had given to the Court and the implied undertaking as to confidentiality and, on the other hand, of complying with the requirements of the Law, unless there was reasonable excuse not to do so.
The matter was mentioned later on the same day and I put in train procedures to enable this point to be argued on 29 September 1995. In short ex tempore reasons I set forth the issues I saw arising, which would require consideration.
On 29 September 1995 the matter came back before me. Mr Vrisakis, once again, appeared in person, and ASC was represented by Mr S.D. Rares of Senior
Counsel and Miss J.S. Gleeson of Counsel. I granted leave to Mr Rares to file in Court a Notice of Motion seeking orders:- 
That Aleco Vrisakis comply with the Notice issued to him pursuant to s.33 of the ASC Law, dated 29 September 1995 ('the Notice') forthwith.
Alternatively, that the Court vary the express undertaking given by Aleco Vrisakis dated 12 September 1995, and the implied undertaking by which he is bound, to permit him to
Comply with the Notice forthwith."
The Notice of Motion was made returnable instanter.
 
The Submissions Made On
Behalf Of The Parties
I think it necessary to bear in mind that Mr Vrisakis was not seeking to be obstructive, and the contrary was not suggested, but was trying to ensure that whatever step he took would not lead to his having acted either in contravention of the express or implied undertakings, or in contravention of the Law. He submitted the Notice extended to documents the subject of his express undertaking and the implied undertaking, and that the obligation to comply with the Notice is not absolute because, by virtue of s.63, a person shall not fail to comply with a requirement made under s.33 "without reasonable excuse". His assertions that the documents in question are those of defendants for which and whom Messrs Freehill Hollingdale and Page and Messrs
Norton
Smith and Co act were not issue, and he referred to the attitudes of those parties, as set out in the communications from their solicitors to which
I have referred. He propounded the issues arising as:- "(1) Whether or not his obligations under his express undertaking to the Court provide a reasonable excuse for non-compliance with the Notice; 
Whether or not his obligations under the implied undertaking to the Court provide a reasonable excuse for non-compliance with the Notice; 
If the answer to or (2) is in the affirmative whether or not a release of his undertaking to the Court is necessary where the parties whose documents are in question have consented to the use that would otherwise be a breach of the undertaking; 
If the answer to (1) or (2) and the answer to (3) is in the affirmative whether or not the Court should release him from his undertaking to the extent necessary to give effect to the Notice."
In so far as Mr Vrisakis made submissions to suggest that he was bound by the undertakings, notwithstanding the issue of the Notice, it was to assist the Court in coming to a conclusion on the issues he propounded.
The first series of submissions on behalf of ASC dealt with the question of consent and noted, correctly in my view, that as all parties to the proceedings and the parties whose documents are the subject of the express and implied undertakings have consented to Mr Vrisakis' being excused from his express and implied undertakings to enable him to answer the Notice, he should be so excused and the undertakings varied. The submission continued that the
Notice was issued by ASC in performance of its statutory function of ensuring compliance with the Law "immediately after the publication of articles in newspapers reporting the latest amendment to the plaintiff's Summons" alleging, for the first time, insider trading, it being submitted it is clear, as I think it must be, that such allegations could bear on matters in which
ASC "had a legitimate and proper interest as the statutory body charged with the administration of the national scheme laws". It was submitted, that given the consents and the new allegations, it would be appropriate for the Court to vary the express and, if necessary, implied undertakings to permit Mr Vrisakis to answer the Notice.
In Adam
P. Brown Male Fashions Pty Limited versus Philip Morris Incorporated and Anor <case>; [(1981) 148 CLR 170] Gibbs CJ, Aickin, Wilson and Brennan JJ noted the power of the Court to vary an undertaking, even in the absence of the consent of the other party, by releasing a party from it where new facts come into existence or are discovered "which render its enforcement unjust": p.178.
It was submitted on behalf of ASC that given the consents this may not be a suitable case in which to hear and determine whether the recipient of a notice, who holds documents to which an express and/or implied undertaking applies, has a reasonable excuse by dint of the undertakings, justifying non-compliance with the Notice. It was suggested there were two reasons for this conclusion, namely that the consents given should be acted upon, and that there is no real contradictor to oppose the case for compliance.
Notwithstanding the detailed submissions with which I have been furnished, on a wider issue to which I shall refer, it seems to me that the proper approach to the issues raised is to act upon the consents, which will require and amendment of the express undertakings stating that they do not apply if Mr
Vrisakis answers a specified Notice from ASC. So far as the implied undertaking is concerned I think it sufficient to note the consent of the parties, whose documents are to be furnished to ASC pursuant to a specified notice, as absolving Mr Vrisakis from any breach of the implied undertakings and to amend the implied undertaking to that extent.
In acting in this way I consider that the Court will provide such protection to Mr Vrisakis as is appropriate in the circumstances, and will be acting conformably with authority. I do not think it is necessary to do more to resolve the present application.
 
Another
Problem
ASC has asserted that an important issue of principle is involved in a consideration of whether it, when exercising powers under s.28 of the Law, must apply to the Court to vary express or implied undertakings of the present kind; and cannot insist on compliance with the Notice because of the existence of those undertakings. It was submitted that in exercising its investigatory powers ASC may require access to documents very quickly so that decisions can be made, which may have an effect on the market as a whole, and that if it is necessary for it to apply to the Court it could be delayed in pursuing enquiries and impeded from exercising promptly or fully or at all its powers under the Law. Further, it was submitted, persons whose conduct may be the subject of investigation could or would be alerted to the fact that it was actively interested, with the possibility that there would be a destruction of material evidence. While this puts ASC's position quite properly it does not lead to a conclusion that a person, in the position of Mr Vrisakis, must necessarily act in a way, which, at least arguably, may render that person in breach of any express undertaking to the Court or of the implied undertaking.
If the position is as the submissions of ASC suggest the appropriate course would seem to be to have the legislation amended to provide that compliance with a Notice under s.33 will not constitute a contravention of either an express or the implied undertaking. If, as the submissions for ASC contend, the investigative processes could be impeded whilst the recipient of a notice, quite legitimately, seeks to have the position clarified, this would seem to be a good reason for such an amendment if the legislature sees fit to repose that power in ASC. Such an amendment, it would seem, would not, in all probability, contravene the legal principles, which have been established, in relation to this area of the Law. As I have said it is not necessary for the purposes of deciding this application to consider this point further, but, in deference to the detailed submissions made and notwithstanding my appreciation of not deciding matters unless that is strictly necessary, I shall refer to these submissions.
In Pyneboard Pty Limited versus Trade Practices Commission and Anor <case>; [(1982-1983) 152 CLR 328] the question arose as to the extent of the power of the Trade Practices Commission, under s.155(1), to issue a notice requiring the recipient to furnish certain information to ASC. The section provided expressly that persons were not excused from complying with that notice on the ground that the information or documents furnished might tend to incriminate them, and qualified the admissibility of material into evidence subsequently.
In the joint judgment of Mason ACJ, Wilson and Dawson JJ their Honours said, at p.341:- "There is a stronger reason for holding that the privilege is available in the case of an examination on oath before a judicial officer which is a preliminary to a committal for trial or summary prosecution than there is in the ordinary case where a statute imposes an obligation to answer questions, provide information or produce documents. On the other hand, if the object of imposing the obligation is to enable an authority or agency to ascertain whether an offence has been committed or a statutory provision has been contravened then it is reasonable to conclude that the privilege, though inherently capable of applying, has been impliedly, if not expressly, excluded by the statute.

In the light of these competing considerations we are not prepared to hold that the privilege is inherently incapable of application in non-judicial proceedings. The issue of its availability in these proceedings therefore falls to be decided by reference to the statute itself, In the consideration of that question it is necessary to bear in mind the general principle that a statute will not be construed to take away a
common law right unless the legislative intent to do so clearly emerges, whether by express words or by necessary implication: ...
 
In deciding whether a statute impliedly excludes the privilege much depends on the language and character of the provision and the purpose which it is designed to achieve. The privilege will be impliedly excluded if the obligation to answer, provide information or produce documents is expressed in general terms and it appears from the character and purpose of the provision that the obligation was not intended to be subject to any qualification. This is so when the object of imposing the obligation is to ensure the full investigation in the public interest of matters involving the possible commission of offences which lie peculiarly within the knowledge of persons who cannot reasonably be expected to make their knowledge available otherwise than under a statutory obligation. In such cases it will be so, notwithstanding that the answers given may be used in subsequent legal proceedings."
The subject matter of that legislation was slightly different from the
Law but, as a matter of principle, it seems to me that the same considerations in relation to statutory interpretation apply.
In Pioneer Concrete (Vic) Pty Limited and Ors versus Trade Practices
Commission and Anor <case>; [(1982-1983) 152 CLR 460] it was held that s.155 was capable of being exercised after proceedings had been instituted under the Act by a person other than
ASC.
In Controlled Consultants Pty Limited versus Commissioner for Corporate
Affairs <case>; [(1984) 156 CLR 385] the High Court considered the power furnished under the Security Industry (Victoria) Code empowering the National Companies and
Securities
Commission to give a direction requiring, inter alia, the production of books in the performance of a function or the exercise of a
power by the Commission under the Code or where the requirement related to a matter that constituted or may have constituted a contravention of, or failure to comply with, a provision of the Code. Section 10(1) provided that a person should not, without reasonable excuse, refuse or fail to comply with such a requirement, and sub-s.(5) stated that it was not a reasonable excuse that the statement might tend to incriminate the person. It was held that the power conferred by s.8 to require the production of books was not subject to the privilege against self-incrimination and Pyneboard was applied.
It is to be noted that these cases were all concerned with an express provision in the legislation precluding reliance on the ground of self-incrimination. The more general observations are relied upon, in the present case, to found the submission that a similar interpretation should be given to the Law.
In
Green versus FP Special Assets Limited (1992) 1 QdR 1 the Full Court of the
Supreme Court of Queensland considered the effect of s.12(3)(c) of the
Companies (Queensland) Code, which enabled a person authorised by the National
Companies and Securities Commission, in appropriate circumstances, to require by notice in writing any person to produce to the authorised person forthwith any books relating to the affairs of a corporation in the custody or under the control of that person. Solicitors to whom such a notice was given were concerned that compliance with it would constitute a breach of the implied undertaking given to the Court and they applied to a Judge in Chambers for an order that they be at liberty to comply with the notice in respect of such documents. The order was refused and the Commissioner appealed. On appeal it was held that the copy documents held by the solicitors could properly be made the subject of a notice under s.12(3)(c), and that copies of documents obtained on discovery were in the custody or under the control of the solicitors. It was also held that the inspection of the copy documents would not amount to a contempt of Court, particularly since the solicitors and the appellant had agreed on a procedure which would not unduly interfere with the efficient conduct of the litigation and, in the circumstances and in so far as it was necessary, the Court should release the solicitors from their implied undertaking.
Shepherdson
J considered, firstly, the proper construction to be given to the legislation and deduced from the authorities that the powers, such as those found in s.12(3), are drastic, capable of abuse and must be exercised with caution; that they can be used in pending judicial proceedings, although care must be taken in their exercise; that the Commission in exercising the power may not obtain documents which are subject to legal professional privilege; and the custody or control referred to focuses on "the ability of the person to whom the notice is addressed to produce the documents when required to do so".
His Honour concluded that the documents, the subject of the notice, fell within the definition of "books" in the Code and then passed to the question, which he stated as being:- "... whether or not compliance with the notices in the present case would be such as to effectively release the solicitor producing the documents from his implied undertaking to the
Court attaching to documents received by him on discovery."
This is not the way in which Mr Vrisakis formulated the question for my decision. He focused not upon whether the effect of his producing the documents would release him from his undertakings, but rather upon whether their production would place him in breach of the express and implied undertaking and thus, potentially, make him guilty of contempt of Court.
Shepherdson J then referred to the protection from liability provided for in s.12(8) and, notwithstanding its wide terms, he said compliance required a consideration of the circumstances of each particular case and:- "If in any particular case the power under s.12(3) were being used 'to assist a person in proceedings already pending, in a way that would give such a party advantages which the rules of procedure would otherwise deny him' and there might well be a contempt of Court then I doubt if s.12(8) would save the party complying with the requirement under s.12(3) from being dealt with for breach of his implied undertaking"
His Honour expressly left open the question whether s.12(8) would "in all cases exonerate a solicitor in a situation such as the present from contempt proceedings for breach of his implied undertaking attaching to the documents received by him on discovery", and said that in the circumstances of that case it had not been shown that the exercise of the power in s.12(3), in the pending proceedings, was such that it would give the party to whom the notice was directed advantages, which the rules of procedure would otherwise deny him. It is not clear to me, if I may say so with the utmost respect, how
Shepherdson J addressed the precise problem the solicitors perceived as confronting them.
Williams J noted the submission on behalf of the solicitors at p.6:- "The main concern of the solicitors was that they were being asked to produce documents, which had come into their possession solely through the discovery process conducted in the action pursuant to the rules of the Supreme Court, to a person who was not a party to that action; in particular they were concerned that such production would constitute a breach of the implied undertaking given to the Court that they would not use the documents so obtained for a collateral or ulterior purpose' ... Those authorities clearly indicate that breach of the implied undertaking would constitute contempt of Court and the party who made discovery of the documents could seek an injunction to restrain the conduct complained of. Because of those considerations the solicitors, who were not otherwise averse to complying with the request, applied to the Chamber
Judge on summons for an order that they 'be at liberty to deliver up for the inspection of the person or persons authorised by a Delegate of the National Companies and
Securities
Commission copies of documents discovered to them in action number 4708 of 1988'."
His Honour then referred to the reasons why the Chamber Judge had declined to make the order, which were based upon the requirement that in litigation there should be full and frank disclosure, and that that would not be enhanced if documents could be used for other purposes. He also referred to the fact that the Chamber Judge had observed, quite correctly in his Honour's opinion, that there was no reason why the Commissioner could not have given an appropriate notice directly to the parties to the action, who had made discovery to the solicitors. However he noted the real question was whether the Commissioner could rely on the provisions of s.12 to insist upon compliance with the course he had chosen to take.
At p.7 his Honour referred to the fact that no submission. had been made against allowing the appeal, and, in those circumstances, the Court had put the appellant to strict proof of entitlement to succeed on the appeal, which I take to mean that the Court required cogency of submission.
At p.10 his Honour considered whether the exercise of the power conferred by s.12 might amount to a contempt of Court because it interfered with judicial proceedings. This I take to be a reference to contempt by the
Commission. He referred to the decision of the High Court in Pioneer Concrete but, he thought, of more relevance to the present case was the decision of
Northrop J in Commercial Bureau (Aust) Pty Limited versus Allen; ex parte Federal
Commissioner of Taxation <case>; [(1984) 1 FCR 202.] He quoted, a passage from his
Honour's judgment at p.208:- "The Commissioner is not a party to the pending proceedings in the Court between Commercial Bureau and the respondents, nor to any of the related proceedings. Thus, inspection of the documents by the Commissioner will not give him advantages in those proceedings which the normal procedures of the Court would deny him.

The documents in the custody of the Registrar are there pursuant to an order of the Court. They are not exhibits in Court proceedings. They have been placed in the custody of the
Registrar in order to preserve them pending the outcome of litigation. They have no greater immunity from due processes of law while in that custody than they would have if they were not in the custody of the Court."
His Honour, having concluded that the documents were in the custody of the solicitors, continued at p.11:- "Further, in this particular case, the solicitors and the parties for whom they act have no objection to complying with the requirement to produce those documents provided that by so doing they are not in breach of their implied undertaking given to the Court. None of the other parties to the discovery process has seen fit to argue that the solicitors ought not to be released from that undertaking, and indeed a number of those parties have expressly consented to the release of the solicitors from that undertaking. Finally, the solicitors and the appellant have agreed upon a procedure which would not impose any hardship on the solicitors and which would not unduly interfere with the efficient conduct of the litigation.

Bearing in mind what has been said in the cases to which I have referred as to the circumstances in which the exercise of a power of the type in question could constitute contempt of Court, I am not persuaded that there is any valid reason here for concluding that compliance- with these notices would be such an interference with the litigation as to constitute contempt.

It is a serious matter to release a solicitor from the implied undertaking to the Court which attaches to documents and information received on discovery. The seriousness with which the Court regards that undertaking can be seen from a consideration of the judgments in Harman versus Secretary of State for the Home Department [(1983) 1 AC 280.] 
Nevertheless in the particular circumstances of this case it seems to me that the Court ought to allow the appeal and make an order as sought on the summons, ...

In so ordering my decision ought not to be regarded by the
Commission as an intimation that in general they may use the power conferred by s.12(3) to require production of documents from solicitors who have obtained such documents on discovery, rather than make the necessary requisition in the first instance to the companies or persons whose documents are sought."
Ambrose J agreed with the orders proposed and with the reasons of both
Shepherdson and Williams JJ.
It seems to me that Williams J proceeded on the basis that this was a special case in which the solicitors were not objecting to production provided they were not in breach of their implied undertaking, none of the other parties to the discovery process had argued to the contrary of the solicitors being released from that undertaking and some had expressly consented to it, and a modus, vivendi had been worked out between the solicitors and the
Commission so as not to impose any hardship on the solicitors or interfere unduly with the efficient conduct of the litigation. His Honour made it clear he was not -making any general pronouncement as to the way in which s. 12(3) should be construed.
Although Mr Rares submitted that this was clear authority for the general submission he was making to the effect that a proper construction of s.33 absolved the recipient of a notice, who complied with it, from the breach of an express or the implied undertaking to which I have been referring, I have some doubt whether that is so. In my view a proper reading of the judgments in
Green indicates that the Court was dealing with a very specific factual situation, and that it was not intending to lay down any more general rule than was necessary for the purpose of deciding that case.
Whilst I would be disposed to follow a decision of the Full Court of the
Supreme Court of another State in matters where there was for consideration the interpretation of national legislation, and indeed I regard myself as bound to do so by the decision of the High Court in Australian Securities
Commission versus Marlborough Gold Mines Limited <case>; [(1992-1993) 177 CLR 485], which was applied by the Court of Appeal in Huntsman Chemical Company Australia Limited and Anor versus International Pools Australia
Pty Limited and Ors (Court of Appeal - 16 March 1995 - as yet unreported), I do not think the decision in Green goes to the extent for which Mr Rares submitted although, for present purposes, the matters in issue and the method of resolving them is very similar to the present case.
Mr Vrisakis submitted that the judgments in Green proceeded on the basis that the power to require production of books did not over-ride the implied undertaking to the Court and, in my opinion, there is much to be said for that
This led Mr
Vrisakis to make the following submission:- "As the implied undertaking is an undertaking to the Court, it is appropriate that the undertaking and any release of it be controlled by the Court and, in the absence of some more specific authority than I have been able to find, in my submission, the consent of the party whose documents are in question cannot itself be taken to automatically release the implied undertaking to the Court."
Mr Rares also relied upon the decision of Hirst
J in A and Ors versus B Bank (Governor and company of the Bank of England intervening) [(1993) QB 311.]
Proceedings were initiated in New York by the United States Federal Reserve
Board and the defendant bank was ordered by subpoena duces tecum to produce to a Grand Jury documents relating to accounts held by the plaintiffs. The plaintiffs obtained an injunction prohibiting the bank from producing the documents to the New York Court or to third parties and, subsequently, the defendant bank was served by the Bank of England with a notice pursuant to s.39(3)(a) of the Banking Act 1987, requiring it to produce certain classes of documents, including documents covered by the injunction. The defendants applied for directions as to whether they were at liberty to comply with the notice, notwithstanding the terms of the injunction, or, alternatively, for a variation or discharge of the injunction to permit such compliance. It was held that the legislation placed the Bank of England under a wide public duty to supervise deposit-taking businesses:- "... the fulfilment of which often required it to take urgent action in the interests of those whom the Act was designed to protect"; and that a notice from the bank over-rode the injunction, the existence of which did not constitute a reasonable excuse for failure to comply with such a notice; and further that the injunction should not, in any event, be interpreted as prohibiting compliance with the notice.
After setting forth the relevant legislation and certain submissions made
Hirst
J referred, at p.322, to the decision of Sir Nicolas Browne-Wilkinson VC in EMI Records Limited versus Spillane [(1986) 1 WLR 967], where a solicitor, who held a document disclosed on discovery by the opposite party in litigation subject to the usual implied undertaking, was served with a notice from the
Customs and Excise to produce the document to them pursuant to their wide powers under the VAT legislation. His Lordship noted that the Vice-Chancellor had held that as there was no consent from the opposite party the solicitor could not disclose the document to the Customs and Excise without committing a contempt of court, unless the undertaking was varied by the court.
His Lordship then noted the submission that the injunction was granted on the basis of the relationship of confidence subsisting between the bank and its customer, and that it was well established that the duty of confidence was over-ridden by the duty to comply with the law and, since the Act over-rode the duty of confidence, it must also over-ride inter partes orders made on that basis. His Lordship does not, as I read his reasons, distinguish between the basis for granting the injunction, and the compulsive effect of it when once granted. He considered if the injunction were not "over-ridden the bank could not properly discharge its public duty of supervision". It was further submitted that there was a strong presumption against the Court having made an order "which could have the effect of over-riding or emasculating s.39, and that it would be wrong to construe the injunction as being inconsistent with powers expressly given by Parliament to the Bank of England": p.323. These conclusions would, in my opinion, justify the Court's varying or dissolving the injunction, but not the party bound by the injunction ignoring it at its own peril.
After noting the contrary submissions his Lordship turned to the provisions of the Act and the purpose of enacting them and he accepted the submission that the fulfilment of the bank's public duty over-rode its duty of confidence to its customers. He also held, p.324, that an injunction did not qualify as a "reasonable excuse" within the terms of that sub-section. As I understand it his Lordship held that the proper construction of the legislation demanded the conclusion, to which he came, that s.39 over-rode the injunction. He was assisted in reaching this conclusion by the fact that there was authority that the legislation over-rode the duty of confidence a bank has in relation to its customers.
Notwithstanding the authorities to which I have been referred I do not think the position is sufficiently clear for me to make any general statement as to the circumstances in which a notice under s.33 will over-ride some other legal obligation imposed upon a party such as to require the party, without more, to comply with it. I am certainly not disposed, on the facts of the present case, to make any such general statement and, further, the present case does not call for it because the parties are agreed, in essence, that it is open to the Court to vary the express undertaking and to release Mr
Vrisakis from the implied undertaking to the extent necessary to comply with the Notice, it being very important to bear in mind that that release is based upon the consent of the parties, whose documents ASC seeks from Mr Vrisakis, to his complying with the Notice.
 
Conclusions
I therefore propose to content myself by making an order varying the express undertaking to allow Mr Vrisakis to comply with whatever Notice is now extant from ASC, which should be identified in the order, and varying the implied undertaking to allow him to comply with any such specified
Notice based upon the consent of the parties, whose documents Mr Vrisakis proposes to disclose in answer to the Notice. I invite the parties to bring in Short
Minutes of Order to give effect to these reasons. The proposed orders should make it clear that the parties consent to the variation of the express undertaking and to the disclosure of the documents the subject of the implied undertaking.
My present inclination is to make no order as to the costs of this application, but if any party wishes to make any submission in that regard that should be done when the Short Minutes of Order are brought in.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/130.html  
