

Afa and Ors versus Garendon Investments Pty Limited (Receiver and Manager
Appointed) and Ors Nos. Ca 40237/94; Ald 30001/93 Time Share Agreement [1995]
NSWSC 50 (27 September 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
PRIESTLEY JA(1), CLARKE JA(2) AND SHELLER JA(3)
HRNG
SYDNEY 23 May #DATE 18:7:1995 #ADD 27:9:1995 
Counsel for the Appellant:     J Basten QC and JS Manuell 
Solicitors for the Appellant:
Kingsford Legal Service 
Counsel for the Respondent:    JM Stowe QC and IA Parsons 
Solicitors for the Respondent:
Baker and McKenzie
ORDER
Appeal allowed
JUDGE1
PRIESTLEY JA I agree with the reasons stated by Sheller JA for his conclusion that the appellant's loan agreements were loan contracts to which [Pt 3](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ca198474/index.html#p3) of the [Credit Act 1984](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ca198474/) applied.
I agree with the orders proposed by Sheller JA.
JUDGE2
CLARKE JA I agree with Sheller JA.
JUDGE3
SHELLER JA The appellants, Serina Sainama Afa and Petty Tripolitsiotis (the first appellants), Rosario Lampasona and Eileen Teresa Wilson (the second appellants) and Judith Thompson (the third appellant) appeal from a decision of Mathews J of 11 April 1994 dismissing the appellants' summons of 16 March in which they sought to have orders made on 10 December 1992 by the
Commercial Tribunal of New South Wales set aside.
The first respondent, Garendon Investments Pty Limited (Garendon), now under a receiver and manager, built a holiday resort, the Port Pacific Resort, at Port Macquarie. This consisted of a nine storey building with thirty-three one bedroom and forty-six two bedroom apartments, specialty shops, a restaurant and facilities including a swimming pool, indoor and outdoor spas, a sauna, gymnasium and solarium. In July 1985 the resort was completed and began operations as a timeshare resort. Various Estate Mortgage
Trusts, of which the second respondents are trustees, financed the development and marketing of the resort. The second respondents conducted the proceedings on the first respondent's behalf.
To market "prescribed interests" in the resort Garendon, Paradise
Timeshare Administration Limited (PTA) and Trustee Company of Australia
Limited (formerly the Union Fidelity Trustee Company of Australia
Limited) (the Trustee), by Deed of Trust dated 10 January 1985 (the Trust Deed), established the Port Pacific Interim Timeshare Trust (the Trust). The Trust
Deed was amended by a Deed of Amendment dated 31 July 1987. The Corporate
Affairs Commission, as delegate of the National Companies and Securities
Commission, approved the Trust Deed and Deed of Amendment.
Three prospectuses for the sale of units in the Trust were registered with the Corporate Affairs Commission, the first on 16 January 1985, the second on July 1986 and the third on 3 February 1988. PTA, which was related to
Garendon and held a dealer's licence under the Securities
Industries 
Code, marketed units in the Trust to members of the public.
Members of the public were invited to apply for
Trust Units on a form attached to the current prospectus. Upon payment of the Subscription Moneys and satisfaction of certain conditions precedent the Trust Units were redeemed upon and in consideration of the transfer by Garendon to the Unit holder of a fractional interest as tenant in common in the land upon which the resort was located (the timeshare Lot); the allotment or transfer to the Unit holder of a share in
Paradise Timeshare Club Limited (the Club).
Garendon leased the timeshare Lot to the Club for ninety-nine years. A share in the Club entitled the share holder to one week's accommodation at the resort per calendar year and to other benefits referred to in its Memorandum and Articles of Association. It is convenient to refer to the real property interest in the resort and the share in the Club so acquired as a "timeshare".
Until July 1987 people wishing to acquire timeshares on credit were referred to outside financiers. In that month Garendon decided itself to offer vendor finance and to that end the
Deed of Amendment was executed. Thereafter between July 1987 and February 1990 Garendon entered into 2,317 contracts for the provision of finance for the purchase of a timeshare. A standard form of loan agreement was used.
On 28 September 1988 the first appellants signed an application form. By doing so they applied to PTA for one timeshare carrying the rights to obtain a /4029 equal undivided interest as tenants in common in the timeshare Lot and one share in the Club. The form showed amounts described as "total subscription monies", "estimated stamp duties", "estimated registration fees" and "estimated title deed issuing fees". The total Application Moneys were shown as $11,136.50 from which was deducted a deposit said to be 10 per cent but in fact $100 leaving a balance of $11,036.50.
The first appellants agreed to be bound by the provisions of the Trust Deed as amended from time to time.
At the bottom of the form in handwriting was a notation which included the letters "VF" said to stand for "vendor finance".
On the same day, the first appellants signed a loan agreement which acknowledged that they desired to make their fractional interest in the land and their share in the Club available for the purpose of securing to Garendon the payment of the sum of $11,474 "the balance of purchase money due or owing" for the land and share and whereby they mortgaged the land and share for the benefit of Garendon. Covenant 1(a) provided: "The Borrower will pay to the Lender at or at such other place as the Lender shall direct consecutive calendar monthly instalments of $25.02 per calendar month compounded of principal and interest calculated at the Higher Rate, such interest to be computed on calendar monthly balances from the 11th day of
October 1988, the first of such instalments to be paid on the th day of November 1988 and one final payment on the 11th day of October 1995 of the balance of the principal moneys secured thereby PROVIDED HOWEVER that if the Borrower tenders to the
Lender on the due date for payment of each such calendar monthly instalment the sum of $202.52 (representing the principal moneys and interest calculated at the acceptable rate) then if the
Borrower is not otherwise in default under Loan Agreement the
Lender shall accept such lower sum in lieu of the higher sum for each calendar month in which the instalment incorporating interest calculated at the Acceptable Rate is so said to the
Lender."
Covenant 3 (c) provided: "For the purposes of this Loan Agreement interest at 'the Higher 
Rate' means simple interest at the rate of Fourteen per cent (14%) per annum and interest at 'the Acceptable Rate' means simple interest at the rate of Twelve per cent (12%) per annum."
The other appellants signed similar application forms and loan agreements.
 
NATURE OF THE PROCEEDINGS
Pursuant to s104 (3) and [Pt 9](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ca198474/index.html#p9) of the [Credit Act 1984](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ca198474/) (the Act) the appellants applied to the Commercial Tribunal to have the transaction with
Garendon reopened, the net balance due by them determined as zero and Garendon repay all moneys they had already paid under the contracts. In response,
Garendon made an application under [ss85](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ca198474/s85.html) and [86](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ca198474/s86.html) in which it denied that the contracts were regulated by the Act but if they were, sought that any contravention by it be excused.
These applications raised a preliminary question involving two separate issues which the Tribunal answered unfavourably to the appellants. They appealed to the Administrative Division of the Supreme Court.
 [CREDIT ACT 1984](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ca198474/) [Part 3](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ca198474/index.html#p3) of the Act regulates certain contracts including, in Division 1, "Credit Sale Contracts and Loan Contracts". [Section 5](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ca198474/s5.html) (1) of the Act defines, unless the contrary intention appears, "credit sale contract" and "loan contract". A major part of the argument at each stage of the proceedings was directed to whether the parties had entered into a "credit sale contract". The parties agreed that the loan agreement signed by the appellants fell within the definition of "loan contract". Accordingly it is unnecessary to set out the definition of "loan contract". The appellants submitted that the loan agreement was a loan contract to which [Part 3](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ca198474/index.html#p3) applied.
"Credit sale contract" is defined to mean: "..... a contract of sale of goods or services where in respect of the payment for the goods or services credit is, or is to be, provided to a debtor, being a buyer but not being a body corporate, by a supplier in the course of a business carried on by the supplier and, under the contract: a charge is made for the provision of credit; the amount payable by the debtor is not required to be paid within the period of four months after credit is provided under the contract; or the amount payable by the debtor may be paid by five or more instalments or by a deposit and four or more instalments ....."
There is no dispute that Garendon provided credit in the course of its business and, within the terms of para (a), made a charge for the provision of that credit. So far as presently material, "services" is defined to include "the rights and benefits that are, or are to be, supplied under: a contract for or involving: ...........
the provision of, or the use or enjoyment of, facilities for amusement, entertainment, recreation or instruction;"
For the purpose of the proceedings the appellants, in order to make good their claim that they had a credit sale contract with Garendon, had to establish that: there was a contract of sale; it was a contract of sale of goods or services, the credit provider was also the seller of the services; both the contract for sale and the provision for credit were contained in the one contract; Canham versus Australian Guarantee Corporation
Limited (1993) 31 NSWLR 246 at 269-70.
The Tribunal found against the appellants in relation to each of these headings. In most respects Mathews J agreed with the findings of the Tribunal, though she approached some of the questions differently and disagreed with the finding that there was no contract of sale of services.
She was disposed to find that the contract was one "involving" the provision, use or enjoyment of recreational facilities.
 .
It is convenient to deal first with the question whether the appellants and Garendon had entered into a credit sale contract and defer consideration of whether the loan agreement was a loan contract to which [Part 3](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ca198474/index.html#p3) applied, For this purpose it is necessary to set out part of the Trust Deed and Amended
Deed.
 
THE TRUST DEED
In the Trust
Deed Garendon was referred to as "the Developer" and PTA "the Manager". "Trust Fund" was defined to mean the sum settled pursuant to sub cl 2.2 together with so much of the Application Moneys paid to the Trustee by Subscribers to be held by the Trustee upon the trusts of the deed and all investments and property into which such moneys might be converted. In sub cl .2 the Trustee declared that it would stand possessed of the Trust Fund "upon the trusts and subject to the powers and provisions hereinafter expressed concerning the same." Sub cl 2.3 provided that the Trust Fund should be vested in and held by the Trustee upon the trusts and with and subject to the powers and provisions contained in the Deed of Trust.
Clause 3 provided for the beneficial interest in the Trust Fund to be divided into Units and that the Units were not capable of division. "Unit" was defined to mean an undivided part or share in the Trust Fund as provided for in the Deed, each Unit carrying the right to obtain one Fractional Interest and one Share in accordance with the provisions of the Deed. Every Unit conferred on the Unit holder an interest in the Trust Fund in the same proportion as the Application Moneys paid to the Trustee in respect of that
Unit bore to the total amount of the Application Moneys paid. No Unit conferred any interest in any particular part of the Trust Fund or any investments. Clause 8 provided that upon the Trustee applying a Unit holder's
Application Moneys in accordance with the provisions of the Deed in relation to a Unit, that Unit should ipso facto be extinguished.
By cl 9 the Developer and Manager jointly and severally covenanted "with the Club and with the Trustee with the intent that the benefit of their covenants shall enure not only to the Club and the Trustee but to the Unit holders jointly and to each of them severally" to do various things including: "(ii) incorporate the Club; cause the Club to adopt the
Regulations; cause the Lease to be duly executed, stamped and lodged for registration."
The Regulations were regulations of the Club annexed to the Deed of Trust and dealing with the use and conduct of the resort. The Lease was the ninety-nine year lease of the resort by Garendon to the Club. By cl 10 the
Developer entered into numerous negative and positive covenants with the
Trustee, the Manager and the Club with the intent that the benefit of its covenants should enure not only to the Trustee, the
Manager and the Club but to the Unit holders jointly and to each of them severally.
Sub cl 11.1.5 was of prime importance to the arguments the parties put.
So far as relevant it provided: "The full amount of Application Moneys received by the Trustee shall be applied in the following manner: subject to (an immaterial sub-clause) by paying on behalf of the Unit Holder to or as directed by the Developer so much of the Subscription Moneys as shall be determined by the Manager in exchange for the delivery to the Trustee of: a duly executed transfer in registrable form from the
Developer to the Unit Holder of a Fractional Interest for every
Unit in respect of which the Unit Holder's Application was accepted, such transfer being subject only to the Scheduled
Encumbrances, ...
by paying on behalf of the Unit Holder to or as directed by the
Developer the balance of the Subscription Moneys against the allotment or transfer to the Unit Holder of one Share together with the Share Certificate relating thereto if the same has been issued by the Club and together with such evidence as the
Trustee may require (if any) that the directors of the Club shall duly register the share transfer PROVIDED THAT in relation to the payment of Subscription Moneys held by the Trustee as at the Completion Date against the respective allotment or transfer to the Unit Holders of Shares, the Developer and the Manager will procure the Directors of the Club to meet at the time of and as part of the settlement process in order to approve the allotment or transfer (as the case maybe) to the respective
Unit Holders of the Shares and payment under this clause shall be subject thereto; ..."
By cl 18 the Trustee entered into positive and negative covenants with the Manager, the Developer and the Club with the intent that the benefit of the covenants should enure to the Unit holders jointly and to each of them severally. Clause 30 provided that the terms and conditions of the Deed should be binding on the parties and each Unit holder and all parties claiming through them respectively and as if each such Unit holder had been party to the Deed.
The Memorandum and Articles of the Club were annexed to the Deed of
Trust. The Club proposed to be registered with a capital of $4,034 divided into that number of $1 shares. Amongst the Subscribers' shares was one "Promoter's
Subscriber" share Garendon held. Article 11.1 provided that this share should be deemed to be equivalent to 4,034 shares less the number of other shares for the time being issued. Article 4 (a) provided that qualification for membership of the Club was that the applicant should be a "Co-Owner", meaning the registered proprietor or a person who was entitled to be registered as the proprietor of a 1/4,029 interest as tenant in common in the timeshare Lot. Article 6.1 provided that the holder for the time being of a share should have the right to exercise an "Entitlement" to occupy one apartment at the resort of the type designated in the register and to use the common facilities of the resort for the one vacation week to which the share related. Article 47 (a) provided for representatives of the Promoter's
Subscriber share to constitute the first committee to retire at the conclusion of the next General Meeting after December 1990 or such earlier date as might be unanimously resolved by the first committee.
 
DEED OF AMENDMENT
The Deed of Amendment provided for the insertion of the following new sub clauses in the Trust Deed: "4.9 Notwithstanding any other provision of this Deed, if an amount is shown in an Application against the item 'Vendor Terms or Finance' then the Application shall be capable of acceptance by the Manager subject to the condition that the Developer will grant Vendor terms for that amount or a recognised lending institution agrees to lend that amount to the Subscriber, on terms inter alia not less favourable than those specified in the Application provided that if the Developer does not notify the Subscriber and the Manager in writing within twenty-one days after the date of lodgment of the Application with the Manager of the agreement to grant
Vendor terms or to lend, then the Subscriber may by notice in writing to the Manager withdraw its Application and the provisions of paragraph .7.3 shall mutatis mutandis apply." "5.6 Where the Developer or a financier has agreed to grant to the
Subscriber Vendor terms or finance, the Subscriber will pay that part of the balance of the Application Moneys shown in the 
Application Form against the item 'Vendor Terms or Finance' to the Developer or financier after the application of his 
Application Moneys in accordance with paragraph 11.1.5 of this
Deed, by such instalments, subject to payment of such interest and on such other conditions and secured in such manner as the
Subscriber and the Developer or financier may have agreed between them. The Trustee shall not have any function or responsibility whatever in respect of any arrangements so agrees, nor as to the compliance or otherwise of any such arrangements with statutory or other legal requirements nor as to the interests of the Subscriber or Developer or financier in regard to those arrangements, nor as to the exercise by any party of its rights under any such arrangements, nor as to the enforcement of any relevant security nor as to the execution or registration of any document or other means of giving effect to the rights of either party following final payment of the outstanding balance of the Application Moneys."
Sub clause 11.1.5 of the Trust Deed was amended by: inserting the words '(less that part (if any) shown in the
Application Form against the item 'Vendor Terms or Finance')' after the words 'Application Moneys' on the first line of that sub clause; inserting the word 'received' after the words 'Subscription
Moneys' in the second line of sub clause (b) of that clause."
The Application Form which was annexed to the Principal Deed was amended as follows: "(a) by inserting the words 'less Vendor terms or finance (if applicable - see notes 8 and 9)' directly below the words 'Deposit (10% of the subscription moneys)' and by inserting a dollar sign in the relevant column; by inserting the words 'within 21 days' under the words 'Balance of Application Moneys'; by inserting paragraphs 8 and 9 under the heading 'Note:' as follows: '8. Where it is noted on the Application (by the completion of an amount opposite the words 'Less Vendor Terms or Finance') that you are seeking a loan of such an amount from the
Developer or from a financial institution and the Manager notifies you in writing within twenty-one (21) days of the date you lodge this Application with the Manager that your
Application for such loan has not been approved then at any time thereafter you may by notice in writing to the
Manager withdraw this Application and all moneys paid by you will be refunded.
Any loan of the amount inserted opposite the words 'Less
Vendor Terms or Finance' on the Application will be on such terms as the Developer or the financial institution shall require including provision for monthly repayments of $  and an effective interest rate of   percent per annum.'"
It is probable, although the complete document is not in evidence, that the Application Form signed by the appellants, to an extent, took this amended form. However the Application Form included in the Third Prospectus, like the
Application Form signed by the first appellants, contained amendments (b) and , with different paragraph numbers 9 and 10, but not amendment (a). The blanks in amendment (c) cl 9 were filled by a row of xs.
 
CREDIT SALE CONTRACT
Central to the question whether the parties had made a credit sale contract within the meaning of the Act is the concept of the Unit in the Trust
Deed and the operation of sub cl 11.1.5. Sub cl 3.2 contemplated that the
Trustee had been paid Application Moneys which it held in trust as part of the
Trust
Fund. The beneficial interest in the Trust Fund was divided into units meaning, according to the definition of "Unit", an undivided part or share in the Trust Fund. The Unit conferred on the Unit holder an interest in the Trust
Fund in the same proportion as the
Application Moneys paid to the Trustee in respect of the Unit bore to the total amount of the Application Moneys paid to the Trustee.
No Unit conferred any interest in any particular part of the
Trust Fund but, according to its definition, carried the right to obtain one fractional interest and one share in accordance with the provisions of the
Deed. In short, the Unit acknowledged that the holder had an undivided share in the Trust Fund and as a result the right to obtain a fractional interest in the timeshare Lot and a share.
Sub cl 11.1.5 explained the nature of the right. The Trustee had to apply the full amount of the Application Moneys by payments on the Unit holder's behalf to the Developer or as it directed of an amount in exchange for the delivery to the Trustee of a transfer in registrable form of a fractional interest in the timeshare Lot and the balance against the allotment or transfer to the Unit holder of a share in the Club.
 
SALE
Mathews J considered a submission that the transaction between the parties involved a sale of a Unit. But payment of the Application Moneys to and acceptance of them by the Trustee created the Unit holder's interest in the
Trust Fund. Before that payment, the beneficial interest in the Trust
Fund, which the applicant by payment acquired, did not exist.
In Cook versus Evans <case>; [(1948) 49 SR 83] at 85 Jordan CJ, in a different context, said that "purchasing" did not connote the acquisition for money of some interest which only came into existence by the very transaction; see also Powell versus Cleland [(1948) 1 KB 262] at 268-9. In my opinion the expression "sale of goods or services" does not include a transaction by which a beneficial interest in a trust fund is created and acquired. I agree with Mathews J that the allotment to the appellants of a Unit in the Trust Fund did not constitute a sale.
A more difficult question is whether there was a contract of sale of the fractional interest in the land and the share in the Club. The appellants accept that, if there was, it was not a sale of goods. Garendon transferred a share in the Club to the appellants. Sub cl 11.1.5 (b) contemplated either allotment or transfer of a share to the Unit holder. Sub cl 11.1.5 (a) required the Trustee to pay portion of the Application Moneys in exchange for a transfer of the fractional share. To this extent the transaction might appear to be a sale to the Trustee acting on behalf of the Unit holder of the fractional share.
The trouble with this characterisation is that the Unit itself carried the right to the fractional share and was extinguished when the
Trustee applied the Application Moneys in accordance with the Deed.
Anantamul Pty Limited versus Innes-Irons [(1984) 2 QdR 180] concerned a section in a Queensland Act which provided that, in particular circumstances, no person should sell or offer for sale any land that was subdivided into more than five allotments. The defendant had purchased units in a unit trust of which the plaintiff was trustee. The balance due was payable after notice of registration of a proposed plan of subdivision of the Trust land. The agreement established a nexus between the defendant's units and a particular allotment in the proposed subdivision and provided that if, after the balance of moneys had been paid, the defendant should surrender his units in the unit trust to the plaintiff, the plaintiff would deliver in exchange a certificate of title to the allotment and a transfer. The defendant repudiated the agreement as illegal and void. Once question was whether under the deed the form of acquisition of land at the defendant's discretion in exchange for his units was a purchase within the meaning of the section. At 188 Derrington J said that, stripped to its essentials, the transaction consisted of a purchase by the defendant of an interest in the trust which included the right, subject to the conditions of registration of the plan and payment of the balance of purchase price of the units, to receive title to the relevant land upon the surrender of the units. Among other authorities his Honour referred to Cook v
Evans and Tillman versus Traill [(1957) 74 WN 284] and, at 189, said: "...is difficult to see how the acquisition of the title to the land by the defendant as proposed could be described as a purchase. The surrender of an interest in the trust in exchange for title to the lands certainly means that the acquisition is associated with a form of consideration, that the land is a subject matter of his beneficial interest in the trust and indeed had been specifically allocated to this end in the original agreement upon his entry into the trust.
By way of analogy in agreement by two beneficiaries of a trust to divide the trust property in specie between them could hardly be described as a purchase by both of them from the trust.
Consequently the Act proposed by the agreement that the defendant take the land as his interest in the trust could not be described as a purchase nor then could the election given to him in that respect be described as an option to purchase."
In my opinion neither the subscription of moneys to a trust fund for the allotment, in exchange, of a unit carrying the right to obtain an interest in land (meaning thereby that the trustee is obliged to obtain a transfer of the land) nor the act of the trustee in obtaining the transfer amounts to a contract of sale to the subscriber.
For the same reason I do not think that the obtaining of the allotment or transfer of a share in the Club amounts to a contract of sale. The appellants have the additional problems that para (b) contemplated that the other party to that arrangement would be not Garendon but the Club and that an allotment of shares is not a contract of sale; see In re VGM Holdings
Limited [(1942) Ch ] at 240-1 to which Mathews J referred.
 
SERVICES
For the sake of argument Mathews J assumed that the allotment of Units in the
Trust Fund did constitute a sale and considered whether it was a contract of sale of "services" within the definition in the Act.
Her Honour accepted that the contract under which the Unit was acquired involved the provision of facilities for amusement, entertainment, recreation or instruction. This may be correct. But as Mr Stowe QC, who appeared for the respondents, argued, it has to be shown that the services are to be supplied under the contract. There is, it seems to me, a powerful argument for saying that the services were supplied not under the agreement for the allotment of the Units but under the
Memorandum and Articles of the Club. However it is not necessary to resolve this question because as her Honour said, Garendon, the credit provider, was not the supplier of the services.
 
ONE CONTRACT
In Canhan versus Australian Guarantee Corp Limited at 269-70 Kirby P said: "The statutory definition of 'credit sale contract' requires that the matters described in subpars (a), (b) and (c) of the definition be provided for under the contract of sale itself.
In the present case each of the matters referred to in subpars , (b) and (c) was provided for in the loan contract. But the loan contract contained no express provision for the sale of the goods." 
Both Priestley
JA (who dissented) and Meagher JA agreed with this.
The obvious problem in the present case is that on the one hand the appellants have entered into a contract evidenced by the Application Form, the
Unit certificate, the transfer of the fractional interest in land and the allotment or transfer of a share in the Club. On the other they have entered into the separate written loan agreement.
The charge made for the provision of credit is made in the loan agreement. Even if one can regard the other documents as evidencing a contract of sale of services with Garendon, that contract is not one under which a charge is made for the provision of credit.
Mathews J treated as unanswerable a submission put on behalf of the respondents that it was simply not possible to identify a single agreement under which property was sold and credit was provided in respect of payment for that property. If cl 10 in the Application
Form in the third prospectus was part of the appellants' application form, any loan referred to opposite the words "less vendor terms or finance" was to be on such terms as the
Developer or the financial institution should require including provision for monthly repayments and an effective interest rate per annum. Thus the charge made for the provision of credit was not made under the assumed contract of sale of services but under the separate loan agreement.
However Mr Basten QC, who appeared for the appellants, submitted that the documents and the transactions should be looked at as a whole and not as though they were separate single transactions.
Mr Basten invoked a passage from Lord Wilberforce's speech in W T Ramsay Limited versus Inland Revenue
Commissioners <case>; [(1982) AC 300] at 323 that the cardinal principle that the Court cannot go behind a genuine document or transaction to some supposed underlying substance must not be overstated or overextended. His Lordship said: "While obliging the Court to accept documents or transactions, found to be genuine, as such, it does not compel the Court to look at a document or a transaction in blinkers, isolated from any context to which it properly belongs. If it can be seen that a document or transaction was intended to have effect as part of a nexus or series of transactions, or as an ingredient of a wider transaction intended as a whole, there is nothing in the doctrine to prevent it being so regarded: to do so is not to prefer form to substance, or substance to form." .
As appears from what followed this was said in the context of ascertaining the legal nature of any transaction to which it was sought to attach a tax or a tax consequence. The problem with applying such reasoning to the circumstances here is that the definitions in the Act speak of and distinguish between specific sorts of contracts, on the one hand a contract of sale of goods or services, on the other a loan contract. The contracts made between the parties were part of the one transaction. But one of them can be identified as a loan contract which was not a contract of sale of goods or services. If there was a contract of sale of goods or services it was separate and separately must meet the conditions which would make it a credit sale contract. In my opinion nothing said by Lord
Wilberforce permits the conclusion that the Act allows the two contracts to be treated as one credit sale contract.
In my opinion Mathews J correctly concluded that the parties had not entered into a credit sale contract within the meaning of the Act.
 
LOAN CONTRACT TO WHICH PART 3 APPLIES
Section 30 (2) of the Act provides that in Pt 3: "a reference to a loan contract does not include a reference to a loan contract in respect of which: the amount financed is more than $20,000; there is no annual percentage rate or there is only one annual percentage rate and that rate does not exceed 14 per centum; or there is an acceptable rate of interest and a higher annual percentage rate that exceeds the acceptable rate by not more than 2 per centum and that acceptable rate does not exceed 14 per centum, unless, when the contract is made, a mortgage relating to a commercial vehicle or farm machinery has been, or is agreed to be, entered into to secure the payment of a debt or the performance of an obligation under the contract."
The appellants' loan agreements did not come within paras (a) or (b).
Section 5 (1) defines "acceptable rate of interest" in relation to a loan contract as meaning "an annual percentage rate that the credit provider agrees to accept so long as the debtor duly observes and performs the terms of the contract". "Higher annual percentage rate" is not defined. "Annual percentage rate" is defined as meaning "annual percentage rate within the meaning of s10". Section 10 provides: "For the purposes of this Act, unless the contrary intention appears, a reference to the annual percentage rate: in relation to a credit sale contract or a loan contract in respect of which the annual percentage rate has not been disclosed to the debtor or has been so disclosed otherwise than in accordance with section 38, is a reference to the lowest percentage rate per annum that can be determined in accordance with that section in relation to the contract; in relation to a credit sale contract or loan contract under which the annual percentage rate has been disclosed in accordance with section 38, is a reference to the rate disclosed; and in relation to a continuing credit contract, is a reference to the annual percentage rate within the meaning of section 55."
Section 38 provides as follows: "The annual percentage rate required under section 35 or 36 to be stated in a credit sale contract or a loan contract is: where, under the contract, the whole of the credit charge is determined by the application of a percentage rate per annum to the daily unpaid balance of the amount financed - that percentage rate; and where under the contract the whole of the credit charge is not so determined: the percentage rate per annum which when applied to the daily unpaid balance of the amount financed calculated according to the actuarial method will yield a sum equal to the amount which under the contract would be the credit charge if all payments under the contract were paid on the respective days on which under the contract they are required to be paid; where Schedule 6 applies to the credit sale contract or loan contract, the percentage rate per annum determined in accordance with the formula set out in that Schedule; or where an applicable method has been prescribed for the purposes of this section, the percentage rate per annum determined according to that method, whichever the credit provider determines."
The parties accepted that calculations done in accordance with s38 showed that by a very small amount, the higher annual percentage rate exceeded the acceptable rate by more than 2 per centum. The result of the calculations would appear to be that the appellants' loan agreements did not come within para (c) of s30 (2) and were loan contracts to which Pt 3 applied. Even so the respondents persuaded Mathews J that this result did not follow. Her Honour said, referring to s38: "That section, it will be remembered, required the annual percentage rate which is required to be stated under section or 36 to be calculated according to either the actuarial method or the Schedule 6 method.

Section 35, which deals with credit sale contracts, has no application here. It is section 36 which requires disclosure in relation to loan contracts.
The relevant portion of that section is as follows: '36(1) A loan contract shall include - a statement of the annual percentage rate in accordance with s 38;' 
If the legislative provisions had ended there, then the plaintiffs would have had to succeed (subject to a possible argument about the de minimis rule). For the rates disclosed in the contracts, being percent and 14 percent respectively, would not have been disclosed in accordance with section 38 in that the calculations referred to under that section yielded rates which were different from those set out in the contracts, albeit to an extremely minor degree. Accordingly section 10 (b) would not apply and the matter must fall within section 10 (a).
That section requires that the methods set out in section 38 be applied in order to determine the relevant interest rate.
And when one embarks upon that exercise, as Mr Dick-Lauder did, the figures which are yielded show a difference between the acceptable rate of interest and the higher rate in excess of percent, albeit again by a very minor degree. Therefore the contracts would be regulated contracts as they would fall outside the purview of section 30 (2) (c).

It is here that section 78 becomes significant.
This section provides as follows: '78 It is sufficient compliance with the provisions of this Part that require the annual percentage rate to be stated in or in relation to a regulated contract under which the whole or any part of the credit charge is a pre-determined credit charge if the annual percentage rate is - stated as a rate greater than that required to be stated: or stated as a rate less than that required to be stated by not more than one part in fifty of the rate required to be stated.' 
The legislative scheme is as follows. Section 30 (2) (c) excludes contracts from regulation if the difference between the acceptable and the higher rate of interest is no more than percent. One must then turn to the definitions in <case>. There one finds that both the acceptable rate and the higher rate are generally described as annual percentage rates.
In order to ascertain what this phrase means, we are referred by section to section 10.

Section 10 (a) applies only if the contract fails to disclose the annual percentage rate in accordance with section 38. If there is disclosure in accordance with s38, then the annual percentage rate is taken for all purposes of the Act, to be the rate so disclosed. One then turns to section 38 in order to ascertain whether the annual percentage rate has been disclosed in accordance with that section.
The opening words of that section refer one back to the sections which require disclosure, namely section 35 and 36. Therefore, according to section 38 itself, the words 'disclosure in accordance with section 38' in section 10 must mean disclosure as required by section 36 which is in accordance with one of the methods set out in section 38. One then turns to section 78.
This section specifies that it is sufficient compliance with section if the conditions stipulated in that section are met. It must follow that a contract which discloses an annual percentage rate within the tolerances permitted by section is, by virtue of section 38 and 36, a 'contract under which the annual percentage rate has been disclosed in accordance with section ' within the meaning of section 10 (b) of the Act.

This conclusion accords with the general scheme of the
Act."
Before coming to what her Honour said about the scheme of the Act it is convenient to examine the process by which her
Honour construed the Act.
Section 10 (a) speaks of the annual percentage rate having "not been disclosed to the debtor" or having "been so disclosed otherwise than in accordance with s38". Section 38 says nothing about disclosure. The section stipulates what the annual percentage required, relevantly under s36, is. This depends upon whether under the contract (a) the whole of the credit charge is determined by the application of a percentage rate per annum to the daily unpaid balance of the amount financed, in which case it is that percentage rate, or (b) not so determined. If it has not been so determined para (b) provides that it will be the percentage rate calculated in accordance with sub para (i) or determined in accordance with the formula set out in Sch 6 or in accordance with an applicable method prescribed for the purposes of the section, whichever the credit provider determines. Thus all one learns by the application of s38 is what the annual percentage rate required under, relevantly, s36 is. Once that rate is worked out, the question that s10 poses is whether in the loan contract that rate has been disclosed to the debtor at all or has been disclosed otherwise than in accordance with s38. I should say immediately that
I am not clear as to the difference. But whatever it is I do not think that s10 (a) speaks of a percentage rate not disclosed in a manner stipulated by s38 (s38 imposes no requirement for disclosure) but a percentage rate as defined by s38 not being disclosed. Paragraph (a) is concerned with what the real or actual annual percentage rate is and then whether that rate has been disclosed. It sends the reader to s38 to find out what is meant by annual percentage rate, not to find out what disclosure is required.
It follows from what I have said that, with respect, I disagree with the proposition that at the threshold of working out whether or not a loan contract is one referred to in Pt 3, one is concerned with whether it meets the various requirements that Pt 3 imposes including disclosure. Section 36 has no application to a loan contract unless it is one referred to by Pt 3. It seems to me to be inverting the necessary process of construction to ask whether the requirements of s36 have been met to determine whether or not the section applies to the loan contract. I do not think, properly understood, the
Act calls for this.
Section 78 alleviates the need for strict compliance with those provisions of Pt 3 that require the annual percentage rate to be stated in or in relation to a regulated contract under which the whole or any part of the credit charge is a predetermined credit charge. The section operates on regulated contracts, that is to say contracts to which Pt 3 applies.
 .
Section 36 (1) requires that a loan contract shall include matters in addition to a statement of the annual percentage rate in accordance with s38.
The effect of the construction her Honour gave the Act would be that s78 would operate not only to make the stated rates therein sufficient compliance but to exclude the need for loan contracts to comply with the other requirements of s36 (1) and of
Pt 3. This could not have been intended.
Mathews J said that the conclusion she reached accorded with the general scheme of the Act. Sections 10 (a) and 38 recognised that the various methods of calculating interest will not necessarily produce the same figure in any given case and that small variations will inevitably occur when one goes to multiple decimal points. "Putting aside for a moment the de minimis principle, it would be virtually impossible in any single case to disclose interest rates in accordance with section 38 unless one were to apply the tolerances permitted by section 78. This could have serious consequences for a credit provider who faces severe penalties under section 42 if a contract is then found to be regulated and the provisions of Part 3 have not been complied with.

It must be taken therefore that the object of section 78 is to permit the overstatement of interest rates (this being unlikely to prejudice borrowers), and also allow for their understatement within the stipulated tolerances, both for the purpose of determining whether the rate disclosed on the face of a contract is in accordance with section 38, and thus for determining whether the contract is a regulated one, as well as for the obvious purpose for determining whether a regulated contract complies with the disclosure requirements of section 36."
However her Honour acknowledged that s78 (b) applies more appropriately when considering whether a loan contract is regulated than s78 (a) which permits interest rates to be overstated to an unlimited extent.
If the loan contract contains two annual percentage rates, the acceptable rate of interest, which the credit provider agrees to accept so long as the debtor observes and performs the terms of the contract, and the higher annual percentage rate, it is necessary to determine first what those rates are, calculated in the way the Act prescribes, and then whether they have been disclosed. Section 30 (2) (c) is directed to the difference between the rates so calculated. If it is more than 2 percent Pt 3 applies.
Section 78 is concerned with the question of whether the provisions of Pt have been complied with in a loan contract to which Pt 3 applies. Sufficient compliance with the provisions of Pt 3 by the operation of s78, in my opinion, has nothing to do with whether Pt 3 applies to the loan contract. Section 78 provides that disclosure of an annual percentage rate is sufficient if the rate disclosed exceeds the correctly calculated rate. If the acceptable rate of interest was actually 12 percent and the higher annual percentage rate 16 percent, Pt 3 would apply to the loan contract. It is hardly conceivable that the legislature could have intended that the credit provider could escape this result by overstating the acceptable rate of interest at 14 percent so that the difference as stated in the loan contract was not more than 2 percent on the ground that by force of s78 (a) there was sufficient compliance, in terms of disclosure, with s36 (1) (e).
In my opinion, s78 does not apply in determining whether, within the meaning of s30 (2) (c) the higher annual percentage rate exceeds the acceptable rate by more than percent. It follows that the appellants' loan agreements were loan contracts to which Pt 3 of the Act applied.
In the alternative the appellant submitted that even if s78 applied in determining whether a contract disclosed an annual percentage rate in accordance with s38, the rates disclosed in the first respondent's contracts were not in accordance with that section. Section 123 of the Act in Pt 6 headed "Regulated Contracts and Regulated Mortgages - General" provides that the regulations may require the use of specified descriptive terms in a regulated contract. Regulation 19 (2) provides that in a regulated loan contract a matter specified in column of Sch 4 shall be described or referred to by the term specified opposite that matter in column 2 of Sch 4.
The third item in column reads "the annual percentage rates expressed in accordance with s38 of the Act" and the term opposite in column 2 is "annual percentage rate". No where in the respondent's contracts was the phrase "annual percentage rate" used. Clause 1 (c) of the loan agreements referred to the higher and acceptable rate as being "simple interest" at the rate of 14 and 12 percent per annum respectively. It was submitted that this use of the term "simple interest" was positively misleading as that expression was commonly understood to mean a flat rate of interest.
Mathews J held, and I agree, that this argument put the cart before the horse. Section 123 and the regulation apply only to contracts which are regulated by Pt 3 of the Act. There was no basis whatsoever for regarding them as applicable to a contract not shown to be a regulated contract or for regarding compliance with them as determinative of whether a contract is regulated or not. In my opinion this alternative argument should be rejected.
 
CONCLUSION
I propose the following orders: 
Appeal allowed; 
The orders of Mathews J of 11 April 1994 set aside; 
In lieu thereof declare that the loan agreements between the appellants and the first respondent, the subject of the proceedings in the Tribunal in matter No 126 of 1991, are loan contracts to which [Pt 3](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ca198474/index.html#p3) of the [Credit Act 1984](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ca198474/) applies; 
Order that the matter be remitted to the Commercial Tribunal for reconsideration of the orders which it should make in the proceeding conformably with the decision of this Court; 
Order that the first respondent pay the costs of the appellants in the court below and of this appeal.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/50.html  
