

Aw and Lm Forrest Pty Ltd versus Beamish Matter No 4330/95 [1998] NSWSC 422 (27
August 1998) 
Last Updated: 7 October 1998 
AW & LM FORREST PTY LTD versus BEAMISH /95 August 1998 
Young J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is a motion challenging the retainer of the solicitors who purport to act for the first plaintiff. 
There are three plaintiffs in these proceedings, the company AW & LM
Forrest Pty Ltd is the first plaintiff, Austin William Forrest is the second plaintiff and the second plaintiff's current wife, Portia-Ann Forrest is the third plaintiff. The first defendant is Maralyn Lillian Beamish who is the step daughter of the second plaintiff, the second defendant is Graeme Beamish her husband, and the third defendants are a firm of solicitors practising in the Albury-Wodonga area.

Before dealing with the motion, I should mention how it comes before me. The proceedings are in the expedition list. One of the defences is that the first plaintiff did not authorize the commencement of these proceedings. I indicated that I did not consider that that was a proper defence, but that if that matter were pressed, it should be raised by motion to challenge the retainer.
The motion was then filed, and I indicated I would hear it on 5 June 1998.

On 5 June, I heard the motion. Mr Walton appeared for the applicant/first defendant and Mr Conti, QC and Mr Tonking appeared for the respondents being the plaintiffs and their solicitors Messrs Marshall Sheehan & Associates.
Ms C Wayland, solicitor, appeared for the third defendants on a watching brief. By agreement, both sides put in written submissions. Subject to those submissions, I adjourned the proceedings to the Expedition List on 17 July, .

I had completed what I might call a semi-final draft of the reasons for judgment on the motion on 16 July. The only point on which I was then wavering was the question of costs. In order to expedite the matter, I announced the result of the motion on 17 July, as follows:- "Order that the corporate plaintiff and all orders sought by the corporate plaintiff in the amended statement of claim be struck out. Give leave to the other plaintiffs to amend and order that the partners of the firm of Marshall
Sheehan & Associates jointly and severally pay the defendants' costs of the motion. Stand over the question as to the basis on which those costs should be paid. All further submissions on this issue must be left with my
Associate no later than 31/7/98. Stand over to Young, J's Expedition List :10am 14/8/98." 
The applicant's further submissions arrived in my chambers about 28 July. On July, junior counsel for the respondents informed me in open court that his clients wished me to disqualify myself for perceived bias. It seemed from what counsel said that this application was made because (a) I had suggested that the motion be filed; and (b) the respondents had somehow or other been denied a proper opportunity to make submissions. I indicated that as far as the first ground was concerned, I was following a practice well ensconced in adjectival law. As to the second ground, I could not at that time see any denial.
However, I said that any such application should be made on motion, but that, as the order had been made but not yet taken out, the respondents should be careful to see that the order was not taken out before that motion could be heard. When, on 11 August, I had not received any notice of motion from the
Registry, I had my Associate telephone Mr Tonking whose clerk informed her that no such motion would be filed. I thus now can give my reasons.

I should note that I have taken the precaution in case the matter should surface in the future of preserving the hard copy of the semi-final draft plus additional notes as they existed on 17 July (and 31 July). If ever they are examined, it will be seen that, apart from the material on costs, they are virtually the same as these reasons.

I will now give reasons for my decision on the motion.

By the further amended statement of claim filed on 4 May 1998 (which I will refer to simply as "the statement of claim"), the plaintiffs said that the first plaintiff is the trustee of the Austin William Forrest Family Trust and of the Lillian May Forrest Family Trust. The second plaintiff and the first defendant were the directors of the first plaintiff. The plaintiffs say that, because of various breaches of fiduciary and common law duties of negligence, the defendants have benefited from the Family Trusts to an extent of between $300,000 and $560,000 more than they should have benefited. The statement of claim, apart from seeking declarations, sought that the defendants repay money to the trustee of the trusts. The allegations in the statement of claim were, of course, more complicated than that, but that summary is sufficient for present purposes.

The applicant challenges the right of the natural plaintiffs to sue in the name of the company. The principal argument proffered is that there has been no meeting of the directors of the first plaintiff to authorize the commencement of these proceedings and that as both the second plaintiff and first defendant are directors and are in opposing interests, there could never be a resolution of directors.

The response to this is that the first defendant was never validly appointed a director and that the second plaintiff had authority as the surviving permanent managing director to retain the solicitors.

I will refer to the first plaintiff simply as "the company". The company was incorporated on 2 September 1960 under the Companies Ordinance 1954 of the
Australian Capital Territory. Its then name was "The Forrest Logging &
Earthmoving Co Pty Ltd". The subscribers were the second plaintiff and his first wife Lillian May Forrest. The Articles of Association are the regulations contained in Table A of Schedule 2 of the Companies Act 1936 with some additions, but excluding certain regulations of Table A including , 66, 69, 70, 72, 73 and 74.

A reference in the Articles of Association of an ACT company to Schedule 2 of the Companies Act 1936 means a reference to those articles as they are applicable in the Australian Capital Territory.

The rule of construction that is applied, at least where Table A is adopted with some exclusions and some additions, is that the whole of the Articles of
Association of the company are interpreted in accordance with the definitions in the relevant [Interpretation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ia191/) which means not only the ACT Companies Ordinance 1954 but also the Acts [Interpretation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ia191/) in force in the
ACT at the relevant time: see Fell versus Derby Leather Co Ltd [[1931] 2 Ch .] 
This rule has some importance in the instant case because articles 103 and 104 provide that if a member has no registered address within the State then notices of meeting may be given to that member in a newspaper advertisement circulating in the neighbourhood of the registered office of the company. With an ACT company "State" must be read as meaning the Australian Capital
Territory.

The additional Articles of Association provide in article 7 that two members personally present shall be a quorum at a general meeting. Article 10 provides that a resolution with or without a meeting of directors evidenced by writing under the hand of all the directors shall be valid and effectual as if it had been passed at a meeting. Article 11 provides that the second plaintiff and
Lillian May Forrest shall be permanent directors and hold office until they die or resign or cease to hold a share in the company.

Article 6 then provides: "Any provision or provisions of the said Table "A" which shall conflict in any way with the positions powers discretions and authority as hereinafter contained of the permanent managing director for the time being shall be inapplicable and in abeyance while any such permanent managing director shall hold office but shall take effect upon all such permanent managing directors ceasing to hold office." 
It will be noted that there is a slide between the terms "permanent directors" in article 11 and "permanent managing director" in article 6 (and also in additional articles 15 (which I will set out later) and 23, which I have not quoted). There is also the flavour in article 11 that Austin and Lillian
Forrest are joint permanent (managing) directors, but article 6 and article 23 seem to make it clear that the survivor is also a permanent managing director.

Lillian May Forrest died on 15 September 1992. Probate of her will was granted on 17 September 1993 to her daughter, the first defendant, and the second plaintiff, her widower. Mrs Beamish was named first in the probate.

On 4 November 1992, the company records were amended so that the estate of LM
Forrest was recorded as a shareholder and Mrs Beamish was recorded as having been appointed a director of the company. Just how this occurred is not clear on the evidence. The Corporate Affairs records show that Mrs Beamish was appointed on 4 November 1992.

The second plaintiff says that this could not be right. He says that article of the additional articles applies. This is as follows: "23. Upon every such Permanent Managing Director as aforesaid ceasing to hold office and subject to section 120 of the Companies 
Act 1936 the number of the Directors and the names of the first 
Directors subsequent to the last such Permanent Managing Director shall be determined by the Company in general meeting." 
Although the wording of this article is infelicitous, it seems to me that it only applies when the last permanent managing director has ceased to hold office and not to the situation where one of two permanent managing directors has lost office by virtue of her death.

Regulation 78 of 1936 Table A allows casual vacancies on the board to be filled up by the directors. Regulation 83 allows less than the minimum number of directors to act only for the purpose of increasing the directorate. Doing the best I can on meagre material it would seem that Mrs Beamish was appointed a director and recognized as a director as from November 1992.

She says that as a director she attended to financial affairs and income tax returns of the company as trustee of the family trusts. Even if there were some defect in the appointment, it would seem that over a three year period there had been such acquiescence that for all purposes Mrs Beamish must be taken to be properly appointed a director.

There was some debate during the oral argument as to whether the articles operated so that Mrs Beamish ceased to be a director. This really does not matter overmuch because the real question is whether the second Mrs Forrest is a director, not whether Mrs Beamish is a director, but the point should be considered 
As Regulations 72-74 of Table A were deleted, there is no provision for retirement of directors by rotation. However, additional article 15 provides as follows:- "15. At the first and every subsequent general meeting of the Company the whole of the Directors other than the Permanent Managing Directors shall retire from office but shall be eligible for re-election and the Company at the general meeting at which the Directors so retire shall elect the new
Directors and in default the retiring Directors shall be deemed to have been re-elected." 
There is no evidence as to what happened at annual meetings. However Mr
Forrest conceded to Mr Walton in cross examination that since his involvement with the company general meetings have simply not been held. There is thus nothing in the evidence to suggest that Mrs Beamish had in fact ceased to hold office as a director when she was purportedly removed from office. Indeed the attempt to remove her, unsuccessful though it was, is clear evidence that the plaintiffs regarded her as a director at least up until that time.

Additional article 15 goes on to provide that "in default the retiring director shall be deemed to have been re-elected." It would seem to me that this default provision applies not only where there is no valid election at an annual general meeting, but also where such a meeting is not held at all. Thus it would cover the situation up until the time when Mrs Beamish was purportedly removed and Mrs Forrest was appointed in her stead.

There was some suggestion that Mr Forrest could, by virtue of his office in the company, remove Mrs Beamish. I cannot see any such power.

Thus Mrs Beamish continues to be a director under additional article 15.

The parties fell out in 1995. The second plaintiff then convened an extraordinary general meeting for 31 October 1995. He purported to do this on the basis that there were not within the "State" (ie the ACT) sufficient directors capable of acting to form a quorum so that under Regulation 41 of Table A, any director might convene an extraordinary general meeting.
This literally complied with the article, but there must be great doubt as to whether this was an act which was done in fraud of the power. The corporators, none of whom had ever lived in the Australian Capital Territory, may have assented to an article that gave each director such power, but almost certainly the power was not to be exercised unless it was impossible to convene and hold a directors' meeting for the purpose of giving notice of an extraordinary general meeting in the ordinary way. However, no point was taken at the time for the simple reason that Mrs Beamish was never notified of the extraordinary general meeting.

In September 1996, the applicant's Melbourne solicitors noticed that the records held by the Australian Securities Commission noted that Mrs Beamish had resigned as a director on 2 February 1996 and wrote to the accountants who had filed that notice asking how it came to be that that notice was filed.
This was answered by the present solicitors for the plaintiffs on 2 October which letter included the following paragraphs: "... You are correct in asserting that Maralyn Beamish did not resign as a director. Maralyn Beamish was removed as a director of the company.

There is no requirement to give Maralyn Beamish notice of any meeting of the members of a AW & LM Forrest Pty Ltd as you suggest." 
The respondents continued to assert that before me. They submitted that notice of the meeting under Regulation 107 of Table A only had to be given to members who had an address within the State and that that article specifically said, "No other person shall be entitled to receive notices of general meetings." As
Mrs Beamish was a resident of Victoria she was not entitled to notice.

Although this submission sounds bizarre and absurd, it is actually supported by the decision of Tomlin, J in Dickson versus Halesowen Steel Co [1928] Eng WN , 34. What has happened is that a regulation in the 1929 English Companies
Act which made quite good sense when it applied to the whole of England has been adopted for a relatively small territory such as the Australian Capital
Territory, and whilst it may very well have a beneficial effect in England it has an absurd effect in the ACT. Neither party reside in the ACT and so neither party was entitled to a notice of meeting. The respondents say that they would have read ACT as meaning ACT or NSW. It is hard to say how one can come to this interpretation, but even if one did, it may well be on the facts that neither party was entitled to a notice of meeting as at least at some stage the second plaintiff was also resident in Victoria.

But it is not necessary to look at either of those matters. Articles such as
Regulation 107 are not construed on the basis that it is impossible to give a notice of the meeting to a person who is not entitled to it. The Corporations
Law and the articles generally expect that the directors will act honestly and with due diligence. If they know that neither party or 50% of the members live at an address they know is outside the State, then it is a fraud on the power to hold a meeting of which they deliberately do not give notice to the other shareholders. Indeed, it was already a fraud on the power for a director to exercise his default powers under article 41 which he must do in the name of the board without taking into account what is just and honest. It may well be, though I would not go so far to so hold in these proceedings, that both the second plaintiff and his solicitor have committed an offence under the
Corporations Law by so acting.

The other way of supporting the validity of the meeting was to say that Mr
Forrest was the senior holder of shares under Regulation 55 because his name appeared first on the Register of Members for the share that was held as part of the Lillian Forrest estate. Regulation 55 says that seniority is determined by the order in which the names stand in the Register of Members. The Register does show Mr Forrest as the senior holder. Why it does is unexplained as the order in the probate is the other way around.

However, assuming that Mr Forrest was the senior member, Regulation 55 has nothing to say about notices and Regulation 105 is merely facultative. Neither warrants directors acting dishonestly or in fraud of the other shareholders by applying some over-technical construction to the articles of association in order to deprive the other director of her position.

At the so-called meeting Mrs Beamish was removed as a director and the third plaintiff, the second Mrs Forrest, appointed as a director. As the meeting was bad Mrs Forrest's appointment must also be bad.

It was sought to save the removal of Mrs Beamish and the appointment of Mrs
Forrest under regulations which excuse accidental omission to give notice to members. However, the omission in this case was deliberate so that that excuse is not open.

Even if there was no necessity to give notice to Mrs Beamish, it would seem to me that the "meeting" was held without a quorum. Additional article 7 required two members personally present to be a quorum. Mr Conti QC said that where a person is present in two capacities, first as a shareholder in his own right and secondly as representing an estate, this provision is complied with.

Mr Conti, QC pointed out that in Daimler Co Ltd versus Continental Tyre and
Rubber Co (Great Britain) Ltd [[1916] 2 AC 307], 325, Lord
Atkinson said that an article requiring two members to constitute a quorum was satisfied if one member was personally present and another present by proxy.
However this does not take the matter very far. In Re Neil McLeod & Sons
Ltd [[1967] SLT 46], at an extraordinary general meeting to pass a resolution to reduce capital, two ordinary shareholders attended, one of whom was also a trustee representing a trust holding of shares. The quorum for an extraordinary general meeting was three members personally present. The Court of Session held that there was a quorum present. The Lord President said at , "The question is whether the necessary quorum was present. In my opinion it was. The requirement for a quorum is 3 members personally present, not 3 individuals. One individual may be present at a meeting in more than one capacity, and there were in fact present at this meeting 3 personae each of whom was a member, namely Mrs Lord, Mr Brydie as a member holding shares in his own right and the same Mr Brydie as a member entitled to vote in respect of a trust holding." 
In Re MJ Shanley Contracting Ltd (1980) 124 Sol J 239, Oliver, J declined to follow this decision. Although the McLeod case was not referred to me when I decided Re RM (No 13) Pty Ltd [(1995) 17 ACSR 758], I there decided that where a trustee company is trustee of two trusts it was not sufficient to hold a meeting to have two different officers represent individual trusts.

Farrar on Company Law (Butterworths, London, 1985) p 278 says, "The question has arisen whether ... one member holding a proxy from another member or one person holding proxies from two different members ... constitute a quorate meeting. The answer has always been no, because of the common law rule that there must be at least two people present for a meeting to take place at all and that one person's presence on behalf of two people does not suffice." As to the two people rule, see Sharp versus Dawes [(1876) 2 QBD 26] Of course, the two people rule did not affect the decision in McLeod's case because there were in fact two people physically present representing three shareholders. 
In the instant case, I believe I should follow the decision of Oliver, J and my own previous inclination in RM (No 13) and either distinguish
McLeod's case on the basis that it does not apply where there is only one person present at the meeting, or alternatively, decline to follow it.

The argument arose as to whether <case> of the Corporations Law as it applied prior to the amendments of the [Company Law Review Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/clra1998210/) affected the situation. Under the Corporations Law, each company that was incorporated before the Corporations Law came into effect is deemed to be a company under the Law. Accordingly, <case> applies to it. Section 175(3) provides that except in so far as the regulations contained in Table A to the Corporations Law are excluded or modified or are otherwise inconsistent with the articles of a company, then Table A to the Corporations Law shall apply. Thus even if a company has adopted 1936 Table A, this subsection may make part of Table A to the Corporations Law applicable if there is silence on a matter. What happens in the case of a company which has not expressly adopted 1936 Table A but has made no provision so that before the Corporations Law came into effect its articles would have been 1936 Table A is unclear. However, in the instant case it would seem to me that the provisions of Regulation 107 of 1936 Table A which provided that notice of meetings need not be given to certain people is inconsistent with the corresponding provision of the Corporations Law Table A (Regulations 95 and 96), so that no solution to the current problem can be found by this route.

My conclusion thus is that, even if the notice of meeting had been good, there would not have been a valid meeting.

Accordingly, the only way in which the solicitors' retainer to act for the first plaintiff can be justified is if Mr Forrest, the second plaintiff, had authority as the governing director of the first plaintiff to retain them. I will now examine the submissions made on this point.

Mr Conti, QC says that the resolution retaining the solicitors was signed by both Mr and Mrs Forrest and would be sufficient if Mr Forrest had the authority of the company as the governing director.

The additional articles do not actually appoint any person as governing director in the sense that that person may outvote all other directors. As I have already pointed out, there is an ambiguity as to whether Mr Forrest and his first wife were permanent managing directors or merely permanent directors.

Article 11 only appoints Mr and Mrs Forrest as permanent directors. Regulation enables the directors to appoint one or more of their body to be managing director on such terms as the resolution specifies. Additional article 6 provides that any provision of Table A which conflicts in any way with "the positions powers discretions and authority as hereinafter contained of the
Permanent Managing Director for the time being shall be inapplicable and in abeyance while any such Permanent Managing Director shall hold office."
Unfortunately for the solicitors' argument, there were no authorities "as hereinafter contained" conferred on a permanent managing director.

Ordinarily, persons dealing with a managing director may assume that that person has all the powers as could be delegated to him: Bank of New South
Wales versus Goulburn Valley Butter Co Pty Ltd [[1902] AC 543.] However, in so far as that proposition is based on some principle of estoppel, it is hard to see how it can be invoked against the present applicants.

The leading authority on retainers is the decision of Powell, J in Harry S
Bagg's Liquidation Warehouse Pty Ltd versus Whittaker - 2839/1982 - 30 July , which for some reason or other was never reported. (Indeed as it would not now seem that it will ever be reported, I append to these reasons, a copy of pages of Powell, J's reasons on this topic in that case). His Honour said on this point, "Nor ... does it seem to me that the concept of `apparent' or `ostensible' authority precludes third parties, such as the Defendants, from asserting that the solicitor had not validly been retained to act for the company in these proceedings." The onus is on the solicitors to establish their retainer and they do that ordinarily by producing the signed retainer.
They must also show the authority of the person who signed it. No estoppel that might lie against the company will be sufficient. In the instant case the solicitors did not give any evidence as to their receiving the retainer or that the person who gave it had actual authority to do so.

There was some debate before me as to whether there could be a governing director of this company notwithstanding that when the matter first arose the
Companies Act 1936 was in force and that Act required two directors. Despite the earlier reservations in Levin versus Clark [[1962] NSWR 686], 701, Holland,
J in Welch versus Welch [1973] ACLC [40-068] and the High Court in Whitehouse v Carlton Hotel Pty Ltd <case>; [(1987) 162 CLR 285], held that this was not a practice which offended the
Companies Acts. However the question does not arise, because not only do the articles themselves provide for a quorum of two, but also there is no actual appointment of a governing director either by the name "governing director" or by some other name with the powers usually attaching to a governing director.

Mr Walton correctly points out that under the additional articles, the power under article 12(b) to appoint solicitors is a power vested in "the
Directors". It is not a power vested in the second plaintiff acting alone, whether as a permanent director or otherwise. Nor does anything in the articles confer on him power to ratify any purported retainer issued without the authority of the board of directors.

Accordingly, Mr Forrest had no power to appoint solicitors without the authority of the board.

It follows that the challenge to the solicitors' retainer must succeed.

As to costs, the ordinary rule is that the solicitors whose retainer is challenged pay all the costs of the proceedings up until the order is made.
Where one plaintiff only appears by a solicitor who has no retainer, then the appropriate order as indicated in the Harry S Bagg's case is that the name of the company as a party plaintiff should be struck out and that the solicitors pay so much of the defendants' costs of the proceedings and of the application as are attributable to the company being made a party to the proceedings; see also Fricker versus Van Grutten [[1896] 2 Ch 649] and the decision of Powell, J in this Court in Proficient Building Co Pty Ltd v
Daimaru Pty Ltd [(1990) 21 ATR 965.] 
Mr Walton strongly argues that the costs should be on the indemnity basis. He puts that the solicitors were on notice of all matters indicating that they was not lawfully retained by the company. It was they who advised the plaintiffs to hold the purported general meeting and drafted the minutes and the form of retainer on which they now place reliance. In a true sense they were the instigators of the misconceived proceedings on behalf of the company.
Further, they have been on notice of the point since June 1996. If the court finds that the solicitors had no authority to bring or maintain the proceedings on behalf of the first plaintiff, the defendants should have all their costs occasioned by those proceedings. To achieve that end, indemnity costs should be awarded.

Mr Walton further puts that where a solicitor purports to file process for a person, he or she warrants the authority to do so. Thus, if the warranty is false, even innocently false, the other party is entitled to be indemnified against the expense incurred in the proceedings. The case is akin to other breaches of warranty of authority. He cites Yonge versus Toynbee [[1910] 1 KB ], ; Myers versus Elman [[1940] AC 282], 336; Michael v
Freehill Hollingdale & Page [(1990) 3 WAR 223], 232-3;
Tolstoy-Miloslavsky versus Aldington [[1996] 1 WLR 736], 746 and
Nelson versus Nelson <case>; [[1997] 1 WLR 233], 239. Mr Walton submits that the evidence in the present case shows that the solicitors both conceived and implemented the present course of action, so that, if his general submissions noted above are too wide, this is a proper case for indemnity costs.

The last three cases cited by Mr Walton, do not bear on the question as to whether or not the costs awarded against solicitors in this type of case should be or should not be on the indemnity basis. However, Nelson's case is authority for the proposition that an order for costs may be made against an innocent solicitor. However, it is also authority for the propositions that the analogy with breach of warranty of authority cases must not be pressed too far, and that the circumstances and degree of negligence or fault in the solicitor is relevant to the order to be made as to costs.

Mr Conti, QC submits that the general rule is that a challenge to a retainer should be mounted early in the proceedings. He points out that whilst the present challenge was raised for the first time in the verified defence of 4
June 1996, the present application was only launched relatively recently. This is true. Indeed, the court itself indicated at a directions hearing that the present point should not be taken in the defence, but, if it was to be made at all, should be made on motion, and it was only then that the motion was filed.

However, the authorities on which Mr Conti, QC relies do not say that a late made application is defeated by delay; they merely say that the application should be made timeously or at least without undue delay; see eg Danish
Mercantile Co Ltd versus Beaumont [[1951] Ch 680], 687. Although there was delay in the instant case there was not undue delay and I cannot see in the pleadings any great matter that occurred after the defence and before the motion which would have exacerbated the costs.

Mr Conti, QC then submits that any order for costs should not be on the indemnity basis. The authorities to which I have referred earlier (which were decided before the [Supreme Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/)) indicated that normally the solicitor should pay the costs on the solicitor and client basis which, translated into present day language, could mean on the indemnity basis. Mr Conti, QC relies on the 4th edition of Halsbury's Laws of England
Vol 44 para 132. There the learned author says that "If the solicitor has been purporting to act for a plaintiff the order will direct him to pay the plaintiff's costs on the standard basis and also all costs which the plaintiff may have been ordered to pay to the defendant and the defendant's additional costs on the standard basis." 
The authorities referred to in footnotes 8 and 9 include a reference to
Fricker's case which is said no longer to be good law on this point.
However, all the cases referred to in footnote 8 of Halsbury, viz Allen v Bone <case>; [(1841) 4 Beav 493]; [49 ER 429]; Crossley versus Crowther <case>; [(1851) 9 Hare 384]; [68 ER 556]; Newbiggin-by-the-Sea Gas Co versus Armstrong [(1879) 13 Ch D ](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281879%29%2013%20Ch%20D%20310 "View LawCiteRecord" ) and Nurse versus Durnford [(1879) 13 Ch D 764], were, in fact, cases where costs were ordered on the solicitor and client basis.

However, in more recent times orders appear to have been made only on the party and party basis. It would seem that such an order was made in Russian and English Bank versus Baring Bros and Co Ltd [[1935] Ch 120], 127 and that was the order made in Bank of Ethiopia versus National Bank of Egypt [[1937] 3 All
ER 8](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1937%5d%203%20All%20ER%208 "View LawCiteRecord" ), 14 (also reported [[1937] Ch 513).] In the Harry S
Bagg's case Powell, J appears only to have made an order on the party and party basis.

Probably the rule now is that costs are in the discretion of the court and there is no presumption one way or the other. In the instant case, the conduct of the solicitors in their attitude generally to Mrs Beamish and further in insisting on the proposition that she was not entitled to any notices of meeting point towards making an indemnity order for costs. It must be remembered too that in this sort of situation the court tends to find against a solicitor because, as Lord Denning said in Griffiths versus Evans [[1953] 1
WLR 1424], 1428, "... the client is ignorant and the solicitor is, or should be, learned. If the solicitor does not take the precaution of getting a written retainer, he has only himself to thank for being at variance with his client over it and must take the consequences." Furthermore, the solicitor, if he has acted honourably, may have a right of recoupment from his real client.

On the other hand, the delay in making the application and the fact that the corporate plaintiff may have incurred more costs through that delay and given that the facts may turn out that Mrs Beamish is only (at least during the lifetime of her stepfather) a supernumerary in the trust points towards an order for party and party costs 
In my view the arguments for making an order for indemnity costs outweigh the opposing factors.

I should note that the respondents have asked that if the motion otherwise goes against them, that the court should convene a meeting to resolve the deadlock. There is power to do this, but I should not make any such order until (a) I hear submissions as to whether there is any point in making such an order; and (b) the form of any such order.

The order I made on 17 July was in accordance with that made by Powell, J in the Harry S Bagg's case. In the light of these reasons, the proper order for costs is that the respondents pay the costs of the motion (which of course include so much of the defendants' costs of the proceedings as are attributable to the company being made a plaintiff) on the indemnity basis.
There should be leave to have those costs assessed and paid forthwith as they were incurred in a quite separate part of the case.

The matter remains in the Expedition List. I assume that the parties will need to regroup and amend. Perhaps the Court will need to order a meeting. Unless these interlocutory matters are resolved in the near future, it would probably be best to dismiss the motion for expedition on the next occasion, without prejudice to the filing of a fresh motion when the pleadings are settled.
 
APPENDIX [Relevant extracts from the Harry S Bagg's case decided by Powell, J in proceedings 2839/1982] 
His Honour said that the fact that the solicitor on the record was not validly retained, "flows from the following:- if the view expressed in In re Consolidated Nickel Mines Limited [[1914] 1 Ch 883] and Ryan versus Carstenz Properties Pty Limited [(1974) 5 ACTR 62] be correct, then, even if he had been validly appointed a Director, Mr White ceased to be a Director, of the company no later than 6th December 1979. This is not the sort of situation to which, in my view, <case> of the [Companies Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/ca1961107/) or Article 89 of Table "A" is directed (see Morris versus Kanssen [[1946] AC 459], 472 per Lord Simonds LC; Grant versus John Grant and Sons Pty Limited <case>; [(1950) 82 CLR 1], 53 per Kitto, J; 
Corporate Affairs Commission versus Drysdale (1978) 141 CLR , 242; <case>; [53
ALJR 144], 146 per
Mason J); nor, although it may operate to permit the solicitor to claim remuneration from the company, does it seem to me that the concept of "apparent" or "ostensible" authority precludes third parties, such as the Defendants, from asserting that the solicitor had not validly been retained to act for the company in these proceedings. In contrast to the situation which exists where actual authority on the part of an agent is established - in which situation the agent is clothed with authority to bring the principal and contractor into a direct contractual relationship - where, as here, what is relied upon is "apparent" or "ostensible" authority in the agent, the result is, not that the principal and the contractor are brought into a direct contractual relationship, but, rather, that the principal is estopped from denying that the agent had authority to bind the principal to the apparent contract (Freeman & Lockyer versus 
Buckhurst Park Properties (Mangal) Limited [1964] 2 QB , 494 per Willmer LJ; 498 per Pearson LJ (as he then was) -506 per Diplock LJ (as he then was); Crabtree-Vickers 
Pty Limited versus Australian Direct Mail Advertising & Addressing 
Co Pty Limited <case>; [(1975) 133 CLR 72], 79-81 per Gibbs J (as he then was) Mason & Jacobs JJ). If this be so, then, estoppel being but a rule of evidence, it matters not, when the question is raised by a third party, that, as between itself and the solicitor, the company is estopped from denying its retainer of the solicitor, for the third party, not being bound by the estoppel, is free to establish the true position (see Daimler Company Limited versus Continental 
Tyre and Rubber Company (Great Britain) Limited [1916] 1 
AC 307, 323 per Lord Atkinson, 336-7 per Lord Parker of 
Waddington; 355 per Lord Parmoor).

The result of all this is that, unless - the onus of establishing which, in the absence of a retainer under seal by Fanhaven, would seem to lie on
Fanhaven (Daimler Company Limited versus Continental Tyre and Rubber Company (Great Britain) Limited (supra) at 327 per Lord Atkinson) or on the solicitor on the record for the Plaintiffs (see Chitty's Archbold Practice Ed (1866) 85; Daniell's Chancery Practice 4 Ed (1865) 289, 491 and cases there cited) since the commencement of these proceedings the actions of
Mr White in purporting to retain the solicitor have been ratified by duly appointed Directors of Fanhaven (see, for example, Danish Mercantile Co
Limited versus Beaumont [[1951] 1 Ch 680)] or, in the absence of any duly appointed Directors, by the members of the company in general meeting (East Pan Du United Lead Mining Company (Limited) v
Merryweather <case>; [(1864) 2 H & M 254]; Danish
Mercantile Co Limited versus Beaumont (supra) at 686 Buckley on the [Companies
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/ca1961107/) 12 Ed (1949) ; 13 Ed (1957) 171) there is no evidence that the solicitor has been validly retained on behalf of the company. On this aspect of the matter, all I can say is that, notwithstanding the frantic activity which occurred, or is said to have occurred, on the 15th or 16th July 1982 (see Exhibits "P", "Q", and "R") and on 21st July 1982 (see Transcript pp 136-140; MFI's 15-23 inclusive) there is no real evidence before me either that, Directors of the company having been validly appointed, the retainer of the solicitor was ratified, or that, there being no Directors of the company validly appointed, the members of the company in general meeting ratified the retainer of the solicitor.

In the light of this conclusion the result must be that even if the retainer of the solicitor to act for the other Plaintiffs be established, it should be ordered that the name of Fanhaven as a party Plaintiff should be struck out (see Nurse versus Durnford [(1879) 13 Ch D 764];
Fricker versus van Grutten [[1896] 2 Ch 649]; Geilinger v Gibbs [[1897] 1 Ch 479)] and, subject to what I set out below, that the solicitor pay so much of the Defendant's costs of the proceedings and of the application as are attributable to Fanhaven being made a party to the proceedings (Reynolds versus Howell [(1873) LR 8 QB 398];
Newbiggen-by-the-Sea Gas Co versus Armstrong [(1879) 13 Ch D 310]; Cape
Breton Company versus Fenn [(1881) 17 Ch D 198]; Nurse v Durnford (supra); Fricker versus van Grutten (supra); Geilinger versus Gibbs ; Yonge versus Toynbee [[1910] 1 KB 215]; Re
Fitzgerald (Lord) [(1914) 112 LT 86).] What, if any, are the solicitor's rights against the company or Mr White has not been argued before me - the same counsel appeared - or claimed to appear - for the solicitor as well as for all the Plaintiffs - and I accordingly express no view on the matter." [His Honour dealt with other matters and concluded] "CONCLUSION: 
As will be seen from what I have recorded above, I have concluded that the solicitor on the record for the Plaintiffs has not been validly retained by any of the companies. This being so, while, if a retainer for one or more of the companies had been established, the proper course to adopt would be to order the names of those which had not retained the solicitor be struck out and to order further that the solicitor bear so much of the Defendants' costs of the proceedings and the application as were attributable to those companies being joined as parties (Fricker versus van Grutten (supra); Geilinger v
Gibbs (supra)) where, as here, no retainer at all is established, the appropriate course to adopt would seem to be either to stay the proceedings - which seems once to have been the practice (Reynolds versus Howe (supra)) - or to dismiss the proceedings - which seems to be the more modern practice (Newbiggin-by-the-Sea Gas Co versus Armstrong (supra); Nurse versus Durnford ; Daimler Company Limited versus Continental Tyre and Rubber Company (Great Britain) Limited (supra) - in each case all prior Orders being discharged and the solicitor being ordered to pay the costs of both the application and the proceedings. In the present case I think it proper to adopt what seems to be the more modern practice.

However, before proceeding to make the formal Orders which I consider appropriate, I would wish to make one further observation. So long as the exempt proprietary company remains a creature permitted to exist, and recognized, by the law of the land, one must expect that many such companies will be - as, I suggest are the companies with which I am concerned - no more than puppets intended to dance only to the tune and to the measure devised by those who manipulate them; but while this may be so, the Courts, I suggest, must be astute to ensure that those who are thus left free to manipulate their puppets at least make their puppets dance to a legal tune and in a legal manner (see, to the like effect, Lord Halsbury LC in In re Johannesburg
Hotel Company; ex parte Zoutpansberg Prospecting Company [[1891] 1 Ch ], )." * * * 
