

Bloom versus Lepre [2008] NSWSC 79 (14 February 2008) 
Last Updated: 15 February 2008 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: 
Bloom versus Lepre <case>  
JURISDICTION: 
Equity Division  
FILE NUMBER(S):  /05  
HEARING DATE(S):  , 11, 12, 14 December 2007  
JUDGMENT DATE:  February 2008  
PARTIES: 
Melvyn Bloom (P) 
Anella Rose Lepre (D)  
JUDGMENT OF: 
Young CJ in Eq  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: 
Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): 
Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: 
Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
D E Grieve QC and C Moschoudis (P) 
H K Insall SC and J H Stephenson (D)  
SOLICITORS: 
Whittens (P) 
Conditsis & Associates (D)  
CATCHWORDS: 
CONVEYANCING [252] Creation of easement by prescription- Application for grant of an easement under <case> Conveyancing Act to widen an existing residential driveway- Whether easement is reasonably necessary for the effective use or development of land having benefit of the easement- Use of land having benefit of an easement not inconsistent with public interest- The extent of compensation the court considers to be appropriate- The exercise of judicial discretion on whether an easement is to be granted.  
LEGISLATION CITED:  [Conveyancing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/), [s
K](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s88k.html) 
Property Legislation Amendment (Easements) Act 1995  
CATEGORY: 
Principal judgment  
CASES CITED:  York Street Pty Ltd versus Proprietors of Strata Plan No 16123 [(1988) 8 BPR ,917] 
Blulock Pty Ltd versus Majic <case>; [(2001) 10 BPR 19,143] 
Durack versus de Winton (1998) 9 BPR 16,403 
Edward Street Properties Pty Ltd, Ex parte <case>; [(2006) 151 LGERA 64] 
Hanny versus Lewis (1998) 9 BPR 16,205 
Katakouzinos versus Roufir <case>; [(2000) 9 BPR 17,303] 
Khattar versus Wiese <case>; [(2005) 12 BPR 23,235] 
Mitchell versus Boutagy <case>; <case>; [(2006) 12 BPR 23,485] 
Parimax (SA) Pty Ltd, Re <case> 
Rose Bay Bowling & Recreation Club Ltd, Re <case>; [(1997) 8 BPR 15,845] 
V T Engineering Ltd versus Richard Barland & Co Ltd [(1968) 19 P & CR ] 
Woodland versus Manly Municipal Council <case>; [(2003) 127 LGERA 120]  
TEXTS CITED:  
DECISION: 
Proceedings dismissed with costs.  
JUDGMENT:  
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
EQUITY DIVISION  
YOUNG CJ in EQ  
Thursday 14 February 2008  /05 - BLOOM versus LEPRE  
JUDGMENT HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff seeks an order under [s
K](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s88k.html) of the [Conveyancing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) imposing an easement over adjoining land at Booker Bay.
 It is a trifle difficult to describe in words the configuration of the land, but I will do my best. The plaintiff's land is Lot C in Deposited Plan and fronts on to the Brisbane Water though surveys show a grassed reserve between the boundaries of the land and the Brisbane Water. However, it may be (or it may be not) that that land has become part of the plaintiff's title by accretion.
 The plaintiff's land is known as No 366 Booker Bay Road, Booker Bay and there is a fibrous cement dwelling erected on it.
 The defendant owns land that is Lot A in the same deposited plan which abuts Booker Bay Road, and is known as No 368 Booker Bay Road. The defendant also owns Lot 100 Deposited Plan 880286 which is known as 364 Booker Bay Road.
Lot 100 was formerly part of Lot B, DP 333518.
 Apart from access from sea, the present access to Lot C is by a right of way over Lot A 2.755 metres wide (though one survey has it at 2.74 metres wide) extending south for approximately 31.25 metres. The right of way then turns a 90 degree bend to the west to enter the rear of Lot C. I will refer to this latter as the east/west portion of the right of way. The east/west portion is only 1.83 metres wide.
 The east/west portion leads to the backyard of Lot C. There is only 4.55 metres of land available for parking at the rear of lot C on the east/west axis. Without a turntable, a vehicle parked on Lot C must either reverse in or reverse out to or from Lot C through the right of way.
 The plaintiff says that that right of way is only sufficient for him to drive onto his land the smallest of vehicles. For this purpose he owns a Fiat
Bambino motor vehicle which is 2.89 metres long and 1.32 metres wide and he is able to drive this vehicle on to Lot C though often he has to cut and fill at the right angle bend in order to get his Bambino vehicle into his property.
 The plaintiff says that if he were to have an easement in accordance with his proposals, it would be relatively easy for a medium size vehicle such as his present Citroen Pluriel C3 Hatchback to gain access to Lot C and park in his car space.
 I will deal with the exact proposals presently. However, it should be noted that the adjustments proposed do not in the main concern the 31 metres between Booker Bay Road and the south, but rather, the east/west portion of the right of way.
 The plaintiff's principal proposal is that the east/west portion of the right of way be widened by 0.915 metres and that there be a splayed corner instead of the right angle bend. That is Proposal 1. Proposal 2 is that part of the garage on Lot 100 be demolished so that the east/west portion of the right of way can be widened by about a metre.
 Towards the end of the case, after Messrs Coady and Brogan, the expert traffic engineers gave evidence, two further proposals were put up and these became orders 3 and 4 of the amended summons filed on 12 December 2007. What was put forward as Proposals 3 and 4 were modifications of Proposal 1 so as to provide for the path of certain vehicles which had been plotted by computer.
Essentially, instead of there being a splayed corner, more of Lot A would be taken up by a more gradual curve.
 Apart from these four proposals, a fifth was canvassed (Proposal 5), that is, that access to Lot C be given to No 372 Booker Bay Road, that is, to the west of Lot A which would involve appropriation of part of No 372 owned by a
Dr Hillman. Dr Hillman was approached, but made it quite clear that he was fundamentally opposed to granting any rights over his land. The plaintiff does not favour Proposal 5. The defendant puts it on the table as a more effective means of access than Proposals 1-4.
 [Section
K](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s88k.html) of the [Conveyancing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/), so far as is relevant, is as follows: "1. The court may make an order imposing an easement over land if the easement is reasonably necessary for the effective use or development of other land that will have the benefit of the easement.
 . Such an order may be made only if the court is satisfied that: use of the land having the benefit of the easement will not be inconsistent with the public interest, and the owner of the land to be burdened by the easement and each other person having an estate or interest in that land ... can be adequately compensated for any loss or other disadvantage that will arise from imposition of the easement, and all reasonable attempts have been made by the applicant for the order to obtain the easement or an easement having the same effect but have been unsuccessful.
 . The court is to provide in the order for payment by the applicant to specified persons of such compensation as the court considers appropriate, unless the court determines that compensation is not payable because of the special circumstances of the case.
 . The costs of the proceedings are payable by the applicant, subject to any order of the court to the contrary." Essentially, a person seeking an order under the section must establish the easement is reasonably necessary for the effective use or development of his or her land; (b) use of the land having the benefit of the easement will not be inconsistent with the public interest; (c) adequate compensation has been provided for; (d) all reasonable attempts to negotiate have failed; and (e) in its discretion the court ought to make rather than refuse the grant of an easement.
 It will be seen that Proposal 2 involves demolition of part of the defendant's property. The question as to whether this is competent was discussed before the hearing. It was observed that in Ex parte Edward Street
Properties Pty Ltd [[1977] Qd R 86], Andrews J made an order involving demolition of a fowl house on the basis that the applicant was prepared to undertake the erection elsewhere on the land of a similar fowl house.
 Mr Insall argued that Ex parte Edward Street Properties Pty Ltd was distinguishable because the Queensland section, <case> of the Law of Property
Act 1974 was wider than the NSW section in that it allowed not only an easement to be granted, but also a statutory right of user or licence. I do not accept this argument. It seems to me that the decisions on the Queensland legislation can be accepted as applicable to the NSW section.
 I ruled that it was competent to make an order such as Proposal 2 leaving it to the trial as to whether it would be appropriate to make such an order in this case. After further argument, I affirm my ruling and consider that, I would not decline to make an order involving Proposal 2 merely because it involves some demolition of the defendant's building.
 I have already noted what is built on Lot C, though the plaintiff has proposals which are either before the local council or have already obtained its approval to erect a more modern building on his land. On Lot 100, there is a substantial house facing the water and at the northern end, ie, the end next to the right of way, there is a brick garage on the east and a covered brick outdoor area used for barbecues etc on the west. This is the defendant's residence.
 Lot A also has a substantial dwelling built upon it. This dwelling appears to extend almost to the western boundary of the right of way.
 At the rear of the building on Lot A is a paved area which is bounded at the south by removable posts. The positioning of these makes it more difficult for a vehicle to execute the right hand bend of the right of way. The defendant uses this area to park he second car. This car is protected from the elements by shade cloth.
 The aerial photograph annexed to Mr Kettle's affidavit shows that apart from land that has accreted from the Brisbane Water, the whole of each of the three pieces of land is completely built upon save and except the small front yard to Lot A.
 Although it does not really enter into the picture, I should for completeness note that on the western side of Lot A there is a right of footway for the benefit of Lot C.
 The present easement on the eastern side of Lot A was created by Transfer
C462498 on 10 August 1936. This was a transfer of Lot C and the land burdened was Lot A "together with full and free right and liberty for the said
Transferree her executors administrators and assigns as owner or owners for the time being of the said parcel and all other persons authorised by her or them from time to time and at all times hereafter and [sic] her and them [sic] will and pleasure to pass and repass with or without horses and other animals, carts, carriages, or motor cases [sic] and other vehicles laden or unladen over all that piece of land ... ".
 The defendant appears to have become the proprietor of Lots A and 100 as a result of a testamentary gift from her parents. She built a house on Lot A in 1989. At that stage a Mr Dale was the proprietor of Lot C. He did not have a motor vehicle but used to use both rights of way to walk to Booker Bay Road.
 In 1999 the defendant's parents devised Lot A and Lot 100 to her. In 2001 she built a new home on Lot 100. Her family has two vehicles and at present they are a Toyota Landcruiser which is parked in the garage of Lot 100, and a
Ford Focus which is parked on the corner of Lot A. The house on Lot A is currently tenanted.
 The plaintiff bought Lot C by auction in April 2002. He is a barrister.
It should have been clear from the title documents that vehicular access would be difficult.
 There was a considerable amount of evidence filed which was either not read by agreement or excluded by me as to disagreements between the parties or acts of spite between them. Even if any of these were established they would have no bearing on the questions before me.
 Apart from any proposal to redevelop Lot C, the plaintiff's principal complaint is that his aged mother needs to be transported down the right of way and the only vehicle he can use to do that is his very small Bambino and that he needs to transport goods into his property for which he either has to use a small vehicle or alternatively unload it on the wide part of the right of way or from the street.
 The proceedings were heard before me on 10, 11, 12 and 14 December 2007, when I reserved my decision. On the first three days Mr C Moschoudis appeared for the plaintiff and Messrs H Insall SC and J Stevenson, appeared for the defendant. On 14 December Mr D E Grieve QC appeared to lead Mr Moschoudis.
 In accordance with usual practice, I had read the affidavits and made preliminary rulings on objections before the commencement of the hearing and before formally reading the affidavits in court I had a view of the site. In accordance with current practice, I recorded the salient points of what I had seen at the view on the transcript, as, under the present law, what I saw is part of the evidence in the case.
 Apart from the parties and their lay supporters, there was a host of so called expert evidence from valuers, surveyors and traffic experts. It was unfortunate that all this material had been collected before the new expert evidence rules became to be appreciated, as it must have been very expensive to amass and its impact on the decision of the case was minimal. In accordance with what is now current practice, experts in the various disciplines were sworn in together in a "hot tub", made witnesses of the court and cross- examined by all counsel in the one exercise.
 It is a little difficult to know where to begin a judgment in this sort of case, but it is probably best to deal with the matter under the following eight heads which I will do seriatim.

Discussion of <case> generally; 
What is reasonably necessary for the effective use or development of the plaintiff's land; 
Matters of public interest; 
Compensation; 
Negotiations; 
Discretion; 
Costs; 
The result of the case.
 (1) Section 88K was introduced into the [Conveyancing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) by the
Property Legislation Amendment (Easements) Act 1995.
 The Attorney-General's Second Reading Speech which is in evidence (DX131) indicates that the focus was on the problem of lack of access in closely settled areas to building activities on neighbouring land. It is clear from the cases before 1995 that in closely settled areas one could not even repair a defective outer wall if the only way one can get to it is through a neighbour's land unless one agreed to a neighbour's harsh terms. The present
Act and certain ancillary legislation enabled the court to deal with that situation.
 However, the authorities decided since the enactment of <case> show that it has a wider operation than merely in that situation.
 Mr Grieve and Mr Moschoudis kept saying in their submissions that the legislation was a remedial legislation. So it is, and indeed, in one of the leading cases, Khattar versus Wiese <case>; [(2005) 12 BPR 23,235] at <case>,
Brereton J adopted the construction of <case> based on its remedial nature.
 However, one must be very careful with remedial legislation conferring benefits on a section of the community, that one does not forget the rights of other members of the community.
 It may be fair enough to prevent a neighbouring owner from "blackmailing" his neighbour when all the neighbour wants to do is to gain access to repair a building on his land or erect a new building. However, where (which is not quite this case), there is an indefinite appropriation of part of a person's land in the sense that that land will be sterilised in so far as the person's own building is concerned, the court is not necessarily quite so favourable to the application.
 It must be remembered that the attitude of the court to modification of easements and covenants, is that it is reasonable for a person who has a property right and who wishes to preserve his or her benefits of sunlight, view and privacy, to insist that these non-proprietary rights continue even though the economic use of neighbouring land may be diminished. If there are such non-proprietary rights ancillary to rights of property, then their owner is entitled to protection; see eg Re Parimax (SA) Pty Ltd [(1954) 56 SR ].
 These matters come to be taken into account when considering matters of discretion which will be dealt with in section (6) later.
 (2) The cases have now quite clearly established that the words "reasonably necessary" do not mean that there be absolute necessity but the need must go beyond mere desirability (see Tregoyd Gardens Pty Ltd versus Jarvis <case>; [(1997) 8 BPR 15,845]; 117
York Street Pty Ltd versus Proprietors of Strata Plan No 16123 [(1988) 8 BPR ,917] at 15,920; Hanny versus Lewis (1998) 9 BPR 16,205 at 16,207 and Owners Strata Plan 13635 versus Ryan <case>; [(2006) 12 BPR 23,485] at <case>).
Furthermore, Hanny and Ryan at least are authority for the proposition that what must be reasonably necessary is the development or use of the land itself, not the personal enjoyment by a person who for the time being is a proprietor of the land.
 There appears to be little need to discuss cases where what is claimed by the plaintiff is reasonably necessary for the development of its land. As far as my memory goes, the cases that have come before the court have not involved situations where anyone has ever challenged the development proposed by the plaintiff. However, questions may arise where the plaintiff's claim is that the proposed easement is reasonably necessary for the use of his or her land.
 Mr Grieve puts that "development" covers any improvement of the plaintiff's land by some means including the erection of buildings and that "use and development" is a conjoint phrase.
 He puts that cases such as Durack versus de Winton (1998) 9 BPR 16,403 show that a wide reading of the words "use or development" is justified in this remedial legislation.
 I generally agree with that submission, but I do not consider that "use" in the sense it is employed in this section can descend to connote situations that are specific to a particular person currently on the land such as, for instance, that the premises are currently being used as a nursing home and access for ambulances is required.
 In Ryan, Rein AJ at <case>; [(2006) 151 LGERA 64], Palmer J said that in working out reasonable necessity one determines it objectively; necessary meant sometime more than desirability or preferability over alternatives, but it was always a matter of degree.
 In Woodland versus Manly Municipal Council <case>; [(2003) 127 LGERA 120] at 128-129, Hamilton J usefully set out the approach that a court must make when dealing with an application under this section.
His Honour listed 10 steps setting out both the gateways that must be passed through before relief can be given as a matter of law and also discretionary factors. I will apply these steps, though without much further reference to this authority.
 It is clear that when the court is determining what is reasonably necessary for the use or development of the plaintiff's land, the court considers that question in the light of the reasonable use of the surrounding land.
 Hamilton J's fifth to ninth propositions in Woodland deal with reasonable necessity. His Honour's point 7 was that in considering reasonable necessity the court takes into account whether and to what extent use with the easement is preferable to use or development without the easement. That use with the easement is preferable or, a fortiori, substantially preferable to use or development without the easement, will conduce to a finding of reasonable necessity, but it is not a necessary precondition to that finding.
 In the plaintiff's submissions it was put that:  * the plaintiff's land is landlocked as there is no front access to a street; * in 1936 when the easement was created cars were smaller and it was intended that Lot C have access by motor vehicle; * off-street parking is reasonably necessary use of any land in the 21st century; * there is no evidence that Booker Bay has any houses which have no off- street parking.
 In my view, the propositions stated in the bullet points are too wide. It may well be that under some circumstances, off-street parking is reasonably necessary for the proper use of land. However, there are a whole host of older suburbs in inner Sydney where off-street parking is just not possible.
Furthermore, there is authority that land which is only accessible by water is not landlocked; see eg Parish versus Kelly (1980) 1 BPR 9394.
 I do not consider that I can take judicial notice of the size of cars from 1936 to date. If I could, I would venture to suggest community standards have regularly changed.
 It would be vain to say that facilities for parking were not reasonably necessary for the use of land in the abstract. However, where cases such as
Khattar and Ryan do speak in these terms, and indeed the same could be said of Einstein J's decision in Durack versus de Winton, the judges are very careful to say that whilst reasonable necessity is to be determined objectively in the light of the facts, an order under <case> is not to be made lightly.
 Thus, one must, when working out the reasonable necessity for the plaintiff, not close one's eyes to the effect on the proper use of the defendant's land and pay proper respect to the defendant's present rights of property. If this were not so, and if the court were permitted merely to focus on the reasonable necessity of the use of the plaintiff's land, then almost any advantage to the plaintiff would be allowed notwithstanding the effect on other people. That was not supposed to be the prime focus on this remedial law. Most of these matters, however, can be dealt with under discretion rather than under what is reasonably necessary as a matter of law or construction.
 Mr Insall submits that in any event Mr Bloom's request merely shows a case of desirability rather than necessity. He says that Mr Bloom has an existing right of way which enables him to drive a small car on to his property and park within his property, for which the car must be able to carry shopping and other household goods which need to be transported on a routine basis. Further, the north/south section of the right of way permits access by much larger vehicles including a removal van to a position about 12 metres away from Mr Bloom's house. It may very well be desirable to have a wider easement running along the east/west section right up to Mr Bloom's door, but desirability is not the statutory test. The facts show that the property Lot C has been effectively used without grant of any wider easement for perhaps 80 years. Widespread individual vehicle ownership has been the norm, at least for the 50 years since the Second World War.
 Mr Moschoudis seeks to answer these submissions by saying that a bigger vehicle than the Bambino (and a few other models) cannot park on Lot C and that means that it needs to be parked in the street where it is at risk of being damaged by vandals. This point has some validity, but its validity was affected by the evidence which suggested that it was possible for vehicles to be parked on nearby property by payment of a licence fee.
 The point was further diminished by the fact that no car longer than 4.5 metres can park in the rear yard of Lot C in any event.
 Mr Insall also puts that when one is working out reasonable necessity one must view the degree of burden on the proposed servient tenement and the greater the burden, the stronger is the case needed to justify a finding of reasonable necessity as he refers to the decision of the Land and Environment
Court in Property Partnership Pacific Pty Ltd versus Owners of Strata Plan 58482 <case> at  <case> and Khattar at [27].
 Mr Insall points out that Proposal 2 involves demolition of part of Ms
Lepre's garage. He submits that there is no jurisdiction to do this (I have already rejected this submission), but even if it is within jurisdiction, it is an unacceptable intrusion into the defendant's rights of ownership. Even
Proposal 1 involves dismantling and relocation of the fence and shade structure that the defendant has erected.
 Mr Insall also puts that in any event Proposal 1 and Proposal 2 would not give Mr Bloom what he wants, and accordingly, would be quite ineffective.
Current standards for access to a piece of land require provision for a "85th percentile vehicle": see Mr Coady's affidavit and report. Neither Proposal 1 nor 2 accommodates an 85th percentile vehicle access.
 I need to explain this matter by reference to the evidence.
 The expert report from Messrs Brogan and Coady (Exhibit AX88) refer to appendix A in the Australian/New Zealand Standard AS/NZS2890.1:2004 - Parking
Facilities Part 1: Off-Street Carparking. This Standard provides design vehicle characteristics and dimensions for three types of cars, namely, the
B99 vehicle - the 99th percentile vehicle which has dimensions 5.2 metres long by 1.94 metres wide, the B85 vehicle - the 85th percentile vehicle which has dimensions 4.91 metres long by 1.87 metres wide, and the light car, the 35th percentile vehicle which has dimensions of 4.45 metres long and 1.7 metres wide.
 Mr Coady gave evidence that the 85th percentile vehicle is the appropriate design vehicle for both public and private places. He accepts that the 35th percentile vehicle (such as the Bambino) is acceptable in circumstances where alternative access for larger vehicles is not practicable.
 Mr Brogan considers that the Standard is directed for design purposes for parking at clubs and in public places and has little to do with parking such as the present situation.
 In my view the Standard and the preference for an 85th percentile vehicle is what one would really look to when one is looking at the ordinary use of land, though a smaller vehicle may need to be used as the only possible option in smaller blocks.
 An 85th percentile vehicle is 4.91 metres long and such a vehicle could not park within Lot C as the parking space on Lot C appears to be only 4.55 metres long.
 It was this sort of submission that led the plaintiff to amend the summons to include Proposals 3 and 4 to accommodate an 85th percentile vehicle's travel as disclosed by computer modelling.
 Proposals 3 and 4 were advocated late in the hearing. Mr Insall sought and was granted leave to put in further written submissions. In those submissions he puts that the evidence shows that Proposal 3 has a greater adverse impact than Proposal 1, and Proposal 4 is likely to be as severe as
Proposal 1. The problem about parking an 85th percentile vehicle on Lot C has also not been addressed.
 Mr Insall also puts that Proposals 3 and 4 even more than Proposal 1, affect the ability of Ms Lepre to park her second car at the rear of Lot A.
Furthermore, there is nowhere else she can park it. Furthermore, the defendant would be in trouble with any future development application because of the open space requirements in Development Control Plan No 155.
 As to the problem that no vehicle longer than 4.5 metres could be parked on the east/west axis of Lot C, the plaintiff tendered evidence that a turntable could be built on Lot C which could turn a vehicle up to 4.5 metres long. He also provided a list of a number of cars which were shorter than 4.5 metres in length.
 The evidence was that Mr Bloom is seriously considering buying one of the
Mercedes Benz short cars (the "Short Car") which evidently has recently come on the market and is only 2.5 metres long.
 This partially answers the problem about whether the car can be garaged on Lot C in any event. However, curing that problem has opened up bigger problems as to whether any adjustment of the right of way is needed at all if an even shorter car is to be used by the plaintiff.
 However, the major point is that planning instruments in the locality consider that it is appropriate that an 85th percentile car have parking space on the relevant lot and this just will not be met no matter what car Mr Bloom actually purchases.
 So far as Ms Lepre's parking is concerned, at the moment she has her second car parked on Lot A under protective shade cloth. That shade cloth is supported by removable metal pillars. Ms Lepre says that if, for instance,
Proposals 3 or 4 were adopted, she would have to redesign this. That is so, but it does not seem to me it is a particularly burdensome exercise and could be met by compensation. I am more concerned with the area that would remain for parking her second car.
 However, the plaintiff says that two things must always be borne in mind, first, that he is going to redevelop his property so long as he can do so as a result of this case. I understand that, but I cannot see how the 4.55 metre area for parking will be changed except that the car may have to do a further right hand bend so that it parks on a north/south axis.
 Secondly, the plaintiff says that under the ordinary law of easements, the grant of an easement implies also the grant of "swing space" (see Megarry
J in V T Engineering Ltd versus Richard Barland & Co Ltd [(1968) 19 P &
CR 890]. Accordingly, it is put that it is not for Ms Lepre to take the point that in making the right hand bend any vehicle entering Lot C will marginally encroach into Lot A, nor should she gain any advantage in putting fences, metal barriers or metal posts so close to the boundary that swing space is impeded.
 There is some validity in this argument but it is not the whole picture.
I note that, at the view, Mr Bloom in fact appeared to swing outside the boundaries of the right of way when both exiting and entering his land. It would not appear that this has been the subject of objection though the existence of the removable poles has restricted it.
 Two other practical matters were argued. On the plaintiff's side it was put that one of the strongest points that could be made for the plaintiff was that right from 1936 the proprietor of Lot C had a right of way to gain access to his property by vehicle. All that is now being asked is that in light of current conditions and the development of motor vehicles, an extra metre wide on the east/west path of the right of way be granted. This is almost de minimus.
 On the other side, Mr Insall put that the plaintiff was a barrister, he must know the law, he saw the land before he bought it and it was quite obvious that there were problems with vehicular access to anything more than a small vehicle. He bought the property with his eyes open and he should not now be permitted to say that it was reasonably necessary for use of his land that he has access by a bigger vehicle.
 I have reached the conclusion that, when one evaluates all these factors, in particular the amount of land available for parking a car on Lot C, the real need to abandon Proposal 1 in favour of Proposal 3, the impact on the servient owner and the fact that the land was bought with eyes open in its existing state, the plaintiff has not demonstrated that the easements proposed in any of Proposals 1-4 are reasonably necessary for the use or development of the plaintiff's land.
 The evidence discloses that the conception manifested in those proposals would be desirable from the plaintiff's point of view, but no more than that.
 (3) The next matter is public interest. It should be noted that the section does not require the plaintiff to show that what he intends to do is in the public interest, rather that the use of the land will not be inconsistent with the public interest. I need not spend too much time on this aspect of the case. It would seem to me that the plaintiff is quite correct that removal of cars from the public street on to private land is not inconsistent with the public interest and that is the focus of what the plaintiff is proposing to do.
 (4) Compensation. As I understand the evidence, the compensation offered is approximately $29,000 in respect of Proposal 1 and $65,000 in respect of
Proposal 2. The compensation for Proposals 3 and 4 were not as finely tuned, but as I understand Mr Moschoudis' address, the land value he is offering for
Proposal 3 is $27,500 and Proposal 4 $25,000 which if one adds the building costs, would bring the compensation to $31,500 and $29,000 respectively all up.
 The defendant says that no amount of money can compensate her in the present case. However, if one is looking at land values, then the valuation evidence on her behalf shows that Proposal 1 involves loss of land valued at $45,000 together with building costs of $4,150 and Proposal 2 $80,000 plus $24,350 building costs.
 The loss or disadvantage for which compensation must be available and fixed by the court covers a wide spectrum of losses to the defendant and is not limited to the value of the land. Often, as the cases show that the concern is with the loss suffered by the defendant's business. A prime example is Katakouzinos versus Roufir <case>; [(1999) 9 BPR 17,303] where the defendant's hotel would be affected by the view of the plaintiff's proposed scaffolding from the hotel rooms.
 In Katakouzinos versus Roufir at 17,310 [66], Hodgson J said that the onus was on the plaintiff in this sort of case, first to show what loss or other disadvantage the defendant will suffer, and second, to show that loss or disadvantage can be adequately compensated.
 I followed that principle in Wengarin versus Byron Shire <case>; [(1999) 9 BPR 16,985] at 16,989 and said that "Ordinarily the compensation will be: (a) the diminished market value of the affected land (including what is sometimes called the hope value, that is the potential use to which the subject land could have been put); (b) associated costs that would be caused to the owner of the affected land; (c) an assessment of the compensation for insecurity, loss of amenities such as loss of peace and quiet; and (d) the compensation is to be less compensating advantages if any". (References omitted).
 I noted that compensation in this section is not a substitute for the price that could have been expected if <case> did not exist: see SJC
Construction Co Ltd versus Sutton LBC [(1975) 29 P & CR 322] at .
 I then added, "There may be some exceptional cases which fall outside the net of 88K(2)(b) yet are cases where it is extremely difficult to assess the compensation, but it is clear that the applicant is to derive a considerable benefit from the application. In such circumstances it may be appropriate to assess the compensation on a percentage of the profits that would be made." In Mitchell versus Boutagy <case>; [(2001) 118 LGERA 249], Austin J said that he did not accept that compensation should be assessed on a generous basis rather than a miserly one and that he did not accept that loss of amenity and utility was a category of loss of proprietary rights which could be the subject of compensation. I merely note this for the sake of completeness, it does not feature in my assessment in the instant case.
 Mr Moschoudis pointed to the words in subsection (4) of <case> that the court is to provide compensation "unless the court determines that compensation is not payable because of the special circumstances of the case."
Mr Moschoudis referred to what I said in Wengarin at 16,988 [20], but special circumstances might exist if the situation whereby the easement is required is brought about by some blameworthy conduct on behalf of the defendant. He submits that in the present case the erection of a metal fence on Lot A has brought about the problem. I do not favour this submission. It may be (or it may not be) that the erection of a metal fence would have been restrained by an injunction because it affected the proper use of the right of way, but that would not be a reason why an additional right of way should be granted.
 The joint report of the valuers (AX88) shows that they are agreed that $20,000 is a fair and reasonable assessment for the diminution in value of Lot
A under Proposal 1 and $7,500 plus the costs of relocation of fencing and services is a fair and reasonable assessment of diminution in value under
Proposal 2 so far as it affects Lot A. So far as Lot 100 is concerned, they could not agree. Mr Dick, the defendant's valuer, assessed the diminution in value at $25,000 comprising the loss of car space at $20,000 and the impact on amenity etc at $5,000. Mr Brown considered there was a nil impact on Lot 100 under Proposal 1 as the car space could be relocated to the rear yard of Lot
A. Both men considered that this would depend on survey.
 So far as Proposal 2 is concerned, Mr Dick's assessment of $70,000 includes an allowance of $20,000 for the loss of the car space. Mr Brown did not allow for that so that they agreed in the "hot tub" cross-examination that the difference between them was about $10,000 and the attitude to the car space.
 Although "splitting the difference" is rarely a satisfactory method of dealing with valuations it seems to me in the present case, having heard both valuers who appear to be sound experts in their field in their hot-tub performance and reading their joint reports, that probably one should split the $10,000 difference down the middle. So far as the car space is concerned,
I cannot really see how it could be relocated in the land that remains of Lot
A unimpeded by the easement and any swing factor. Accordingly, I would allow
Mr Brown's figure.
 Accordingly, so far as <case>(b) is concerned, I determine that the owner of the land to be burdened can be adequately compensated.
 So far as section 88K(4) is concerned, the compensation that would be appropriate in the case of Proposals 1 and 4 would be $50,000 being $45,000 land value and injurious affectation plus $4,200 building costs rounded up because of inflationary costs in the building industry etc from the date that the figures were obtained. In respect of Proposal 3, the figure would be $52,500 because the land value is $2,500 more. In the case of Proposal 2 the appropriate figure is $97,000 being land value and affectation $72,500, building costs $24,350 rounded up.
 (5) There does not seem to me to be any issue on whether there have been attempts at negotiation before suit as it is clear that apart from Proposals 3 and 4, there were some negotiations and it was clear that the defendant would not entertain anything further.
 Mr Insall says there has been no negotiation at all with respect to
Proposals 3 and 4. Whilst this is true, it is clear from the attitude to
Proposal 1 which was very similar but perhaps a little less intrusive, that any further attempt to negotiate would have been a complete waste of time.
Accordingly, I do not consider I can do anything else but find this factor in favour of the defendant.
 (6) It is clear from the authorities that the commencing words of section 88K(1) "The court may make an order imposing an easement" confers a discretion on the court to make or refuse an order even if all the factors set out in subsection (2) are decided in favour of the plaintiff: see Khattar at ,250 [59]; Blulock Pty Ltd versus Majic <case>; [(2001) 10 BPR 19,143] at ,150  <case> and
Woodland at 128 <case> at <case>.
 It is inappropriate to set out matters which affect a discretion, the discretion is at large and must not be restricted by inventing lists of possible criteria. It is clear, however, that if the plaintiff is otherwise entitled to an order, it would be wrong for the court to exercise its discretion against the application capriciously. Normally, factors purely personal to the plaintiff such as his or her belligerent manner or the colour of the tie or scarf they wore in the witness box, would be such matters. The core matter affecting the exercise of the discretion are matters which touch and concern the respective pieces of land.
 In the instant case most of the factors relevant to discretion have already been discussed when dealing with the matter of reasonable necessity in section (2) of these reasons.
 The matters which seem to me particularly relevant to the exercise of discretion are that the defendant has managed her property on the basis that the right of way in favour of the building on Lot C has been satisfactory to the occupant of that property for many years. The plaintiff came to the property knowing the restricted access. He can drive a car on to his property, albeit a very small one. He has, or can have, available parking off the street a few hundred metres away. Whilst it would be more comfortable to have off- street parking, in view of the inconvenience that the expanded right of way would cause to the defendant, even if it were reasonably necessary rather than merely most desirable, the court would be reluctant to interfere with the defendant's proprietary right.
 On the other hand, the plaintiff says that there is already an existing easement, the defendant may be disturbed by any vehicle coming down that right of way, all that he is asking for is a metre further width, the impact on Lot
A is less than 4%. When one takes into account that the court will impose an order for significant compensation, one can see that, on a proper analysis, the defendant will not really suffer if the easement were to be granted.
 Another factor that must be taken into account either here or elsewhere, is Proposal 5.
 It will be remembered that Proposal 5 is that there be a right of way down the western side of Lot A over Dr Hillman's land, though also taking in the existing pedestrian right of way on the western side of Lot A. The defendant says this is a far better entrance route for the plaintiff because it does not involve any right hand bend but rather a straight path down to his land.
 The plaintiff says that Proposal 5 is not a reasonable alternative. For one reason it does not allow him to get his car parked on an east/west access.
Secondly, Dr Hillman is fiercely against it; and thirdly, it would intermix both pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
 Fourthly, the plaintiff says that Proposal 5 is manifestly inferior in addition to the reasons I have already stated in that there would be inefficient waste of valuable residential land on Dr Hillman's in lieu of merely widening an existing right of way by one metre.
 I must confess these reasons do not really seem particularly weighty, but on the other hand it is for the plaintiff to indicate what easement he wants, and he does not want Proposal 5. As Brereton J said in Khattar at [32], where there is more than one possible easement the applicant may within reason select that which he desires to acquire. So long as that is a reasonable selection, the court does not assess whether one is objectively superior to the other.
 I really do not consider that the existence of Proposal 5 assists in resolution of the present case.
 In the light of my decision that the plaintiff has not shown that any of the Proposals 1-4 were reasonably necessary for the use or development of the plaintiff's land, it is strictly unnecessary for me to deal with the question of discretion.
 As Windeyer J pointed out in Blulock at [20], in many cases considerations of discretion and other factors overlap. They do in this case.
However, in considering matters of discretion, the court probably gives greater weight to the inconvenience that might be suffered by the defendant than when it is considering the elements that the plaintiff must prove to be entitled to an order under the section.
 I must state that, even if I was in error in concluding that the plaintiff's proposal had not overcome the hurdle of demonstrating that the proposed easement was reasonably necessary, this is a case where the factors I have mentioned would lead to the court saying in its discretion that it should not grant an order.
 (7) Counsel for the plaintiff acknowledges that <case> means that the costs of the proceedings are payable by their client subject to any order of the court to the contrary, but put that a contrary order should be made.
 They acknowledge that there is no argument that the defendant should have the costs of considering the application and taking legal advice, at least such as used to be covered by the old two guinea rule: see Re Rose Bay
Bowling & Recreation Club Ltd [(1935) 52 WN 77] at 78. However, over and above that they put that there should be no order for costs. Alternatively, if that proposition is not upheld that the costs which have been inflated by the raising of irrelevant issues should not be allowed.
 Before dealing with those matters I should note that in Property
Partnership Pacific Pty Ltd versus Owners SP 58482 at [89], Biscoe J said that he would be inclined to say that costs of these sorts of application should be on the indemnity basis because <case> is a confiscatory legislation providing for compensation and the respondent should have its day in court and receive costs even though it loses and not be out of pocket. However, he recognised the weight of contrary authority and that costs would ordinarily be made on the ordinary basis. I accept what his Honour there said.
 It is true in this case that there was far too much material provided that was necessary for the fair determination of the questions involved. This was of two kinds, first, there were allegations and counter allegations as to nastiness on each side towards the other party and their associates. In the end, almost all of this was either not read or rejected and really could have little impact on the case other than to bear upon the question which allegedly was conceded that there had been sufficient negotiation concerning Proposals 1 and 2.
 The second was the proliferation of expert witnesses. I very much doubt that had the court considered the question as to whether leave should be given to call all that expert evidence that it would have acceded to the request.
However, in this case, by the time the court had to consider whether leave should be given to call expert evidence, the expense had been incurred in retaining architects and builders and traffic planners and valuers and surveyors, who in the end did not differ that much.
 I must note that there is no suggestion that either party went out of his or her way to make the case more complicated or expensive by excessive retention of experts.
 As to the first class of evidence, Mr Insall points out that his solicitor did write at a very early stage pointing out the uselessness of a lot of the spite evidence put forward by the plaintiff and was met with a reply that the plaintiff would press ahead with all guns blazing. It was argued, probably correctly, that this material as to mutual spite was relevant as to whether there had been sufficient negotiation. This only ceased to be arguable when the concession was made.
 As when it was put on the material was strictly relevant, it was part of the proper material in the case. It was initiated by the plaintiff, the plaintiff having lost the proceedings must pay the costs of it.
 The same can be said about the expert evidence. The plaintiff was certainly a willing party to amassing all this expert evidence, and having lost the case, must pay for it. There is not sufficient evidence in the circumstances to negative the statutory provision that, ordinarily, the plaintiff is to pay the costs of the proceedings.
 Accordingly, in my view the plaintiff must pay the defendant's costs of the proceedings.
 (8) It follows from what I have said above, that the proceedings must be dismissed with costs. The exhibits may be returned after 28 days, but if an appeal is lodged they are to be retained pending the determination of the appeal.
 *  
LAST UPDATED:  February 2008 * * * 
