

Industrial Installations and Relocations Pty Limited versus Leiner Davis
Gelatin International Limited Matter No 55008/96 [1998] NSWSC 183 (5 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 10 June 1998 
INDUSTRIAL INSTALLATIONS & RELOCATIONS PTY LIMITED v LEINER DAVIS GELATIN INTERNATIONAL LIMITED /96 May 1998 
Rolfe J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division Construction List 
Name of Case: INDUSTRIAL INSTALLATIONS & RELOCATIONS PTY LIMITED versus LEINER DAVIS GELATIN INTERNATIONAL LIMITED 
Proceedings: 55008/1996 
Date of Hearing: 3 April 1998 
Date of Mention: 1 May 1998 
Date of Judgment: 5 May 1998 
Counsel for Plaintiff: Mr P H Greenwood 
Solicitors for Plaintiff: Cameron Gillingham Boyd 
Counsel for Defendant: Mr M Dempsey 
Solicitors for Defendant: Blake Dawson Waldron 
Adoption of a Referee's report.

Super Pty Limited versus SJP Formwork Aust Pty Limited [(1992) 29 NSWLR ]
applied to the facts of the case.

I N D E X 
Page 
Introduction 1 
The Adoption Of The Report 3 
A Difficulty Arose 3 
Overpayments 
Item 20 - Engineering Labour - $36,920 10 
Item 31 - Piping Difficulties in BOQ and claimed rates - $9,802 15 
Item 33 - Miscellaneous Steelwork - $39,516 18 
Item 34 - Ducting to Dryer - $28,690 23 
Item 35 - Change to Pipe Supports - $96,772 25 
Defective Workmanship 
Item 13 - Hot Water Circulation Pump in Dryer - $600 29 
Item 15 - Pressure Gauge and Seals in Votators- $10,955 30 
Item 17 - Installation of Dryer - $7,465 31 
The Relevant Principles 33 
Conclusions 36 
HIS HONOUR: 
Introduction 
By an order made on 25 October 1996 this Court referred the whole of these proceedings to Mr G. R. Easton, an expert in building matters, pursuant to Pt r2(1)(a), for enquiry and report, and vested him with the usual powers on the making of such an order. The proceedings involved many disputed matters between the plaintiff, which was a nominated sub-contractor and for which Mr
P.H. Greenwood of Senior Counsel appeared, and the defendant, which was the proprietor, and for which Mr M. Dempsey of Counsel appeared, arising out of the building and relocation of a factory for the defendant from Botany Bay in
New South Wales to Beaudesert in Queensland. The work was carried out, initially, pursuant to an agreement entered into between the defendant and a builder, A.W. Edwards Pty Limited. The plaintiff was a nominated sub- contractor for the relocation of plant and equipment.

The Referee held an initial preliminary conference on 26 November 1996 and, thereafter, took the steps towards a hearing which he has outlined on pages 3 and 4 of his Report, which is dated 28 January 1998. He conducted a four day witness conference in March 1997 to assist in a definition and better understanding of the issues and the hearing commenced on 12 March 1997. It occupied 19 hearing days and, after allowing for necessary adjournments, concluded on 8 August 1997. The Referee heard oral submissions on 29 August and, thereafter, received "extensive written submissions". Those of the defendant, which became an Exhibit before me, ran to about one hundred and fifty pages. There were 1345 pages of transcript and approximately 100 exhibits.

The Report, exclusive of annexures, contains 120 pages. In it the Referee refers to the plaintiff as "IIR", and the defendant as "LDG". It is clearly and logically compiled in a manner which identifies the issues and, on its face, the reasoning process pursuant to which the Referee determined them. He identified the various witnesses, expressed concise views as to their credibility and acceptability, examined the documentary evidence to which he referred in detail, and stated the conclusions to which he came. It is, if I may say so with respect, a thoroughly commendable Report in the method of its compilation and presentation and in the exposure of his reasoning processes.
Criticism is only made of eight specific matters.

The Referee ultimately concluded that the plaintiff was entitled to recover from the defendant $369,201, (which finding is not in dispute), from which he deducted $328,366 for overpayments, which he found had been made by the defendant to the plaintiff, leaving an amount owing by the defendant to the plaintiff of $40,835. He calculated interest payable on that amount giving a total figure of $54,646.

He held the defendant was entitled to recover $5,450, which, after the addition of interest, came to $7,010, which led to his ordering the defendant to pay the plaintiff $47,636.

The Adoption Of The Report 
The matter has come before the Court for the adoption of the Report. In the first paragraph of its written submissions the defendant sought an order that it be adopted without qualification. By an amended Notice of Motion the plaintiff sought an order that the Report be adopted except for five items where he found there had been an overpayment, being items 20, 21, 33, 34 and , and three items where the Referee found the defendant was entitled to recover for defective work, being items 13, 15 and 17. The plaintiff sought that the figures prepared by the Referee be adjusted conformably with its assertions that the overpayments should not have been allowed and the defective work had not been established.

A Difficulty Arose 
The defendant's submission that the Report should be adopted accepted, as I understood it, the correctness of the Referee's conclusion, which was not challenged by the plaintiff, that in seeking to recover the overpayments under its cross-claim, the "onus lies with" (the defendant) "to prove its assertion in relation to each item": p26. The defendant acknowledged that the onus of proving defective workmanship lay upon it.

The Referee has annexed to his Report various pleadings. By its summons the plaintiff sought to recover $402,316, interest thereon and costs, that amount being the difference between $6,044,668, which the plaintiff claimed as being owing to it for completing the work, and $5,642,352 paid by the defendant to it.

Mr Dempsey's first written submission was that the Report be adopted and the parties be directed to prepare Short Minutes to give effect to it. The second paragraph of those submissions, under the heading "The Pleadings and onus", referred to the plaintiff's amended summons whereby it claimed payment of $6,026,934 for work it had allegedly performed less $5,887,732 paid, leaving a balance of $363,201. The submission continued:- "On the plaintiff's case any payments made by the defendant to the plaintiff in respect of progress claims were on account of the plaintiff's entitlement under the sub-contract".

The submission noted that by its defence the defendant denied that the plaintiff had completed work to the value of $6,044,668 or that it was entitled to the sum claimed or any additional sum. In relation to the overpayments claim, which the defendant made, it was stated:- "To the extent the defence is successful up to the sum of $369,201 it operates by way of defence. If, and to the extent, that the defence succeeds beyond that figure, a claim is made on the same basis but by way of cross-claim for payment of that amount on the basis that the plaintiff was overpaid to that extent by the defendant under a mistake that it was obliged to make that payment".

The submission continued:- "The plaintiff bore the onus of proving that it had in fact performed the work under the sub-contract, the value of that work and that it was entitled to any further payment to the extent it was in issue".

The submission was that the total sum claimed was comprised in the ten categories set out on page 6 of the Report, and that the defendant disputed the plaintiff's entitlement to certain amounts within items 5 to 10, either in whole or in part and:- "The specific matters raised by the defendant on this basis were referred to in the proceedings as the Overpayments Issues: (see Report p8.5)".

The Report, at page 7, commenced to consider the defendant's claims. The
Referee set forth the defendant's assertion in the defence that the plaintiff was not entitled to any further payments for four reasons, viz. that it had already been paid, by mistake of fact or law, substantial amounts in excess of the sums to which it was entitled under the sub-contract; that it had failed to perform some items of work for which it claimed payment; that some of the work it performed was defective entitling the defendant to damages; and that it was estopped from claiming additional money.

The defence stated that the defendant claimed that the plaintiff had been paid by mistake of fact or law substantial amounts in excess of that to which it was entitled and an issue as being:- "Whether the Plaintiff was paid in excess of its entitlements...".

Paragraph 12 of the defence pleaded:- "The Defendant overpaid the Plaintiff in respect of work the subject of the Agreement under a mistake of fact or law, and is entitled pursuant to the terms of the Sub-contract and on the Agreement, to an adjustment to the Contract Sum and the amounts paid by the Defendant to the Plaintiff accordingly: 
Particulars 
The Defendant refers to clauses 3.1, 11, 40.20 and 42.1 of the Sub-contract and on the Agreement".

By its Cross-Claim the defendant alleged, in paragraph 10, that it had paid the plaintiff amounts to which it was not entitled "as a result of a mistake and were in fact payments for work carried out which had already been accounted for as part of the Contract sum". It claimed a further overpayment in paragraphs 21 to 27 inclusive.

In paragraph 5, page 26, of his Report the Referee considered the overpayment issues. He said:- "Although IIR is the plaintiff in the proceedings, the fact is that LDG has paid (allegedly by mistake) almost all (over 93% - see also p8 and p16 in annexure `B') of the amount claimed by IIR as the final contract sum. Thus in seeking to recover the `overpayments' under its Cross-Claim, the onus lies with LDG to prove its assertions in relation to each item. As the major part of LDG's case on these over-payment issues is provided by Greensmith, the necessary extent of proof has in several cases been difficult to achieve, for the reasons outlined earlier (see Section 3, Greensmith)".

Thereafter the Referee placed the word "overpayments" in inverted commas on some occasions. I have no doubt that he appreciated that with which he was dealing and I do not consider that this indicated that he thought the overpayments were other than that, viz amounts the defendant conceded it had paid, but contended that it was entitled to recover because the plaintiff had not performed the work entitling it to those payments. When the Referee dealt with the summary of the overpayments claim he did not use inverted commas and he found that the defendant was entitled to an allowance of $328,366 in respect of sixteen items. He had considered thirty-eight items under this heading but the defendant did not assert that in respect of the further twenty-two items the Referee's Report should be reconsidered because he applied the wrong onus of proof or, indeed, for any other reason. I think the inverted commas were to indicate the fact that a claim was made but, at that stage of the Report, not determined.

On the hearing of the adoption of the Report Mr Dempsey maintained his submission as to onus. Mr Greenwood submitted that the defence of overpayment pursuant to a mistake was an affirmative defence on which, conformably with well established principles, the defendant bore the onus. Put shortly he submitted the defendant had to establish why it was entitled to repayment on the basis that "he who asserts must prove".

On 6 April 1998 Mr Dempsey made further written submissions in which, inter alia, he submitted that the "expression `overpayment claims' may be misleading" and that a statement to the effect of "disputed contract sums adjustment claims" would be more appropriate. In so far as there is a distinction, as to which I have some doubt, I do not think it is a submission which can now be raised. The case was fought before the Referee on the basis that overpayments had been made and were recoverable. He decided this issue.
The defendant should not be allowed to change the ground rules laid down by its pleadings and on the basis of which the case was fought. Mr Dempsey also relied on the plaintiff's failure to make any submission as to this onus. He does not suggest he did. The Referee was thus left to decide the matter and, in my opinion, he came to the correct conclusion. There was, in my opinion, one exception to this, viz "Item - Engineering Labour - $36,920". I shall explain why when I deal with it.

In his further written submissions Mr Greenwood adopted, essentially, the position to which I have referred and noted that the defendant's claim for amounts overpaid was originally $841,651. Mr Greenwood tendered his written submissions, which he made to the Referee, which stated in relation to items shown as overpayments it was alleged that "There should be no deduction from the plaintiff's claim" thus indicating, as he submitted in my opinion correctly, that the defendant had failed to establish in respect of each such item that it had made an overpayment justifying a reduction. He submitted that an assertion of overpayment by mistake of fact or law imposed a burden of proof on the party making it, which, in my opinion, must be correct. If it is not then there would be an onus on the plaintiff to prove that although it received a payment, it was not an overpayment. Put another way, if the plaintiff does work for which it claims an entitlement to payment, which matter the defendant denies, the plaintiff must prove what work it did and the amount to which it is entitled. If, however, the plaintiff's claim has been paid and the defendant claims an entitlement to recover the money, the defendant must establish the basis of that entitlement, e.g. overpayment.

On 8 April 1998 Mr Dempsey furnished further written submissions and sought to tender further documents, including his submissions to the Referee. He concluded:- "On the question of onus, it is submitted on behalf of the defendant that the plaintiff bore the onus of proof, generally, as to the proof of its claim that the adjusted contract sum was $6,026,734 and, specifically, as to the particular charges comprised in that sum which were identified in the overpayments issue. An exception to the second limb of that proposition is the negative adjustments sought in respect of the pipe supports (see paragraph 11 of my submissions of 6 April 1998)." 
It is unfortunate that this issue was raised, in truth, for the first time, when the Report came before this Court for adoption. The Referee was not favoured with any submissions although, in my respectful opinion, he reached the correct conclusion having regard to the way in which the matter was pleaded and the nature of the allegations. In consequence of this matter not being raised before the Referee I have been obliged to spend far more time on it than the Court should be expected to in considering the adoption of a report.

Overpayments 
Item 20 - Engineering Labour - $36,920 
The plaintiff challenged an allowance to the defendant of $36,920 as an overpayment. This claim arose because the plaintiff claimed an additional $50,960 on account of time spent by its principal, Mr Skelton, in carrying out "engineering" work in the period December 1993 to March 1995. It was based on
Mr Skelton's estimate of hours spent by him, as set out in Exhibit P8, which was admitted without objection, and costed at the rate of $52 per hour.

Although the parties seem to have been content to have treated this as an overpayment, it is clear from the Report that it was a claim for an additional payment and, as such, it seems to me that the onus rested on the plaintiff to establish it. The Referee noted, p38, that the defendant admitted that part of the plaintiff's claim relating to that work from December 1994 to March 1995 amounting to $14,040 should be accepted, but denied the balance of $36,920. He concluded that there was "effectively no evidence" on which he could rely as justifying the balance of the claim, which he found to be based on an estimate of hours by Mr Skelton made in July 1995, which was some 19 months after the claimed work was commenced, and in circumstances where the plaintiff was unable to produce any contemporaneous records to substantiate the claim. He found the claim had not been verified or approved by others, who were involved, and:- "For the reasons given earlier, this is a specific example where I am unable to give any significant weight to Skelton's bald assertions of time spent on this work".

The Referee referred to the evidence of Mr Lovell, who had been at relevant times the defendant's engineering manager, but was called as a witness by the plaintiff. He noted that Mr Lovell had kept no records of hours spent by Mr
Skelton, but that, in his opinion, "the hours claimed are `reasonable' ". He said that whilst generally he found Mr Lovell's evidence to be reliable:- "...on this particular matter he is only able to provide a vague opinion (formed much later in October 1996), and in my view it should be given little weight". (My emphasis.) 
The Referee then considered evidence from the defendant, which comprised a later analysis which, in his opinion, raised some serious doubts as to whether
Mr Skelton could have spent the times claimed. In relation to this evidence the Referee held it was "not evidence which proves the point for LDG".

He looked for other matters and noted Mr Skelton's acknowledgment that he spent considerable time on management and administration, rather than engineering, and that he was involved in other projects. He concluded:- "I am persuaded by the evidence generally that in terms of specific engineering work, Skelton is most unlikely to have expended the hours claimed. Although it is difficult to draw the line, it seems that by far the majority of his time appears to have been spent on general management and supervision activities".

The Referee decided that the plaintiff's claim for engineering labour from
December 1993 to November 1994 should not be allowed, although he acknowledged that "Skelton may in fact have spent hours on engineering work which were claimable". Nonetheless he considered that the plaintiff's own management failures, including absence of basic and contemporaneous records, operated against the claim, and he was of the opinion that in accepting the plaintiff's claim after November 1994, the defendant had given Mr Skelton the "benefit of the doubt in the absence of any direct substantiating evidence". This was a course in which the Referee agreed "as there is stronger direct evidence of
Skelton's involvement in engineering work in the period December 1994 to March ". In the result he found that the plaintiff was entitled to the amount the defendant conceded, but not to the balance of $36,920.

The plaintiff's claim was based on the document headed "Engineering labour -
Davis", which was Exhibit P15 before the Referee. It was tendered as Exhibit C before me. It was tendered, without objection before the Referee, as a document showing how the $50,960 was calculated and it was explained at Tp81.

It was common ground that Mr Skelton's cross-examination was limited to asking him whether he had kept contemporaneous records, which he agreed he had not, but it was not put to Mr Skelton that he did not do the work set out in
Exhibit P15 during the months he claimed or for the number of hours spent on that work. Reliance was also placed on the evidence of Mr Lovell, who considered the number of hours claimed by Mr Skelton in this regard to be "reasonable". The Referee found Mr Lovell was "a reliable, accurate and honest witness" whose credit was not sought to be impugned by the defendant.

In relation to this item the defendant claimed, correctly in my view, that the real question for determination was whether the plaintiff had discharged the onus of proving its entitlement to the amount.

On an issue of fact, where the Referee has had the opportunity to observe the witnesses give evidence and to assess their credibility and reliability the
Court will, generally speaking, not interfere with a finding of fact. However,
I have great difficulty with this finding of fact. I do so on the basis that the plaintiff carries the onus of proof. My reasons for that difficulty are:- 
The plaintiff produced the document Exhibit P15. It was admitted without objection. There were no contemporaneous records to support it but, of itself, that does not invalidate the truthfulness of what was recorded.

It was never put to Mr Skelton that he had simply fabricated the figures nor that he had no truthful basis on which to put them forward. In my opinion it is one thing to say there is no contemporaneous record. It is quite another thing to say that figures put forward from recollection are not reflective of genuine recollection, but are the product of fabrication or deception. If some such allegation was to be made it was incumbent upon Mr Dempsey to put that matter directly to Mr Skelton. If it was not made the status of the invoice has to be considered in the absence of any such assertion.

Mr Skelton's evidence was corroborated by the evidence of Mr Lovell, who the Referee found to be a truthful witness.

Moreover, he expressly found that Mr Skelton may "in fact have spent hours on engineering work which were claimable". On the other hand he was not persuaded that in terms of specific engineering work Mr Skelton was "most likely to have expended the hours claimed". However, having made that observation, he said it was "difficult to draw the line", although it seemed to him by far the majority of time "appears to have been spent on general management and supervision activities".

There was no countervailing evidence from the defendant. I appreciate that a party carrying the onus does not necessarily discharge it because there is no such evidence. It may be that the tribunal of fact is able to discount evidence led in support of the claim by virtue of its inherent incredibility, or the lack of probability that it is true. However, in my opinion, for that step to be taken there must be strong evidence to support a finding that one cannot rely on the prima facie evidence. Such evidence, particularly where there is corroboration for it from the evidence the Referee otherwise accepted, depending upon the case, may take various forms. In the present case it appears to have been absent.

The real question the Referee had to confront was whether there was, notwithstanding his view that the evidence was "vague" and "a bald assertion", a reason for rejecting it, having regard to the whole of the evidence. In my view, as the evidence stood, there was not. I have, so far, dealt with the matter on the basis that the plaintiff carried the onus of proof. If, as the
Referee seems to have approached the matter, the defendant carried the onus of proof, it clearly had not discharged it. In disagreeing with the Referee's finding of fact on this issue I am acutely conscious of the very limited circumstances in which the Court will do so on evidentiary issues, and the undoubted advantages the Referee had in assessing the credibility of the witnesses. Notwithstanding, the matters to which I have referred satisfy me that on this aspect the Referee did err.

I am of the view that in relation to item 20 the disallowance of the claim of $36,920 should not be adopted.

Item 31 - Piping Difficulties in BOQ and claimed rates - $9,802 
The defendant's claim for an overpayment arose from an analysis of certain invoices within the plaintiff's claim for pipes and fittings. The Referee noted that those invoices related to work, which was carried out under a provisional sum item and was not the subject of specific rates within the bill of quantities. He continued:- "As this work is part of a provisional allowance then, pursuant to clause 11(a) of the general conditions it is to be valued under 40.2(c), and reasonable rates or prices are to be used (see Items 24, 27 earlier)".

The Referee traced the various competing contentions of the parties and the reduction of the original analysis by the expert called by the defendant, and he said:- "It is plain that both parties (but particularly LDG) have expended large amounts in pursuing the dispute on this issue when their differences are so small that both fall within the general grey area of reasonableness." 
At p.59 he continued:- "I have consequently been required to review both Skelton's and Greensmith's evidence and analyses in elemental detail, rate by rate. Although, in an overall sense both totals are within the bounds of reasonableness, I am satisfied that there are some particular rates derived by Skelton which do not have a logical or reasonable basis". (My emphasis.) 
The Referee identified examples of these and said:- "I have therefore concluded that on balance the rates derived by Greensmith in his later review (Exhibit D28, pp22-27) more closely reflect reasonable rates for the subject work than Skelton's.

Accordingly, I find that LDG is entitled to a deduction of $9802 from IIR's piping claim in respect of this item." 
Mr Greenwood submitted that the Referee's findings that both assessments fell within "the general grey area of reasonableness" and that "in an overall sense both totals are within the bounds of reasonableness" led to the conclusion that the reasonable rate or price could have been found to have been either, or, put another way, that it could not be said that the rates or prices put forward by the plaintiff should not be accepted.

Mr Greenwood also submitted that the Referee acknowledged that Mr Greensmith was not an expert in the costing of pipework, but accepted his expertise to carry out a comparative analysis. Mr Greenwood submitted the conclusion was flawed as that analysis, to be meaningful, had to involve some expertise and understanding of the items being compared. Mr Greenwood then gave a detailed analysis and, in doing so, noted that the Referee had wrongly asserted that "some particular rates derived by Mr Skelton did not have a logical and reasonable basis". The submission continued that the only two referred to are items where in fact Mr Skelton did provide a logical basis for the derivation of the rate "which has not been demonstrated to be unreasonable". The submission also continued that Mr Greensmith had provided a detailed derivation, but by "the mere application of a mathematical approach". It concluded by submitting that the Referee disregarded that the onus lay on the defendant to establish some unreasonableness in relation to each item challenged. Thereafter there is a very detailed approach to the minutiae of the evidence.

On behalf of the defendant it was submitted that the onus fell on the plaintiff to demonstrate that the charges made by it were reasonable and thereafter sought to support the Referee's reasoning. In my opinion, as Mr
Greenwood submitted, this was an attempt to prove an overpayment and the onus was on the defendant.

I consider the proper reading of the Report is that while the Referee acknowledged that both sets of figures fell within the "range of reasonableness", which he expressly considered to be "general" and "grey", when he came to decide, as was clearly a matter of fact for him, which was relevantly reasonable, i.e., reasonable within the contractual term, he came to the view that the figures put forward by the defendant were the ones he was prepared to accept. He offered several examples of these, but I am satisfied they were intended as examples and that the same reasoning was carried forward into the total conclusions to which he came.

In my opinion this is an instance where the findings of fact were clearly open to the Referee not only by reference to the evidence before him, but also by virtue of his expertise, to which he was entitled to give full weight. The reasoning process is explained and I see no error in it.

In the result I would adopt the Referee's Report in relation to Item 31.

Item 33 - Miscellaneous Steelwork - $39,516 
The Report states, p.61, that the defendant asserted that various invoices for miscellaneous steelwork, which form part of the plaintiff's claim for refurbishment work, should have been included in the fixed price part of the sub-contract. The Referee referred to the evidence of Mr Greensmith, and his conclusion from his analysis that within the plaintiff's claim there was an apparent lack of steelwork invoices booked by it to lump sums/piping work, and an excess of invoices booked to refurbishment.

The Referee reported that Mr Lovell's evidence was that as the work progressed he discovered that many items of work, which the defendant required the plaintiff to carry out, had been omitted from the drawings, and:- "Thus, where IIR used miscellaneous steelwork for the carrying out of such work, then (in Lovell's view, with which I concur) IIR would be entitled to make an additional charge rather than absorb the cost as part of the lump sum portion of the sub-contract." 
The Referee continued that in this context Mr Lovell had reviewed each of the major invoices categorised by Mr Greensmith as having been misallocated by the plaintiff, which totalled $42,743 and from that review Mr Lovell conceded that certain items, totalling $7,500, should have been included as part of the lump sum/piping work. The Referee said that as a result of that evidence Mr
Greensmith had reviewed his list and removed items totalling $8,634, which were no longer pressed by the defendant. He continued:- "The residual list of alleged misallocated major invoices totals $34,109. I have considered the evidence relating to each of these major item invoices, including those conceded by Lovell ($7500 - see above). I am satisfied that with the exception of one item there is on balance sufficient evidence to find that the work covered by the requirements of the Specifications, BOQ or Drawings was well within the sub-contract, and should properly be included within the fixed installation price." 
The Referee identified the one item, which he was prepared to accept should be included as a refurbishment charge, and another minor item and, after making the necessary calculations, found that the defendant was entitled to a deduction of $35,584 from the plaintiff's claim "on account of this item of overpayment".

Mr Greenwood submitted that the defendant's assertion was based upon Mr
Greensmith's incorrect construction of the contract and some invalid assumptions he drew from what appeared on some irrelevant drawings. He submitted Mr Skelton gave direct evidence of the work in relation to each of the items about which he was cross-examined, which was supported by Mr Lovell in part and was not contradicted. The submission continued that the Referee found that seven items invoiced by the plaintiff as refurbishment were included within the fixed price contract part of the work. The submission identified the items and referred to the Referee's finding that there was, on balance, sufficient evidence to conclude that the particular work should properly have been included within the fixed installation price of the contract. The submission continued that the Referee had not given any reasons for that finding.

The submission also was that at p.21 the Referee provided an outline of the history and nature of the sub-contract and, at p.23, he found that the plaintiff's scope of work was not adequately defined within the sub-contract documents and much was left to the discretion and direction of Mr Lovell as the work proceeded. He also found, according to the submission, that it was the clear intention of the parties to establish a flexible working arrangement and to provide for progressive decisions to be made on issues of design, refurbishment and layout as the relocation work progressed.

The submission made reference to "significant grey areas" arising from the inadequacies of the documentation and the form in which the sub-contract was structured, of which the Referee considered the drawings were a prime example.

This led to a submission about the drawings and to the Referee's acceptance of the view of Mr Skelton and Mr Lovell that they were "indicative only".

The submission made reference to evidence given by Mr Skelton, which it was said was supported by Mr Lovell and, from that, the submission was made that it was wrong to assert "simplistically that everything which appears under the heading `5. Scope of Works' in the contract was fixed price work, as Mr
Greensmith did". The submissions then turned to the individual items.

The critical matter, in my opinion, is whether, read as a whole and fairly, the Referee has approached the task, which allowed him to bring his own expertise to bear, in a proper manner.

In my opinion the Referee has sufficiently exposed the problems in his Report to identify that to which he had to direct his attention. His reasons disclose that he considered the evidence and that he was satisfied "on balance" that the items should be dealt with in a certain way. I do not think it proper to stop reading his Report at that stage. Insight into his reasoning process is provided by the next two paragraphs. He came to his conclusion, according to the next paragraph, because it was not possible to relate that particular item to any particular requirement within the sub-contract, in which he included drawings or specifications and, in those circumstances, he accepted that was work which should properly be included as a refurbishment charge. He gave the same reason in respect of the item to which he referred in the next paragraph.
In my opinion the Referee has made clear he considered the evidence on the basis that he wished to relate the work to a contractual requirement and, if that was not possible, he treated it as a refurbishment charge for which the plaintiff was entitled to be paid. That, in my opinion, was a sufficient discharge of the obligation to provide reasons and, essentially, the matter was one of fact for him to determine in the light of all the facts before him and by bringing to bear his own expertise.

As the submissions for the defendant point out a basic proposition for which the plaintiff contended is that the Referee failed to construe properly the contractual documents. I am not satisfied that in so far as this submission is made by the plaintiff, it has been established.

I have approached this matter on the basis that the onus lay on the defendant to establish the entitlement to the overpayments and, on that basis, I am satisfied that the Referee has not been shown to have been in error. I would, accordingly, adopt the Referee's Report in relation to Item 33.

Item 34 - Ducting to Dryer - $28,690 
The Referee identified this overpayment as having a similar basis to the claim in Item 33 and he noted it arose from Mr Greensmith's analysis of the relevant sub-contract requirements. He specified the defendant's assertion that three invoices for ducting, which totalled $29,275, were included in the plaintiff's claim for refurbishment work, but should have been included within the fixed price part of the sub-contract.

The Referee noted that both Mr Skelton and Mr Lovell had given evidence that the existing ducting to the dryer at Botany was difficult to inspect due to its elevated position and its being covered in gelatine dust. He noted Mr
Skelton's evidence that when it was dismantled it was found to be in extremely poor condition and had to be rebuilt, and his assertion that the invoices identified by Mr Greensmith related to this rebuilding and thus were properly included within the refurbishment claim. He was of the view that Mr Lovell's evidence on whether that work had to be carried out was "equivocal and unfortunately of no real assistance".

The Referee referred to detailed evidence relating to the three invoices, with which he dealt, and he continued:- "There is no evidence other than Skelton's assertion (see above) that the three invoices relate to repair of existing ducting (rather than the new ducting shown on drawing P42). My own examination of the invoices (Exhibits D13, D13A and Drawing P42) confirms Greensmith's analysis (Exhibit D28, para.3.20 and D34), which I accept in preference to Skelton's uncorroborated assertion." 
The Referee carried out a further analysis of the evidence, including a concession made by Mr Greensmith, and concluded that he was satisfied that subject to those adjustments the invoices identified by the defendant should have been included within the fixed price part of the sub-contract and, accordingly, he found the sum of $28,690 to be an overpayment.

Mr Greenwood submitted that Mr Skelton's evidence was not contradicted and that it appeared that the Referee had misread it "as an acknowledgment by Mr
Skelton that the duct work to the dryer required by Drawing P42 was that supplied under the Regent sheet metal invoices".

I received detailed submissions concerning the evidence of Mr Skelton, but it appeared to me then, as I stated, and it still appears to me, that the Referee had the advantage of hearing the evidence given and of drawing his conclusions as to that about which Mr Skelton was speaking. I do not have that advantage, and I am not disposed to come to a different conclusion from that which the
Referee discerned from that evidence.

Mr Greenwood submitted that whilst the Referee referred to his examination of the invoices and drawings, which confirmed Mr Greensmith's analysis, this took the matter no further as the Referee did not provide any reason why the work should be found to fall within the fixed price work, rather than refurbishment work.

In my opinion this submission does little justice to the Referee's reasoning.
He obviously analysed each invoice with care and related it to the drawing. He preferred the results flowing from his own examination of the invoices, which he considered confirmed Mr Greensmith's analysis, in preference to Mr
Skelton's assertions. I do not see why this is not a sufficient explanation of the way in which the Referee reached his conclusion, nor, if that be so, why he did not properly evaluate the evidence. In my opinion this was a matter for the Referee to determine according to his evaluation of the evidence in the light of his expertise.

I have approached this matter on the basis that the defendant carried the onus of proof and, for the reasons I have sought to give, I am not satisfied that the Referee did not reach a conclusion, which was properly open to him and for which he gave adequate reasons. I would adopt this part of the Report.

Item 35 - Change to Pipe Supports - $96,772 
Item 35 was an overpayment claim by the defendant based on an analysis by Mr
Greensmith, as a result of which it was asserted by the defendant that costs relating to pipe bridge work had been incorrectly charged within the plaintiff's claim for refurbishment work, and should properly have been included within the fixed price part of the sub-contract. In his later submissions to me Mr Dempsey referred to it as a negative adjustment to the contract sum arising from omissions of work.

The Referee noted that the work required for the construction of the pipe bridge was shown on Drawings P30 and P59, which were part of the sub-contract and which were tendered before me. He dealt with the drawings at some length, and noted it was common ground that the "as-installed" pipe bridge design was varied from this arrangement, such that the five supports leading up to the plant building were replaced by four supports of a different section, while the seven supports alongside the plant building were replaced with a lightweight pipe support frame and "unistruts".

The Referee noted the plaintiff's submission that this work never formed part of the fixed price work within the sub-contract, notwithstanding its inclusion within the drawings, and he referred back to his previous conclusion that inclusion of work in the drawings was not definitive and that the circumstances of each item had to be considered. He said:- "However, when cross-examined, neither Skelton nor Lovell could offer any evidence in support of the IIR position, the best Skelton could do being to assert (Tp469.10) - `because it just didn't'. Lovell gave evidence (T.813.32-46) (which I accept) that the portion of the pipe bridge to the south of grid line 6, the edge of the plant building on Drawing P30 was constructed by another contractor, (John Holland) and that along the external face of the plant (grid line A, from grid 6 to grid 3) an alternative structure to that shown on the drawings was in fact installed by IIR. However there was no evidence from Lovell (other than his unsubstantiated assertion - Exhibit P45, p12) which would suggest that this latter work (even though varied) was something outside IIR's original scope".

The Referee referred to various other pieces of evidence and to clause 5.7.1, and concluded that when that clause was taken with the drawings and evidence relating to a note, Exhibit D14, it satisfied him that the pipe bridge work fell within the fixed price portion of the plaintiff's sub-contract.

He referred to two further pieces of evidence upon which the plaintiff relied, and his reasons for rejecting it, and he continued:- "On balance therefore, I am satisfied that whatever Skelton's understanding may have been, as a matter of proper construction of the terms of IIR's sub contract, the pipe bridge work shown on drawings P30 and P59 formed part of IIR's fixed price scope of work. An adjustment must be made to allow for the fact that the actual work was varied but as IIR has charged the costs of actual work carried out under its refurbishment claim, LDG is entitled to a deduction from IIR's claim to account for this overpayment item".

This was a large item involving $96,772.

Mr Greenwood submitted that the defendant bore the onus of proving overpayment, which I think is correct, and that the defendant's assertion was based on the existence of a "typical pipe bridge detail" on one of the drawings. He noted that Mr Skelton and Mr Lovell had maintained "adamantly" that the pipe bridge was not ever part of the plaintiff's fixed price contract. He referred at length to the cross-examination of Mr Skelton and noted that after the words quoted by the Referee, "because it just didn't", that Mr Skelton had added:- "It was excluded specifically because nobody knew what they wanted".

Mr Greenwood also quoted at some length from the evidence of Mr Lovell that it was "a typical detail", which Mr Lovell said meant that it was an indication of how the system could be built.

Mr Greenwood submitted that the evidence of Messrs Skelton and Lovell was not challenged nor contradicted and that it was supported by various documentation to which he referred. He submitted the Referee erred in not having regard to the onus of proof in the absence of evidence from the defendant to establish its claims; in treating the evidence of Mr Skelton and Mr Lovell as being of no value; in failing to give reasons for his decision regarding the proper construction of the contract; in not giving due weight to the absence of evidence from the defendant; and in not giving due weight to the evidence that the work was included within the building contract, but not the plaintiff's contract.

Mr Dempsey submitted that whilst the drawings showed a substantial pipe bridge it was common ground that the bridge was not built conformably with the drawings thus giving rise to the question whether the construction of the pipe bridge fell within the contract and, if it did, what allowance should be made against the contract price. He submitted the Referee gave careful consideration to all the relevant evidence, that he rejected that of the plaintiff, and that he considered the relevant provisions of the Scope of Work and the drawings, and the other evidence relied upon by the plaintiff.
However, he submitted the Referee concluded that, as a matter of the proper construction of the sub-contract, pipe bridge work shown on Drawings P30 and
P59 formed part of the fixed price scope of work and that an adjustment must be made to allow for the fact that the work was not done. He also referred to the fact that the defendant's valuation, amounting to a deduction of $96,772, was not challenged by the plaintiff and that the Referee had satisfied himself as to its reasonableness: Report p68.

In my opinion this matter raised a question of fact for the Referee, which he considered in great detail, weighing up very carefully the various factual matters and concluding, on the basis of that analysis, that the pipe bridge work formed part of the plaintiff's fixed scope of work. He did so because he considered that that was the proper construction of the terms of the plaintiff's sub-contract, after a detailed consideration of all the evidence.
In my view it has not been shown, the onus on this issue being on the defendant, that the conclusion to which the Referee came was not correct.
Accordingly I would adopt the Referee's findings as to Item 35.

Defective Workmanship 
Item 13 - Hot Water Circulation Pump in Dryer - $600 
It was submitted on behalf of the plaintiff that the Referee was mistaken in the view to which he came on this Item, and that he gave no adequate reasons.
In my view, on a fair reading of the Report, the Referee made it abundantly clear why he came to the view to which he did. The task of installing the equipment fell on the plaintiff. After the work was done it was found that the alignment was "askew", which caused problems requiring rectification. The defendant undertook some work in relation to one of the pumps and, in my opinion, the Referee concluded that the proper inference was that the work was necessary because it had not been carried out properly in the first instance by the plaintiff. The care the Referee took in considering the evidence is clear in his only allowing one-half of the amount claimed and his reasons for doing so. I see no reason to interfere with his finding of fact, which was based upon a readily discernible reasoning process.

Item 15 - Pressure Gauge and Seals in Votators - $10,955 
This claim related to the fact that from April to September 1995 several operational problems were experienced with ammonia leaks from the votators. Mr
Everett identified such leaks, seal failures, faulty gauges and faulty control equipment as matters requiring rectification, and formed the opinion that they were related to poor installation and faulty refurbishment of old plant by the plaintiff. The defendant claimed $10,955 for carrying out that work.

The Referee reviewed the evidence in relation to these alleged faults and he also considered that as the plant was being incorrectly operated by inexperienced operators there was a reasonable inference that that may have contributed to the problems. He recognised "a conundrum as to the extent of defective work under this Item which can be attributed to" the plaintiff. He considered Mr Skelton's evidence was unreliable, although he noted that Mr
Skelton agreed that the use of double gas jets, as found by Mr Everett, was not good workmanship.

The Referee was obviously placed in a position of some difficulty in relation to the cause of the problem. He was of the view that it was caused in part by the actions of the plaintiff and in part by those of the defendant and, accordingly, he said he was persuaded that there had been some defective work by the plaintiff "but the evidence as to its extent is problematical". This, of course, did not relieve him of the obligation to consider whether damages should be paid and he concluded that an amount of $3,650 should be paid. He did so because he thought that a detailed examination of the invoices disclosed that it would be unreasonable to attribute more than "about one- third of the costs to IIR's breaches". I do not consider this was an inappropriate way for the Referee, approaching the matter on the basis of his expertise and in the light of the evidence, to decide. In my view, there should be no interference with this finding.

Item 17 - Installation of Dryer - $7,465 
The dryer assembly was a new component as it was uneconomical to relocate the equipment from Botany. A new design was prepared by the defendant's consulting engineers, and the plaintiff fabricated and installed it to that design. In
March 1995 Mr Everett observed that the dryer jammed, which he attributed to a lack of proper tightening of the tracks on which the dryer belt ran. Mr
Everett found it necessary to replace certain parts in June and July 1995 and the defendant claimed $7,465 for the costs of labour and materials to carry out the initial and the replacement work.

When the jam occurred in March 1995 Mr Everett recalled that the plaintiff's employees worked to fix the problem, and that Mr Lovell told him "the matter would be resolved". The Referee was satisfied that the original jamming may have been caused by the plaintiff's defective work, but he was not satisfied that the further rectification was. He said the only evidence of causal connection was Mr Everett's "bald assertion" and, for the reasons he gave about the evidentiary deficiencies, he concluded the defendant had not established an entitlement to damages, other than $1,200.

Mr Greenwood submitted that this was incorrect because Mr Everett did not say the plaintiff caused the problem, and there was evidence from Mr Skelton and
Mr Lovell that the work had been carried out properly. Further, he submitted that the conclusion that the jamming "may" have been attributable to defective workmanship was insufficient to discharge the onus. However, the Referee was also entitled to have regard to the actions taken by employees of the plaintiff and Mr Lovell's statement that the matter would be resolved. It was for the Referee to place such weight on that evidence as he thought proper. He was also entitled to draw an inference from the time sequence.

I am not satisfied that the Referee reached a wrong conclusion on this matter.

The Relevant Principles 
The principles to be considered by the Court in determining whether a Report of a Referee should be adopted were stated by the Court of Appeal in Super
Pty Limited versus S J P Formwork Aust. Pty Limited [(1992) 29 NSWLR 549.] Gleeson
CJ, who delivered the leading judgment said, p563, that an application under
Pt 72 r13 was not an appeal. His Honour continued:- "This is consistent with the right of the Referee to conduct the Reference as the Referee thinks fit and unconstrained by the rules of evidence. Rather, the judge, in reviewing the Report and deciding whether to adopt, vary or reject it, has a judicial discretion to exercise in a manner that is consistent both with the object and purpose of the rules and with the wider setting in which they take their place.

That wider setting is a system for the administration of justice according to law. Insofar as the subject matter of dissatisfaction with the Referee's Report is a question of law, or the application of legal standards to establish facts, then a proper exercise of discretion would require a judge to consider and determine that matter afresh. ...

Subject to what has just been said, it is undesirable to attempt closely to confine the manner in which the discretion is to be exercised: cf Nicholls versus Stamer <case>; [(1980) VR 479] at 495 per Brooking J. The nature of the complaints made about the Reports, the type of litigation involved, and the length and complexity of proceedings before the Referee, may all be relevant considerations. The purpose of Pt 72 is to provide, where the interests of justice so dictate, a form of partial resolution of disputes alternative to orthodox litigation, and it would be to frustrate that purpose to allow the Reference to be treated as some kind of warm-up for the real contest. On the other hand, if the Referee's Report reveals some error of principle, some absence or excess of jurisdiction, or some patent misapprehension of the evidence, that would ordinarily be a reason for rejecting it.... So also would perversity or manifest unreasonableness in fact-finding".

In relation to disputed findings of fact "where there is shown to be evidence available to support such findings, or the issue involves a choice as between conflicting evidence", his Honour stated that he agreed with the view of Giles
J and Cole J, which his Honour had earlier quoted including the following passage:- "As a broad proposition, depending upon the circumstances of each case, the Court will not reconsider disputed questions of fact where there is factual material sufficient to entitle the Referee to reach the conclusions he did, particularly where the disputed questions are in a technical area where the Referee enjoys an appropriate expertise": (p553) 
Giles J incorporated in that passage, which appears at p553, the following passage from the judgment of Cole J in White Constructions (NT) Pty Limited v Commonwealth of Australia (1990) 7 BCL 193, which I had adopted in
Buttrose versus Versi (10 December 1990 - unreported):- "Consistent with the views I expressed in Chloride Batteries of Australia Limited versus Glendale Chemical Products Pty Limited, I am of the view that in this instance the Court should not embark upon a re-examination of the questions of fact upon which the Referees have reported. There is obviously a large body of evidence upon which the Referees could properly find as they did. The purpose of Referees reporting to the Court on disputed questions of fact is rendered futile if the Court is to reconsider disputed questions of fact in circumstances where it is conceded that there is factual material sufficient to enable Referees to reach the findings they did. In circumstances where the Court, having closely scrutinised the Referee's Report, has a comfortable feeling of satisfaction that the factual issues have been properly explored and considered, in my view the Court should adopt the Referee's Report on findings of fact. In this instance I have that feeling and adopt the actual findings".

I have endeavoured to apply that reasoning in considering the Report.

In Hughes Bros Pty Limited versus The Minister for Public Works (17 August 1994 - unreported) I had reason to consider the principles to be applied and the obligation to give reasons. In considering the relevant principles I referred to Super and Nine Network Pty Limited versus Kennedy Television Pty Limited (Court of Appeal - 8 June 1994 - as yet unreported). I also considered, in some detail, the obligation to give reasons. In that regard I said, p13:- "In my opinion the Court must be able to see and follow a reasoning process. That does not, in my view, impose an unnecessary burden upon the Referee. The nature of what is required is that a reasoning process be disclosed, or sufficiently disclosed, to satisfy the Court that the finding was one based upon such an intellectual exercise. The performance of that task is not fulfilled by ultimate conclusions unsupported by reasoning".

At p14 I said:- "In the case of reports to the Court where it is necessary for the Court to decide what should be done with the report to give it legal effect, there should be, at least, sufficient reasons indicating what has led the Referee to the conclusions".

I have approached a resolution of this matter conformably with these principles.

Conclusions 
I have stated my views generally about the quality of the Report and my reasons for not adopting Item 20 and adopting the balance. I invite the parties to bring in Short Minutes of Orders to give effect to these findings.
I shall then hear any submissions on costs.
 * * * 
