

Regina versus Sobolewski Matter No Cca 60502/97 [1998] NSWSC 243 (17 June 1998) 
Last Updated: 4 August 1998 
REGINA versus DANIEL KONRAD SOBOLEWSKI 
CCA 60502/97 June 1998 
Powell JA, Wood CJ at CL, Newman J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
Nature of Jurisdiction: Appeal against conviction and application for leave to appeal against sentence in District Court (Nield DCJ sitting without Jury) 
File No: 60502/97 
Delivered: 17 June 1998 
Hearing Date: 21 April 1998 
Parties: Regina versus Daniel Konrad Sobolewski 
Judgment of: Powell JA, Wood CJ at CL, Newman J 
Counsel: 
Appellant: C C Waterstreet 
Respondent: W G Dawe QC 
Solicitors: 
Appellant: (Direct Access) 
Respondent: S E O'Connor, Solicitor for Public Prosecutions 
Result: Allowed 
Catchwords: Criminal Law - Particular offences - Drug Offences - Supply prohibited drug - Possession of an amount not less than trafficable quantity - Possession - Exclusive physical control - People other than accused having, or having had, access to place where drugs found - Inadequacy of evidence of possession. 
No. of Pages: 26 
REGINA versus DANIEL KONRAD SOBOLEWSKI 
JUDGMENT 
POWELL JA: The Appellant was indicted before Nield DCJ at the Penrith District Court on 12 August 1997 on two charges: 
For that he on 4 September 1996 at Parramatta did supply a prohibited drug, to wit, cannabis leaf, in that he had in his possession an amount which was not less than the trafficable quantity applicable in respect to that prohibited drug.
For that he on 4 September 1996 at Parramatta did supply a prohibited drug, to wit, mescaline, in that he had in his possession an amount which was not less than the trafficable quantity applicable in respect to that prohibited drug.
 (ss. 25(1), 29 [Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/)) 
The Appellant pleaded not guilty to each charge and with the consent of the
Crown Prosecutor, elected to be tried before Nield DCJ alone.

On 14 August 1997, Nield DCJ, having reserved Judgment overnight, delivered
Judgment and found the Appellant guilty of each of the offences of which he stood charged.

On 12 September 1997 Nield DCJ sentenced the Appellant on each count to a minimum term of imprisonment to commence on 14 August 1997 and to expire on 13
August 1998 and an additional term of 2 years to commence on 14 August 1998 and to expire on 13 August 2000, at the same time recording his view that a number of factors to which he referred in the course of his remarks on sentence constituted "special circumstances" which warranted his variation of the otherwise statutory apportionment of the total term of the sentence which he imposed on the Appellant.

The case which the Crown sought to advance on the hearing before Nield DCJ was as follows.

At about 5.15 p.m. on Wednesday 4 September 1996, Constables Raby, Hazard,
Crowe, Dick and Cunningham attended at 19 Albert Street, North Parramatta to execute a search warrant at that address. Senior Constable Raby approached the front door of the premises where he observed a security camera pointing toward the left hand side of the front door. The Appellant answered the door and identified himself as the occupier of the premises. He was handed the
Occupier's Notice which he appeared to read. The other police entered the premises.

Constables Dick and Cunningham remained in the hallway of the house while
Constables Hazard, Crowe and Raby conducted the search in the presence of the
Appellant.

During a search of the Appellant's bedroom, and while Constable Hazard was searching some clothes in the wardrobe in the bedroom, the Appellant approached the wardrobe and removed a sum of money from a jacket that was hanging in the wardrobe and handed the money to Constable Hazard. Constable
Hazard then handed the money to Constable Raby who counted it in the presence of the Appellant, the total amount of the money being $5,000.00.

After a search of the kitchen and dining room area the three police officers went to a room half way along the hallway on the western side of the property, the door to which room was closed, and had a key in the lock. On being asked, the Appellant identified the room as his "Star Wars room". Constable Hazard then unlocked the door and went inside accompanied by Constables Crowe and
Raby and the Appellant. During the course of a search of the room Constable
Crowe located a red and white plastic shopping bag in a cardboard box.
Examination of the contents of the shopping bag revealed six large resealable plastic bags all of which contained green vegetable matter. The Appellant, when asked to whom the bag and contents belonged replied "What is it? I've never seen it before." Examination of another box which was in the room revealed another resealable plastic bag which contained three further resealable plastic bags each of which contained a brown substance. When asked what was in the bags the Appellant replied "I don't know they are not mine".
Constable Hazard then informed the Appellant that he was under arrest and would later be taken to Parramatta Police Station at the same time being given the usual caution.

Constable Raby then left the room and obtained a video camera. On his return to the room Constable Raby started to record the room and what had earlier been found in it. While this was going on Constable Hazard continued to search the room and, in the course of so doing, located a purple plastic shopping bag which contained one empty resealable plastic bag, one resealable plastic bag containing green vegetable matter and one resealable plastic bag containing five smaller resealable bags each containing green vegetable matter. When asked, the Appellant said he did not know to whom the plastic bag belonged.

A little later the police officers and the Appellant went to the lounge room where there were located a large quantity of empty resealable plastic bags and two resealable plastic bags containing green vegetable matter. As well, there was located a Danish Butter Cookie tin which contained twenty-four resealable plastic bags each containing green vegetable matter and four empty resealable plastic bags. Under a small table nearby there was found a grey plastic container which when opened was found to contain two further resealable plastic bags each containing green vegetable matter. Behind that container was found another small plastic container which had electrical parts in it. The
Appellant admitted owning the latter container but denied owning what had been found in the grey plastic container saying "I don't do drugs mate".

After the search had been suspended for a time, it was recommenced in the lounge room where a further resealable plastic bag containing vegetable matter and a laminated leaf and a set of electronic scales were located.

Police officers then returned to the main bedroom where they located a book entitled "Marijuana Growers Handbook, Indoor Greenhouse Edition" and a 1997 calendar called "High Times". In a bookshelf in the dining room there was found a book entitled "Legal Highs".

At the time when the police officers first entered the premises there were three other people in addition to the Appellant who were present in the house.
Those people included one Julie Menz, the Appellant's fiancee, who also lived at the premises and another male and female person. Another male person arrived while the police officers were in the premises. All four people remained in the lounge room watching television for most of the time while the police officers were present, and were observed during the course of the search by Constable Cunningham and Dick who remained in the hallway near the lounge room door.

On the completion of the search, the Appellant was taken to Parramatta Police
Station where all the items seized were weighed in the presence of the
Appellant. In an interview with police the Appellant agreed with entries which
Constables Crowe and Hazard had made in their official notebooks recording the various items which were found, but he declined to answer questions until he sought legal advice.

Analysts' Certificates recorded that all the vegetable matter which had been found in the various resealable plastic bags was cannabis leaf, the total weight of the vegetable matter being 899.4 grams. A further Analyst's
Certificate revealed that the brown substance which had been found in the resealable plastic bags in the "Star Wars room" contained less than 1% of mescaline, the total weight of the brown substance being 162.6 grams.

In the light of one of the submissions which was advanced on behalf of the
Appellant on the hearing of the appeal, it should be recorded that, although
Nield DCJ rejected those parts of the statements of Constables Raby, Hazard and Crowe which dealt with a conversation between the police officers and the
Appellant as to the money which the Appellant handed to Constable Hazard when he and the police officers were in the bedroom and before Constable Raby left to obtain the video camera, during the course of his cross-examination of those police officers, counsel then appearing for the Appellant cross-examined
Constable Hazard - but not Constable Raby or Constable Crowe - as to what he and the Appellant had said at the time the money was produced - the significance of the evidence then given by Constable Hazard and the further evidence given in the course of his re-examination on the same subject matter will later appear.

At the close of the Crown's case counsel then appearing for the Appellant submitted that the Appellant had no case to answer as, so it was submitted, there was insufficient evidence to show or to permit the inference to be drawn that the accused possessed the cannabis leaf which had been found in the lounge room. That submission was rejected by Nield DCJ upon the basis that the
Appellant and his fiance were the only occupiers of the premises so that "at worst for the Crown, he and his fiancee were the joint possessors of all that which was found within the residence".

The case which, at trial, the Appellant sought to make was as follows.

He had lived at the subject premises, which premises were owned by his parents, who lived next door, since 1991. The premises were used by him both as a residence and as the place from which he conducted a horticulture/hydroponics business under the name and style of "A.C.E.
Hydtech".

At the time when the Appellant moved into the premises, he was accompanied by his former fiancee, Deborah Horne, with whom he had been living for some time and who continued to live at the premises until about a year before September
During such time as she lived at the premises, Ms. Horne conducted a sewing business at the premises using, for that purpose, the "Star Wars room" which, in addition to doing duty as a sewing room, also did duty as a general storage area and a place where the Appellant was accustomed to store "Star
Wars" memorabilia of which he was a collector.

The circumstances leading up to and attending Ms. Horne's departure from the premises were hostile involving apprehended violence orders and court appearances. When Ms. Horne left the subject premises, she left without taking her belongings, not only her property in the "Star Wars room" but also property which was in other rooms in the premises.

In September 1996 the Appellant was living at the premises with Julie Menz, who had been living there for about 8 or 9 months, and to whom the Appellant was engaged to marry. Ms. Menz had property stored in boxes in the "Star Wars room".

The Appellant said that he used resealable plastic bags in the course of his business both for packing pesticides which were sold in the course of that business and also for the storage of electrical components and other like things which were used in the course of his business as, for example, in the building of circuit boards used in the manufacturing side of his business. The door to the "Star Wars room" was generally kept closed with the key in the lock.

The Appellant said that on the day on which the police officers searched his premises he and Ms. Menz had attended a computer auction conducted by "Hymans the Auctioneers" where they had purchased items for which he intended to pay cash on the following day - he had been withholding cash from banking from sales he had made during the previous week for the purpose of making purchases at auction. The Appellant and Ms. Menz had arrived home less than an hour before the police officers arrived. Some school friends arrived at the same time and another friend arrived shortly after.

The Appellant gave evidence that he had no knowledge of the cannabis found in the lounge room and that it was not his. The small set of electronic scales belonged to him and he used it to divide pesticide and electronic components to be placed in resealable plastic bags. The cannabis leaf enclosed in plastic which was found in the lounge room had been given to him by a client.

During the course of the search of his bedroom, the Appellant indicated to
Constable Hazard that there was money in the wardrobe and he took the money from a jacket and handed it to him. The Appellant tendered invoices on what purported to be sales, the total of the sales prices being $5,074.65. The
Appellant denied that the money was the proceeds of drug sales.

The Appellant said that he had no knowledge of the cannabis leaf or the brown substance found in the "Star Wars room". He said that it was not his and he did not know that it was there. He assumed that the "Marijuana Growers
Handbook" belonged to Ms. Horne.

The Appellant said that the "High Times" calendar found in his bedroom was a gift. The book "Legal Highs" found in the dining room was also his.

The Appellant said that a number of people had access to the "Star Wars room" including his customers, Ms. Menz and guests who often stayed over for short periods. No witness other than the Appellant was called in the Appellant's case.

Although counsel's submissions were not recorded in the transcript, the passages from Nield DCJ's Judgment to which I will shortly refer make it tolerably plain that the Appellant's counsel submitted that the Crown had not established to the required standard that the Appellant was in possession of the drugs found during the police search and, in particular, that the Crown had not negatived the possibility that either Ms. Horne or Ms. Menz was the owner of the drugs.

In his Judgment Nield DCJ, after a short introduction, said: "Except for one matter, the accused did not dispute the evidence of police.
That was because nearly everything that was done by police was recorded on video and audio tapes, and everything that was found within the accused's home was photographed, and where those things were found was recorded on paper in a police notebook. The one matter about which there was a dispute related to what was said during a conversation between police and the accused concerning the accused's possession of $5,000.00 in cash. That there was a conversation between police and the accused concerning the accused's possession of that money is not in dispute. It is what was said during that conversation that is in dispute. Unfortunately, this conversation was not recorded on audio tape and the accused was not asked to confirm the police version of the conversation when he was interviewed. The accused's explanation for his having this money is very important, and I will return to it." 
Then, following a passage in which he recorded his observations about the demeanour of both the police witnesses and the accused and recorded, in particular, that there was nothing about the Appellant's demeanour which caused him to doubt his (the Appellant's) evidence, Nield DCJ continued: "But there is his evidence about two things which I cannot accept and which undermines his credibility. The first thing is this, it concerns his possession of the money. He told police that there was `some cash' in his wardrobe and he removed the money from a jacket hanging in the wardrobe and gave it to police. I cannot accept his evidence that he did this because police asked him if he had anything that he should not have. He claims that he had the money lawfully, so I wonder why he would produce the money in response to a question to the effect `Do you have anything that you shouldn't have?'
Moreover, I cannot accept his evidence as to the contents of the conversation with police concerning that money. He claims that he told police that he had most of the receipts related to his receipt of the money but it would take some digging up to get them. I cannot believe that an innocent person claiming lawful possession of an amount of money totalling $5,000 in cash and for which receipts confirming the lawfulness of the possession were immediately available would not go out of his or her way to prove to police that the possession of the money was lawful. Furthermore, if the receipts confirming the lawfulness of the possession of the money were not immediately available,
I cannot believe that an innocent person would not produce those receipts to police at the first available opportunity. The other thing is this, it concerns his assertion that he had most of the receipts for his receipt of the money. He said that the documents, exhibit 1, are his copies of receipts showing his receipt of the money and that four of them were in his Portafile at the time of the police search. I do not accept his evidence that the documents show his receipt of the money or that four of them were in existence at the time of the police search. Each document is said to be an `invoice/cash sale' document. However, not one of the documents provides any clue as to whether it is an invoice rendered for goods supplied and for which payment is outstanding, or a cash sale document for goods supplied and for which payment was made at the time of the supply, or a receipt for payment was made at the time of the supply, or a receipt for payment subsequently made for goods already supplied. I think that these documents are false documents and that they were created by the accused in an attempt to prove the lawfulness of his possession of the money. I am comforted in my view as to those documents by the failure of the accused to produce any other records of his business, or businesses, and his failure to call his franchisee, Mr. Tony Kendrick, to confirm his payment of the amounts referred to in the documents bearing date 3
September 1996. I appreciate that the accused does not have to prove that he is not guilty of the subject offences, but he assumed an evidentiary burden to explain his possession of the money and, as to this, he has failed.

Thus, I accept the evidence of the police witnesses in preference to that of the accused as to the contents of the conversation concerning the accused's possession of the money and I reject the accused's evidence as to his possession of that money." 
Having done so, Nield DCJ then proceeded to record that the evidence satisfied him, beyond reasonable doubt, of a number of facts, which facts included the following: "(5) The accused and Ms. Menz were the only occupiers of the premises at the time of the police search.

Both the accused and Ms. Menz had free and unrestricted access to all parts of the premises.

Both the accused and Ms. Menz had personal property in the various rooms of the premises.

Moreover, there was property of the accused's former fiance in some of the rooms of the premises.
 .........

Some of the quantity of cannabis leaf was bagged or packaged in plastic bags ready for sale.

The money, the unused plastic bags, the scale and the calendar were the property of the accused and they were in the exclusive possession of the accused at the time of the police search of the premises.

None of the accused's friends had brought anything into the premises and none of them owned any of the cannabis leaf or the mescaline." 
Having recorded those findings, Nield DCJ then proceeded as follows: "From these facts these possibilities arise as to the identity of the person who possessed the drugs.

The accused.

The accused's former fiancee.

Ms. Menz.

The accused and his former fiancee jointly.

The accused and Ms. Menz jointly.

The accused's counsel submitted that the Crown had not negatived the possibility that the accused's former fiancee or Ms. Menz was the owner of the drugs. It is true that the Crown Prosecutor did not call the accused's former fiancee or Ms. Menz for each of them to deny that she owned the drugs.
However, although [s.18](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/s18.html) of the [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) does not apply to the accused's former fiancee, it applies to Ms. Menz, which means that she could have objected to giving evidence. Of course, in the absence of hearing from either of them, we will never know what the accused's former fiancee might have said and whether or not Ms. Menz would have objected to giving evidence, and, if she did not, what she might have said. But the fact that neither the accused's former fiancee nor Ms. Menz gave evidence denying ownership of the drugs does not mean that a conclusion that the accused was in possession of the drugs at the time of the police search of the premises cannot be drawn. There may be and, in my view, there are, other circumstances which permit the conclusion that the accused possessed the drugs being the only rational and logical conclusion to be drawn. In my view the accused's possession of the money, in circumstances that are unexplained, the unused plastic bags, which are similar to the bags containing the cannabis leaf, and the scales, and his occupancy of the premises, albeit jointly with Ms. Menz, warrants, indeed demands, the conclusion that the accused possessed the drugs, because he knew that they were where they were found and because he knew what they were. I think that any other conclusion would offend logic and commonsense. As the only issue raised in this trial was the question of the accused's possession in law of the drugs, I have said all I need say.

I find the accused to be guilty of each of the offences of which he stands charged." 
Thereafter, having heard evidence tendered on behalf of the Appellant going to the question of penalty, which evidence included a statement by a Mr.
Percival, an analytical chemist, relating to the mescaline which had been found in the premises and which statement tended to indicate that the mescaline needed refining in order to make it "safe" for oral consumption,
Nield DCJ imposed on the Appellant the sentences to which I have earlier referred.

On 2 October 1997 there was filed on behalf of the Appellant a Notice of
Appeal against Conviction and Application for Leave to Appeal against
Sentence, in which Notice and Application the grounds taken were: "In all of the circumstances the verdicts were unsound and unsafe, and the sentence is in all the circumstances of the case excessive." 
Thereafter, on 4 December 1997, the Appellant was granted bail pending the hearing of the appeal to this Court. On the hearing of the appeal (T.21), the
Appellant's bail was continued until the date upon which this Court delivers its Judgment on the appeal.

When the appeal was called on for hearing, Mr. C.C. Waterstreet appeared for the Appellant, while Mr. W.G. Dawe QC appeared for the Crown.

In the outline Written Submissions which he had provided to the Court prior to the appeal coming on for hearing, Mr. Waterstreet identified, as errors which he claimed had been made by Nield DCJ, the following: having, correctly, so it was submitted, rejected those parts of the written statements which had been prepared by Constables Raby, Hazard and
Crowe which related to the conversations said to have occurred immediately prior to and following the Appellant's handing of the money to Constable
Hazard, he ought not to have placed any reliance at all upon that part of the oral evidence given by Constable Hazard which dealt with that conversation; despite this, it is clear that the handing over of the money and the conversation surrounding it were matters which were central to Nield DCJ's reasoning in finding the Appellant guilty; the Crown having failed to call either Ms. Horne or Ms. Menz to prove sole possession by the Appellant as was alleged in the charges, it was not open to
Nield DCJ to find that the drugs in question were in the sole possession of the Appellant; there was no evidence to found Nield DCJ's finding of fact that the
Appellant knew where the drugs were; the analysts' certificates which were tendered at trial did not support a finding of a trafficable quantity of the drug mescaline; the sentence imposed upon the Appellant was in all the circumstances excessive.

The written submissions which were provided by Mr. Dawe to the Court prior to the hearing of the appeal were to the following effect: notwithstanding the submission advanced on behalf of the Appellant, Nield
J erred when he first rejected evidence of the conversation between the
Appellant and Constable Hazard when the money was produced since an apparently exculpatory statement does not constitute "an admission" for the purposes of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) (reference was made to the Judgment if Hulme J in R. v. Esposito [1]); in any event, the fact that the statement was earlier rejected by Nield
DCJ was irrelevant as the evidence upon which Nield DCJ was later to rely was given by Constable Hazard in the course of his cross-examination by counsel then appearing for the Appellant; in the circumstances of the case alleged against the Appellant, the Crown was not obliged to rebut the possibility of joint possession of the drugs found in the Appellant's premises. The facts found by Nield DCJ, in particular, the various locations in which the drugs were found, together with his Honour's rejection of the Appellant's explanation of his possession of the $5,000.00, were sufficient to enable his Honour to infer both that the
Appellant was aware of the existence and location of the drugs and that he alone had the exclusive right or power to place his hands on them; it was not open to this Court to interfere with Nield DCJ's conclusion that the evidence "warrant(ed), indeed demand(ed), the conclusion that the accused possessed the drugs, because he knew that they were where they were found and because he knew what they were (and that) any other conclusion would offend logic and common sense" unless this Court, having made its own independent assessment of both the sufficiency and quality of the evidence concluded that Nield DCJ ought to have had a reasonable doubt as to the
Appellant's possession of the drugs (reference was made to Whitehorn v. The
Queen [2] and to R. v. Kurtic [3]); applying the definitions contained in [s.3(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s3.html) of the Act and the provisions of Schedule 1 to the Act, the evidence tendered at the trial established that the quantity of mescaline seized at the
Appellant's home exceeded the trafficable quantity; the maximum penalty available for the offence of supplying cannabis being $200,000.00 or ten years imprisonment or both and the maximum penalty available for the offence of supplying mescaline being $200,000.00 or fifteen years imprisonment or both, a sentence of three years imprisonment made up of a minimum term of one year and an additional term of two years was well within
Nield DCJ's sentencing discretion.

As will be apparent from the summary of the submissions of counsel which I have set out above, the principal question for determination by the Court is whether, having made its own independent assessment of both the sufficiency and the quality of the evidence which was tendered at the trial, the Court concludes that Nield DCJ ought to have had a reasonable doubt as to the matters the subject of the charges, that is, that the Appellant, at the relevant time, had possession of the drugs in question.

Although I have not recorded the submissions of counsel on this aspect of the matter in detail, it is, I believe, fair to say that there did not appear to be any real difference between counsel as to what needed to be found in order that Nield DCJ could find that the Appellant, at the relevant time, was in possession of the drugs in question. Contrary, to what appears to have been suggested by Nield DCJ, when ruling on the submission made at the close of the
Crown case that there was no case to answer - that is, that, at worst for the
Crown the Appellant and Ms. Menz were the joint possessors of all that was found within the premises - it appears to have been accepted that the Crown case was that the Appellant was in sole possession of the drugs in question, and that, in the circumstances, it was incumbent upon the Crown to establish, to the requisite standard, that the Appellant not only was aware of the existence within the premises of the drugs in question but also that he had the right to exclude any person not acting in concert with him from interference with the drugs in question (see, for example, Dib & Dib [4]).

As, in the passage from his Judgment which I have earlier recorded (see p. 12 ), Nield DCJ recognised there were five possibilities as to the identity of the person who, at the relevant time, possessed the drugs in question, they being: the Appellant;
Ms. Horne;
Ms. Menz; the Appellant and Ms. Horne jointly; the Appellant and Ms. Menz jointly.

As it was the Crown case that it was the Appellant alone who possessed the drugs in question and not that the Appellant jointly possessed the drugs with either Ms. Horne or Ms. Menz, one may set to one side the last two possibilities - if the Crown case had been that the Appellant had possessed the drugs jointly with either Ms. Horne or Ms. Menz, it would have been incumbent on the Crown to establish, to the requisite standard, that not only the Appellant, but also Ms. Horne, or Ms. Menz, as the case may have been, had the requisite knowledge of the existence and location of the drugs but also the right to exclude any person not acting in concert with him or her as the case may be from interference with the drugs.

However, even if one sets to one side the last two possibilities envisaged by
Nield DCJ, the facts, first, that Ms. Horne had lived with the Appellant in the premises for a period of some four years or thereabouts and that even after she had left her belongings remained not only in the "Star Wars room" but in other rooms in the premises; second that for about twelve months prior to the relevant date Ms. Menz had lived with the Appellant in the subject premises and that she had property stored in boxes in the "Star Wars room"; third, that a number of people had access to the "Star Wars room" including guests who often stayed over for short periods; in my view meant that, in order that the Crown might establish to the relevant standard that it was the
Appellant who had possession of the drugs in question, it was incumbent upon the Crown to eliminate any reasonable possibility that the drugs in question had been, or were, in the possession of, at least, Ms. Horne or Ms. Menz or to establish that Ms. Horne or Ms. Menz, as the case may have been had been, or was, acting in concert with the Appellant in relation to the drugs in question (see, for example, Filipetti [5]; R v. Bazley[6]; Dib &
Dib [7]).

As will be apparent from the concluding passages of Nield DCJ's Judgment which
I have set out above (pp. 12-13 (supra)), his Honour did not - or, at least, did not in terms - so direct himself. If that is a fair reading of his
Honour's Judgment then, as it seems to me, his Honour misdirected himself, it following that the trial miscarried and that the conviction and sentence ought to be set aside. If, however, the better reading of Nield DCJ's Judgment is that, although he did not articulate the question to be determined in the manner which I have described above, he did in fact turn his mind to the relevant question, then the question is whether the process of reasoning by which he reached the conclusion which he stated was valid.

As will be apparent from Nield DCJ's Judgment, his Honour, in reaching the conclusion which he did, appears to have placed a great deal of stress upon the facts: that the Appellant had at the relevant time in his possession $5,000.00 in cash; that the documents which became Exhibit 1 were false documents created by the Appellant in an attempt to prove the lawfulness of his possession of the money; and that the fact those documents were false documents and were created by the Appellant in an attempt to prove the lawfulness of his possession of the money constituted an admission of guilt on his part.

If, as seems to have been the case, this was an important part of his Honour's reasoning to his ultimate conclusion, then I must say that, in my view, that process of reasoning was not a valid one.

So far as the first of the matters to which I have referred is concerned, it seems to me that neither the conversation which immediately preceded, nor the conversation which attended, the production of the $5,000.00, nor the fact that the Appellant had the $5,000.00 in his possession whether taken together or in isolation had any relevance to the charges with which the Appellant was indicted before Nield DCJ. The statements of each of Constables Crowe and
Hazard were to the effect that while Constable Hazard was in the process of searching clothes in the wardrobe the Appellant said "You'll find some cash in the wardrobe" and having done so placed his hand on the inside of a jacket and withdrew the money from a pocket, the money then being handed to Constable
Hazard. The oral evidence which was given by Constable Hazard in the course of his cross-examination by counsel for the Appellant and in the course of his re-examination was to the effect that he (Constable Hazard) asked the
Appellant where he had obtained the money and that the Appellant replied that he had sold things at auctions. That oral evidence was further to the effect that he (Constable Hazard) asked the Appellant whether he had any receipts for the money, to which the Appellant replied "No, you'd be surprised how many people don't want receipts in the horticultural business - industry".

It seems to me that, in the absence of something more, the handing over of the $5,000.00 and the conversation which preceded and attended it, could not be regarded as in any way constituting an admission that the Appellant was in possession of the drugs which were found in the premises and still less that the money represented the proceeds of dealing in drugs (see, for example,
R. v. McMahon [8]).

So far as the second of the matters to which I have earlier referred is concerned, it seems clear enough that Nield DCJ's conclusion that the documents which formed part of Exhibit 1 were false documents which were created by the Appellant in an attempt to prove the lawfulness of his possession of the money was relied upon as an admission of guilt on the part of the Appellant, which admission, coupled with the production of the $5,000.00 in the context of the conversation which I have earlier recorded, justified him in finding, first, that the Appellant was in possession of the drugs found in the premises and, second, that the $5,000.00 was, not the proceeds of sales made by the Appellant in the course of his business, but, the proceeds of the Appellant's trafficking in drugs.

But even if, as I am prepared to do, one assumes that Nield DCJ was justified in finding that the documents which become Exhibit 1 were false documents which were created by the accused in an attempt to prove the lawfulness of his possession of the $5,000.00, it does not follow that his Honour was, without more, entitled to proceed, as he appears to have done, upon the basis that that fact constituted an admission by the Appellant of his guilt of the matters with which he came to be charged. The position, as it seems to me, is no different from that discussed by the majority (Deane, Dawson and Gaudron
JJ) in Edwards v. The Queen [9] where their Honours say [10]: "There is a difference between the mere rejection of a person's account of events and the finding that a person has lied. A lie is a deliberate untruth.
To conclude that a statement is a lie is to conclude that the truth lies elsewhere. In some circumstances, a finding that a person lied will necessarily involve acceptance of the contrary. However, the fact that a person has lied does not of itself establish a specific contrary proposition.
 
Ordinarily, the telling of a lie with merely affect the credit of the witness who tells it. A lie told by an accused may go further and, in limited circumstances, amount to conduct which is inconsistent with innocence and amount therefore to an implied admission of guilt. In this way the telling of a lie may constitute evidence. When it does so, it may amount to corroboration provided that it is not necessary to rely upon the evidence to be corroborated to establish the lie. At one time it was thought that only a lie told out of court could amount to an implied admission, but the distinction is not logically supportable and is no longer drawn. When the telling of a lie by an accused amounts to an implied admission, the prosecution may rely upon it as independent evidence to `convert what would otherwise have been insufficient into sufficient evidence of guilty' or as corroborative evidence. 
But not every lie told by an accused provides evidence probative of guilt. It is only if the accused is telling a lie because he perceives that the truth is inconsistent with his innocence that the telling of the lie may constitute evidence against him. In other words, in telling the lie the accused must be acting as if he were guilty. It must be a lie which an innocent person would not tell. That is why the lie must be deliberate. Telling an untruth inadvertently cannot be indicative of guilt. And the lie must relate to a material issue because the telling of it must be explicable only on the basis that the truth would implicate the accused in the offence with which he is charged. It must be for that reason that he tells the lie. To say that the lie must spring from a realisation or consciousness of guilt is really another way of saying the same thing. It is to say that the accused must be lying because he is conscious that `if he tells the truth, the truth will convict him'".

With great respect to Nield DCJ, it does not seem to me that the only explanation for the Appellant, as his Honour found, producing false documents in an attempt to prove the lawfulness of his possession of the money is that the Appellant was conscious that if he told the truth, the truth would convict him - it is at least possible that the Appellant was a man who conducted a predominantly cash business and kept inadequate records and who believed - perhaps, not entirely without foundation - that unless he could produce some form of documentary evidence indicating that he had come by the $5,000.00 honestly, his evidence that he had done so might not be accepted.

In the circumstances, it seems to me that the evidence before Nield DCJ was not such as to justify him in finding beyond all reasonable doubt that the
Appellant was, at the relevant time, in possession of the drugs in question, it following that the trial miscarried and that on that ground alone, the appeal should be upheld and the conviction and sentence set aside. That being so I do not consider it necessary to deal with the other grounds of appeal which have been argued.

The only question which remains is whether or not, in the circumstances, a new trial should be directed. Having considered that matter as best as I might, I have concluded that as the whole of the Crown case is before the Court and there is no reason to anticipate that any stronger case could be made on a new trial, a new trial should not be directed.

The Orders which I propose are thus:
Appeal upheld.
Conviction and sentence quashed; and
In lieu thereof direct that a verdict of acquittal be entered.

WOOD CJ at CL: I have had the advantage of reading in draft the reasons for judgment of Powell JA. I agree with his reasons and the orders he proposes. 
NEWMAN J: I have had the advantage of reading in draft the reasons for judgment of Powell JA. I agree with his reasons and the orders he proposes.  <case>; [(1983) 152 CLR 657], 688 per
Dawson J with whom Gibbs CJ and Brennan J (as he then was) concurred [3] [(1996) 85 A Crim R 57], 60 per Hunt CJ at CL with whom Grove J and Barr AJ agreed [4] [(1991) 52 A Crim R 64], -67 per Hunt J (as he then was) with whom Newman and Abadee JJ agreed <case>; [(1993) 178 CLR 193] [10] supra at 208-209 * * * 
