

Re Trivan P/L [1996] NSWSC 388 (30 August 1996) 
RE TRIVAN PTY LTD /90 
FRIDAY 30 AUGUST 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an appeal from a liquidator's rejection of a proof of debt. The proof of debt that I am dealing with in these reasons is a revised proof of debt. The amount for which the applicant/appellant's claim would be admitted for proof, if the claim were allowed, would, on the facts before me, be $345,000, which is a much lesser sum than the amount which was submitted in the original proof.

Essentially, the appellant, Janward Pty Ltd, was the proprietor of land on which the Rose Hill International Hotel was being built by the company in liquidation, Trivan Pty Ltd. For ease of reference I will merely refer to the appellant as the "proprietor" and the company as the "builder".

The parties had entered into a standard form of building contract JCC B 1985.
That contract was a document of almost fifty printed pages. Clause 12 dealt with its determination. The only relevant clause that needs to be considered in the instant case is 12.05, which is as follows: "12.05 Where the Builders' employment has been determined pursuant to any of
Clauses 12.02, 12.03 and 12.04 the respective rights and liabilities of the
Proprietor and the Builder shall be: ...
 .05.02 The Builder shall if so required by the Proprietor or the Architect within ten (10) days of the date of determination assign to the Proprietor without payment the benefit of any agreement for the supply of materials or goods and/or for the execution of any work for the purposes of this Agreement, and for the purposes of effecting such assignment only the Builder hereby irrevocably appoints the Proprietor to be the true and lawful attorney of the
Builder with full power and authority to execute such assignment on behalf of the Builder and to bind the Builder accordingly but on terms that a supplier or sub-contractor shall be entitled to make any reasonable objection to any further assignment thereof by the Proprietor. The Proprietor may pay the hirer of any plant or equipment to the Builder or any supplier or sub-contractor for any plant or equipment used or materials or goods delivered or work executed for the purposes of this Agreement (whether before or after the date of determination) in so far as the charge or price therefor has not already been paid by the Builder. The Proprietor's rights under this paragraph 12.05.02 are in addition to his rights to pay nominated sub-contractors as provided in paragraph 4.09.03, if applicable, and payments made under this Clause may be deducted from or paid out of the proceeds of any security provided by the
Builder under this Agreement or from any sum due or to become due to the
Builder.
 ...
 .05.04 Until completion of the Works pursuant to paragraph 12.05.01 the
Proprietor shall not be bound by any provision of this Agreement or otherwise to make any further payment to the Builder but as soon as is reasonable thereafter, having regard to the rights of the Proprietor under paragraph .05.01, the Architect shall ascertain the amount of costs properly incurred by the Proprietor pursuant to that paragraph and the amount of any loss and/or damage caused to the Proprietor by the determination and any other liability of the Builder to the Proprietor under this Agreement and shall certify all of the same and if such aforesaid amounts when added to the moneys paid to the
Builder before the date of determination result in a total amount in excess of that which would have been otherwise payable under this Agreement the difference shall be a debt due and payable to the Proprietor by the Builder.
If the said amounts when added to the said moneys result in a lesser total than that which the Proprietor would otherwise have been required to pay under this Agreement then the difference shall be a debt due and payable by the
Proprietor to the builder." 
The builder had engaged various sub-contractors to do parts of the work and exhibit DX07 is a sample of the standard form sub-contract, it being a document that is endorsed: "for use with Building Works Contract JCC B 1985".

A provisional liquidator was appointed to the builder on 5 March 1990, presumably pursuant to a summons to wind up filed that day. The winding up and the final appointment of the liquidator was made on 8 March 1990.

On 6 March 1990 the proprietor elected to determine the employment of the builder, pursuant to cl 12.03, by sending a notice of that date to the builder. Having thus determined the employment of the builder, the proprietor then proceeded to complete the construction of the hotel itself.

There were various sub-contractors on site, when the building contract was terminated, who had previously entered into sub-contracts with the builder.
The proprietor entered into new sub-contracts with each of these people. The effect of what happened was that debts which may have been owing by the builder to the sub-contractors were paid to the sub-contractors by the proprietor as part of the new sub-contracts.

The builder made a claim on the proprietor for $3,200,620.43 pursuant to withheld moneys under progress claim certificates 9 through 15, which had been issued by the architect in pursuance of clauses in the special works contract.
There was some correspondence between the parties about this matter. However, the proprietor is now in receivership and no formal claim was ever made for this amount.

The proprietor alleges that as cl 12.05.04 of the building contract provides that in the circumstances the proprietor does not have to make any further payment to the builder until the certification procedure specified in that clause is followed, no matter what the claim of the builder the proprietor does not owe it any moneys at all.

The proprietor says, however, that it is entitled to be subrogated to the rights of the sub-contractors against the builder because of the payments which it has made.

There may be some technical answers to that proposition in light of the fact that the payments were made to the sub-contractors under the new sub- contracts, rather than payments made in lieu of the builder making the payments. However, I will put that aside because the matter has been argued on other points and that being so it would be wrong to deal with the matter on technicalities of that nature.

Mr Harper, who appeared for the liquidator of the builder, says that subrogation does not apply in this sort of situation at all. He acknowledges that there are some dicta to the effect that subrogation may apply in cases other than the standard situations, but he says that even if that is correct the present case is not one of them, and that the parties should be left to their contractual rights. The standard situations would appear to be insurers, vendors' liens, payment out of prior securities, and unauthorised and unenforceable borrowings and guarantees.

It is difficult to find readily a good account of the scope of the doctrine of subrogation. Indeed, the various textbooks and judgments dealing with the situation do not all speak with the one voice. Goff & Jones in their The
Law of Restitution (Sweet and Maxwell London 1993, fourth edition at -590) give the most extensive treatment and say that the origins of the doctrine are obscure. They say that the oft repeated statement that the doctrine came from Roman law probably results from some confusion, but that, in any event, Equity was applying principles of subrogation from the early eighteenth century.

There is also a debate as to whether the doctrine is based in contract or
Common Law or Equity. There is English authority, such as Orakpo versus Manson
Investments Ltd [[1978] AC 95], which would have it in the contractual field. There are other notions that it is an unjust enrichment principle and some of the later textbooks tend to classify all such principles as principles of the
Common Law (although Mason and Carter Restitution Law in Australia (Butterworths Sydney 1995) take this general view, they do seem to except subrogation from that classification). The prevailing authorities, and included amongst them are the words of Gibbs ACJ in Australasian Conference
Association Ltd versus Mainline Construction Pty Ltd <case>; [(1978) 141 CLR 335], 348, say that subrogation is a doctrine of Equity. Meagher
Gummow and Lehane Equity Doctrines and Remedies, third edition (Butterworths Sydney 1992) [903] provides abundant extra authority for that proposition. See also Derham on Subrogation in Insurance Law (LBC Sydney pp 8-32).

However, as an equitable doctrine it does not seem to me that it is one that is restricted to closed categories. The American history of the doctrine of subrogation shows that early on that was the general view that was taken, but certainly by the time of Federal Land Bank V Marvin [14 SW (2d) 762] (1929) (Ky); Am LR 1392 the American authorities had recognised that the rule was then being liberally applied. The author of the annotation in 70 Am LR at 1397 quoted a local text to the effect that: "In keeping with the more liberal application of the principles of Equity, the doctrine has been greatly expanded and as now applied is broad enough to cover all cases in which one person pays an obligation which in justice and good conscience ought to have been paid by another." 
Pomeroy's Equity Jurisprudence, fifth edition (Bancroft-Whitney Co, San
Francisco 1941 vol 4 par 1419 p 1073) says: "The doctrine is in general applied in favour of all persons who are required to pay the debt of another for the protection of their own interests." 
Pomeroy then says in a footnote, which refers to perhaps twenty cases backing up that proposition or in which it has been applied: "Without attempting a comprehensive classification of cases in which the doctrine of subrogation may be applied, it is generally held that the right of subrogation will arise where the party claiming it has advanced money to pay a debt, which, in the event of default by the debtor, he would be bound to pay; or where the one making the payment had some interest to protect; or where the money advanced to pay the debt was under an agreement with the debtor, or the creditor, express or implied, that he should be subrogated to the rights and remedies of the creditor." 
The reference to the limitations "protection of their own interests" or the like, is to distinguish cases where a person has a valid commercial reason for acting in a way that discharges the debts of another, and the situation where the person making the payment is a mere volunteer. The exact line may be difficult to draw in any particular case, but the distinction must be made.

The next matter that should be noted about subrogation is that it is really not a right, but a remedy, that is, it is a remedy which a court of Equity will grant in order to prevent there being an unconscionable situation. Even the English cases seem to have approved of that point; see for instance In
Re T H Knitwear (Wholesale) Ltd [[1988] Ch 275], 283.

Furthermore, it is an equitable remedy. That means that it will not be granted merely as a right, but will only be granted in circumstances where it is appropriate to do so. Parkinson Principles of Equity p 551 (LBC Sydney ) sets out a series of situations where Equity will not grant the remedy.

Before dealing with the question as to whether the remedy should be granted in this case, I should give one further illustration of the width of the doctrine, and that is the decision that was made in what seems to be the
Common Law Division of the Supreme Court of Ontario in Brown versus McLean [(1889) 18 Or 533.] In that case the plaintiff advanced moneys to the owner of real estate to pay off existing mortgages, but was not told, nor did he inquire, as to whether there were any execution creditors. In fact the Sheriff was about to sell under a writ. However, the plaintiff was entitled to relief by being subrogated for the right of the original mortgagees which he had paid out, which mortgagees had priority over the execution creditor. It will be seen that mere contributory negligence in not making proper searches was not sufficient in that particular case to operate against the remedy of subrogation being given.

Ordinarily, a person who seeks an equitable right must offer to do equity, and in fact do equity. This appears even in the leading cases on subrogation in the Supreme Court of the United States Aetna Life Insurance Co v
Middleport <case>; [(1888) 124 US 534.] The facts in that case are complicated, involving the local
American way of having municipal councils finance railways. The US Supreme
Court held that the doctrine of subrogation in Equity requires that the person seeking the benefit must have paid a debt due to a third party before he can be substituted to that third party's rights. Furthermore it held that in doing so he must not act as a mere volunteer, but on compulsion to save himself from loss by reason of a superior claim. The plaintiff not having paid the debts that arose out of the transaction was not entitled to subrogation of the rights against the town of Middleport.

Traditionally in Equity when one was asking for equitable relief one was asking for a boon. In the form of pleadings that existed in Equity in England before the Judicature Act the person seeking an equitable remedy had to agree to give up all Common Law rights that would inhibit him from himself acting in good conscience. Thus any claim under the Money Lenders Act or legislation of that nature, which might be available at law, had to be forsworn by a person who wished to have his security documents returned to him because he had to do equity and pay what was justly and truly owed as a condition of having those documents returned to him.

In the instant case, Mr Wigney, for the applicant/appellant, says that his client is under no legal obligation to pay any part of the $3 million claimed by the builder because the appropriate process has not been undergone. That is a technical legal answer to a claim which Equity does not allow to be said by a person seeking equitable relief.

Although the evidence on this matter is fairly skimpy, there is some evidence in Mr Cardwell's initial affidavit in this claim, and it would seem to me that there would need to be some evidence on the other side that the builder has no claim at all or, alternatively, if it has a claim that the appellant is willing to set off that claim against the amount that could be proved against the builder. However, not only is this not done, but, indeed, the proprietor makes the point that there could be no set off because there is no debt owing by the proprietor to the builder.

We do not need to get into the area of statutory set off in bankruptcy under s of the Bankruptcy Act, which would have been imported into the company liquidation by <case> of the Companies Code: equivalent provisions are now in s
C of the Corporations Law. The equitable doctrine of set off, which is not completely displaced by <case> or its equivalent, would be applicable in the present situation, provided that there were debts at law or in Equity; see
McIntyre versus Perkes <case>; [(1990) 22 FCR 260], 271, affirmed by the High Court sub nom Gye versus McIntyre <case>; [(1991) 171 CLR 609.] 
Another thing that should be said is that if subrogation is a remedy not a right and is only available when there is a decree of a court of Equity, it is most questionable whether the matter can be asserted in a proof of debt. The proof of debt would have to be in the normal event a claim at law. As subrogation is a right in Equity obtainable under certain conditions, it is questionable whether a claim for subrogation would amount to a provable debt.
However, I merely wish to state this, I do not wish to take it any further because it is commercially sensible that this sort of claim should, at least in the first instance, be looked at by liquidators and admitted perhaps after judicial advice, if it is thought to be a good commercial claim, rather than money wasted by approaching the court.

It follows that the prerequisite for establishing the claim of subrogation has not been made out and, accordingly, the appeal must be dismissed with costs.

The exhibits may be returned after twenty-eight days.
 * * * 
