

Kwanchi P/L versus Kocsis [1996] NSWSC 489 (15 October 1996) 
KWANCHI PTY LTD versus KOCSIS /95; DC 269/93 OCTOBER 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
PRIESTLEY JA, CLARKE JA, HANDLEY JA 
CATCHWORDS: WORKERS' COMPENSATION - indemnity of employer - <case> [Workers' Compensation Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) - recovery by employer of legal costs incurred in defending compensation proceedings - recovery by employer of interest on compensation payments 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: ALLOWED 
Mr MacDougal was employed by the appellant, Kwanchi Pty Limited, when he sustained an injury during the course of his employment. The injury was caused by the negligence of the respondent. After the accident, the appellant commenced to pay worker's compensation to Mr MacDougal. Mr MacDougal later commenced proceedings in the District Court against the respondent seeking damages for the injuries suffered, and in the Compensation Court against the appellant seeking lump sum payments pursuant to [ss 66](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) and 67 of the [Worker's Compensation Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) ("the Act"). The appellant incurred legal costs in defending the compensation proceedings and was also obliged to pay MacDougal's costs. 
The appellant sought from the respondent indemnity pursuant to [s
Z(1)(d)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s151z.html) of the Act in respect of the compensation paid by it to Mr MacDougal, together with interest and costs. Mr MacDougal's claim against the respondent settled, and repayment of the compensation sums was made under the terms of settlement.
The appellant's claim against the respondent was then limited to the legal costs incurred in the compensation proceedings, together with a claim for interest on all payments made by the appellant in the course of the compensation claim.

Held: 
It is not to be thought that the legislature intended, when enacting [s
Z](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s151z.html), without clear language to diminish the amount of damages payable to the worker for his injuries by the amount of the employer's costs incurred in contesting the worker's compensation claims. The scheme of [s
Z(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s151z.html) makes clear that the indemnity referred to in subsection (d) does not include costs: Dairy Farmers Co-operative Milk Co. Limited versus Parker [[1966] 2 NSWR .] 
The employer is entitled as against the tortfeasor to an award of interest on compensation payments made to the worker calculated from the date of payment of compensation until the date of reimbursement by the tortfeasor.
Such an award is made pursuant to <case> [District Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/) and is not an amount ordered to be paid under the indemnity: Howard Rotavator Pty
Limited versus Wilson [(1987) 8 NSWLR 498.] 
Orders 
Appeal allowed; 
Orders of Twigg DCJ set aside and judgment entered in favour of the appellant for the amount of interest as agreed and, subject to the rules, an order for costs; 
The respondent to pay the appellant's costs of the appeal but should have, if qualified, a certificate under the Suitors Fund Act.

JUDGMENT 
PRIESTLEY JA: I agree with Clarke JA.

CLARKE JA: Mr M A MacDougal was employed by the appellant, Kwanchi Pty Limited, when he sustained injury during the course of his employment on 23 November 1988. The injury was caused by the negligence of the respondent, Ferenc Kocsis, and arose out of the use by the respondent of a motor vehicle. Shortly after the accident the appellant commenced to pay worker's compensation to MacDougal in accordance with the [Workers' Compensation Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) (the Act). In 1991 MacDougal commenced proceedings in the District Court against the respondent seeking damages for the injuries suffered. MacDougal also commenced proceedings in 1991 in the Compensation Court against the appellant seeking lump sum payments pursuant to [ss.66](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) and 67 of the Act. On 16 November 1992 an award was entered in the Compensation Court in favour of MacDougal. In those proceedings the appellant incurred legal costs of $7,579.40 in defending the worker's compensation proceedings, and upon resolution of those proceedings was obliged to pay $5,406 to MacDougal's solicitors in respect of his costs and disbursements.

In January 1993 the appellant issued a statement of claim in the District
Court against the respondent seeking indemnity pursuant to [s.151Z(1)(d)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s151z.html) of the Act in respect of compensation paid by it to Mr MacDougal, together with interest and costs. On 1 November 1994 both that claim, and MacDougal's claim against the respondent for damages for personal injury were listed for hearing. MacDougall's claim against the respondent was settled for $330,000 inclusive of costs. Under the terms of settlement the respondent was authorised to deduct from that sum and pay to the appellant worker's compensation sums repayable by MacDougal to the appellant. That was done.

Accordingly, when the appellant's proceedings against the respondent came on before Twigg DCJ on 9 December 1994 its claim was limited to the legal costs incurred in the worker's compensation proceedings, being the sums of $7,579.40 and $5,406 previously mentioned, together with a claim for interest on all payments made by the appellant in the course of the compensation claim. The claim for interest was grounded on both common law principles and pursuant to s.83A [District Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/). The appellant also sought costs in the action. Twigg DCJ in reasons delivered on March 1995 dismissed the appellant's claims.

CLAIM FOR COSTS 
His Honour rejected the appellant's claims for the two sets of costs incurred in the Compensation Court proceedings by adopting the reasoning in the decision of Lee J in Dairy Farmers Co-operative Milk Co. Limited versus Parker [[1966] 2 NSWR 551.] His Honour was there considering the provisions of s.64(1)(b) Workers Compensation Act 1926 which provided: "Where the injury for which compensation is payable under this Act was caused under circumstances creating a legal liability in some person other than the employer to pay damages in respect thereof - the worker may take proceedings both against that person to recover damages and against any person liable to pay compensation under this Act for such compensation, but shall not be entitled to retain both damages and compensation.

Employer's indemnity 
If the worker firstly recovers compensation and secondly such damages, he shall be liable to repay his employer out of such damages the amount of compensation which the employer has paid in respect of the worker's injury under this Act, and the worker shall not be entitled to any further compensation.

If the worker firstly recovers such damages he shall not be entitled to recover compensation under this Act; if the worker has recovered compensation under this Act, the person by whom the compensation was paid shall be entitled to be indemnified by the person so liable to pay damages as aforesaid; where any payment is made under the indemnity and, at the time of the payment, the worker has not obtained judgement for damages against the person paying under the indemnity, the payment shall, to the extent of its amount, be a defence to proceedings by the worker against that person for damages." 
His Honour held that whilst at common law the grant of an indemnity was usually sufficiently wide to encompass a claim for costs properly incurred, when construing paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of s.64(1) of the Act, as amended by the 1942 amending act, so to construe paragraph (b) would produce a result inconsistent with paragraph (c).

His Honour said: "A worker who recovers damages is obliged, under para (a), to refund to his employer any compensation he has received and it would be quite illogical that para (c) should place him in a position qua the wrongdoer where he could lose more from his verdict than merely the compensation he had been paid and yet this would be the result in my opinion if the indemnity given in para (b) were held to be an indemnity against both compensation paid by the employer and costs incurred by him. The expression "such payment under the indemnity shall be ..." is a clear reference to the total of the payment made under the indemnity, and if this can include costs as well as compensation it is the total of the amount of costs and the compensation which is pro tanto to be a satisfaction of the worker's judgment for damages. In the result his verdict for damages will be the fund which in reality bears the burden of the employer's costs in the compensation proceedings; that is, the employer recovers his costs under para (b) from the wrongdoer, and the wrongdoer receives the benefit of the payment so made in the reduction of the worker's verdict. In addition, it would mean that although the employer was required to pay the worker's costs of the compensation proceedings the workers verdict against the wrongdoer would be reduced by the amount of these costs, ie, in reality the worker would be deprived of the benefit of the Commission's order for costs made in his favour. Such a result could scarcely have been intended.
Paragraph (c) then is not to be construed to place the worker in any different position from that in which he is placed under para (a), and (b) must be construed to fit into this scheme. Consistency is achieved by limiting the indemnity in para (b) to compensation only." 
The trial judge applied similar reasoning to the construction of s.151Z. Its terms are as follows: "Division 5 - Miscellaneous provisions 
Recovery against both employer and stranger 
Z(1) If the injury for which compensation is payable under this Act was caused under circumstances creating a liability in some person other than the worker's employer to pay damages in respect of the injury, the following provisions have effect: the worker may take proceedings both against that person to recover damages and against any person liable to pay compensation under this Act for payment of that compensation, but is not entitled to retain both damages and compensation; if the worker recovers firstly compensation and secondly those damages, the worker is liable to repay out of those damages the amount of compensation which a person has paid in respect of the worker's injury under this Act, and the worker is not entitled to any further compensation; if the worker firstly recovers those damages the worker is not entitled to recover compensation under this Act; if the worker has recovered compensation under this Act, the person by whom the compensation was paid is entitled to be indemnified by the persons liable to pay those damages (being an indemnity to the amount of those damages); if any payment is made under the indemnity and, at the time of the payment, the worker has not obtained judgment for damages against the person paying under the indemnity, the payment is, to the extent of its amount, a defence to proceedings by the worker against that person for damages; and if any payment is made under the indemnity and, at the time of the payment, the worker has obtained judgment for damages against the person paying under the indemnity (but judgment has not been satisfied), the payment, to the extent of its amount, satisfies the judgment; all questions relating to matters arising under this section are, in default of agreement, to be settled by action or, with the consent of the parties, by the Compensation Court." 
It is not to be thought that the legislature, presumably aware of Lee J's decision in Dairy Farmers, which had stood since 1966 and which protected the fund awarded to the worker for damages for personal injuries from the employer's costs of compensation proceedings, intended when enacting s.151Z in terms not dissimilar to those in s.64 under the old Act, without clear language to diminish the amount of damages payable to the worker for his injuries by the amount of the employer's costs incurred in contesting the worker's compensation claims.

The scheme of s.151Z(1) makes clear that the indemnity referred to in subsection (d) does not include costs. Subsection 1 deals with all possible situations concerning payment of compensation and damages. The worker may sue both the employer and the tortfeasor, the employer only or the tortfeasor only. Subclause (d) provides a statutory indemnity. Payments under that indemnity may be made prior to or after the worker has obtained judgment against the tortfeasor. In the first instance, dealt with by subsections (a), and (c), it is provided that the worker cannot retain both damages and compensation (subsection (a)). If compensation is recovered ahead of damages from the tortfeasor then the worker must repay to the employer from the damages so recovered the amount of the compensation so paid by the employer (subsection (b)). In such circumstances the worker would generally be entitled to recover from the employer the costs of bringing the compensation proceedings, however the statutory repayment obligation imposed by subsection is to repay only the compensation received, not the legal costs properly incurred in obtaining an award for such compensation. No provision is made by subsection (b) for payments of either the worker's or the employer's costs of the compensation proceedings. The worker, by recovering both damages and compensation as a result of two successful proceedings, will generally be entitled to his costs in each proceeding. The compensation referred to in subsection (b) is the amount of monetary benefit paid to the worker under the
Act and does not include legal costs (see definition in s.3(1)). If, however, the worker recovers damages ahead of compensation, he may not recover compensation (subsection (c)). The worker will receive both damages and generally his costs of proceedings to recover them. Thus the tortfeasor bears the loss and the costs associated with recovering that loss.

Subsection (d) addresses a third situation where the worker has recovered compensation. That may be simply by payment by the employer, or by the making of an award, either by consent or resulting from contested proceedings. The worker may elect not to sue the tortfeasor, or if the tortfeasor is sued, the proceedings may be discontinued after receipt of compensation. In those circumstances, subsection (d) provides a statutory indemnity to the employer from the tortfeasor. The indemnity is in respect of compensation which has been paid. "Compensation" is to be given its defined meaning in s.3(1)(f).
There is no basis for reading "compensation (which) was paid" in subsection as though it included the words "together with costs incurred by the employer or paid to the worker in respect of proceedings brought by the worker to obtain such compensation".

Subsections (e) and (e1) deal with the situation where the tortfeasor pays under the indemnity to the employer. If the worker has not obtained judgment against the tortfeasor, that payment under the indemnity may be pleaded, to the extent of its amount, as a defence to those proceedings. If judgment has been obtained but not satisfied it is partially satisfied by such payment. In each instance the payment under the indemnity refers to the payment made pursuant to subsection (d) which is limited to the amount of compensation payments and does not include legal costs.

It follows in my view that Twigg DCJ was correct in rejecting the claim for legal costs.
 
CLAIM FOR INTEREST 
The employer has claimed interest on three sums, namely the amount of compensation paid by it to the worker, the costs paid by it to the worker in respect of the worker's compensation proceedings, and the amount of costs incurred by it in defending the worker's compensation proceedings. The claim for interest was grounded on common law principles as well as upon s.83A [District Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/).

From the date upon which the employer pays compensation, it has a statutory right of indemnity against the tortfeasor given by s.151Z(1)(d). Hope JA in
Howard Rotavator Pty Limited versus Wilson [(1987) 8 NSWLR 498] at 500, in dealing with the analogous situation under s.64(1), said: "In my opinion a different position rises under s.64(1)(b). The liability of the tortfeasor is again a statutory one. It does not arise independently of the statute, but the employer is given, by this paragraph, a statutory indemnity in respect of the compensation which he has paid. The ordinary rule in respect of indemnities is, as I would, understand it, correctly set out in
Halsbury's Laws of England, 4th ed, vol 20, par 315 at 173: `In law an action on a contract of indemnity does not normally lie until the promisee has paid the third person's claim. Where he has paid, the amount so paid constitutes a debt due to him from the promisor which, save in certain exceptional circumstances, he may recover with interest in an action ...' 
I see no reason why that rule should not be applied to the liability which arises by virtue of the statute under s64(1)(b). The employer, assuming that the circumstances described in the paragraph are satisfied, has a right of action in respect of each payment and, prima facie, his right to interest is a right to interest from that time, that is, the time of payment." 
I respectfully agree.

Hope JA then went on to say: "In particular, although it may not be necessary to decide it for the purposes of the present case, I would conclude that interest paid pursuant to an order for interest made by a District Court judge in proceedings under <case>(b) would not be a payment made under the indemnity for the purposes of s (1)(c). The amount of interest is not the subject of the indemnity; the amount of interest is the subject of and arises from an order made by the judge of the District Court pursuant to the [District Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/), <case>." 
That section expressly provides, in subsection (1A), that interest may be awarded where the whole or part of the debt or demand is paid within the currency of the proceedings.

It follows that the power to award interest does not depend upon the debt becoming the subject of a judgment. Where an employer sues a tortfeasor to enforce its indemnity pursuant to <case>(d) (which is not relevantly different from <case>(b) of the old Act), and where the tortfeasor does not pay the amount claimed prior to judgment, the District Court is, in the event it finds for the employer, empowered under <case> to make an award of interest in favour of the employer. Likewise, if the tortfeasor pays the amount claimed after service of a statement of claim but prior to judgment the employer can maintain its claim for interest. Where an award is made, it is made pursuant to the statutory power of the court and the interest is not, strictly speaking, an amount ordered to be paid under the indemnity.

Stated succinctly, the payment of interest is not a payment made under subsection (d) or pursuant to it. The claim for interest is a statutory claim to reimburse the employer who has paid compensation for being deprived of its money pending payment of that compensation by the tortfeasor. Although Twigg
DCJ ordered a verdict for the defendant, his Honour's reasoning seems to be consistent with that which I have expressed and which entitles the employer appellant to an award of interest against the tortfeasor from the date of payment of compensation until the date of reimbursement by the tortfeasor. The parties should agree upon the amount of that interest. The employer not having an entitlement to recover legal costs from the tortfeasor, these sums do not attract interest.

As the employer is entitled to claim interest under <case> it is unnecessary to consider the alternative common law claim.

The proceedings should be stood over until a date to be fixed to enable the parties to bring in short minutes reflecting these reasons.

That means there should be a verdict for the plaintiff employer against the tortfeasor in the District Court action and accordingly, subject to the Rules, that should attract an order for costs.

It follows, in my view, that the appeal should be upheld, the orders of Twigg
DCJ set aside, judgment be entered in favour of the appellant for the amount of interest as agreed and, subject to the rules, an order for costs. The respondent should pay the appellant's costs of the appeal but should have, if qualified, a certificate under the Suitors Fund Act.

HANDLEY JA: In this appeal I have had the benefit of reading in draft form the reasons for judgment of Clarke JA. His Honour sets out the relevant facts, the history of the proceedings, and the relevant legislation, and there is no need for me to repeat these matters. I agree with his Honour's reasons, but will add additional reasons of my own.

Section 151 Z was added to the [Workers Compensation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) when common law rights for injured workers were restored by Acts No 133 of 1989 and of 1990. This section can be traced to <case> of the Workers' Compensation
Act 1926, as amended in 1942, and thence to the original 1926 Act and the
Workmen's Compensation Act 1906 (UK).

Under the 1906 Act and the 1926 Act until its amendment in 1942 a worker tortiously injured by a third party in circumstances creating an entitlement to compensation had to elect between compensation and damages. If he recovered compensation he lost his right to damages and vice versa. In such circumstances an employer who had paid compensation to the injured worker was entitled pursuant to <case> (b) to be "indemnified" by the tortfeasor. This provision reproduced the substance of <case> (2) of the 1906 Act in practically identical language.

Decisions in England appear to have established the employer's right to be indemnified for costs reasonably incurred in defending compensation proceedings brought by the injured worker. See Great Northern Railway Co v
Whitehead (1902) 4 WCC 39; Daily News Ltd versus McNamara & Co Limited [(1913) 7 BWCC 11]; Nettleingham & Co Limited versus Powell [(1913) 3 KB ] CA at 211. See also Halsbury 2nd Ed (1940) Vol 34 "Workmen's Compensation", p and Cockatoo Docks and Engineering Co Pty Limited versus Dalgety & Co Ltd <case>; [(1939) 39 SR 295] where the employer's claim to be indemnified in respect of costs was not disputed. When these cases were decided, the enforcement of the employer's indemnity could not disadvantage an injured worker.

This situation was altered by the 1942 amendments which enabled an injured worker to recover compensation and then damages, but prevented him retaining both. Section 64 (c) added in 1942 provided that payments by the tortfeasor under the indemnity "shall be, to the extent of the amount of such payment, a satisfaction of the judgment for damages". At the same time <case> (a) was amended to provide that if the worker first recovered compensation then damages "he shall be liable to repay to his employer out of such damages the amount of compensation which the employer has paid".

The paragraph conferring on the employer a right of indemnity against the tortfeasor was not directly amended in 1942, but thereafter it formed part of a different scheme for adjusting the burden of compensation between employer tortfeasor and worker. Costs paid to a worker's solicitors are not compensation. If the employer's indemnity extended to costs of compensation proceedings payable to the worker's solicitors or incurred by the employer their reimbursement would be payments "under" the indemnity for the purposes of <case> (c), and if the indemnity was enforced before the damages were recovered those expenses would ultimately be payable out of the worker's damages. However if the worker recovered damages before the employer enforced its indemnity, the worker's only obligation was to refund to the employer "the amount of compensation which the employer has paid" (s 64 (a)), and he would have no obligation to reimburse the employer for costs incurred in compensation proceedings.

Parliament could not have intended that a worker's damages should be reduced by amounts paid by the employer for the costs of compensation proceedings brought by the worker. Even less can it have intended that <case> should confer such an entitlement on the employer if it enforced its rights to indemnity before the worker recovered damages but not otherwise. The Court should adopt a construction which would prevent <case> operating in such a capricious and unjust manner. The solution, accepted by Lee J in Dairy Farmers Co-op Milk Co v Parker (1966) 85 W.N. Pt 1 43, which in my judgment was correctly decided, was to construe the indemnity conferred by <case> (b) in the altered context created by the 1942 amendments as limited to the actual compensation paid by the employer. Section 64 (a), (b) and (c) were re-enacted in <case> Z (b), (d) and (e) substantially unchanged for present purposes and there is a presumption of some weight that the decision of Lee J was thereby endorsed by Parliament . See Re Alcan Australia ex parte FIMEE <case>; [(1994) 181 CLR 96] at 106. I agree therefore that the appeal fails in respect of the costs incurred by the appellant in the Compensation Court proceedings.

The appellant also sued to recover interest on compensation payments made to the worker computed from the dates of such payments. If the employer was entitled to such interest pursuant to its right of indemnity under <case> Z (d) (formerly <case> (b)) then the burden of such interest would ultimately be borne by the worker out of his damages if the case fell within <case> Z (e) (formerly <case> (c)), but not when the case fell within 151 Z (1)(b) (formerly <case> (a)), with the difficulties previously discussed which that construction would entail. Such a view of the 1926 Act was however rejected in
Howard Rotavator Pty Limited versus Wilson [(1987) 8 NSWLR 498] where Hope
JA, delivering the principal judgment for the Court, said at 501: "... interest paid pursuant to an order for interest made by a District Court
Judge in proceedings under <case> (1)(b) would not be a payment made under the indemnity for the purposes of <case> (1)(c). The amount of interest is not the subject of the indemnity; the amount of interest is the subject of and arises from an order made by the Judge of the District Court pursuant to the [District Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/) <case> A".

This decision may also be taken to have been endorsed by Parliament when it enacted [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/s151.html)
Z.

Where the worker receives compensation payments with interest for late payment, such interest may be compensation for the purposes of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/s151.html) Z but no such question arises in this appeal. The employer's right to indemnity under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/s151.html) Z (d) accrues as and when each payment of compensation is made. See AG v
Arthur Ryan Automobiles Ltd [(1938) 2 KB 16] CA. Prima facie therefore the employer being entitled under the statute to recover sums so paid as from the dates of payment is entitled to recover them with interest under <case> A.

With respect I agree with the reasoning and conclusions of Hope JA in
Howard Rotavator Pty Limited versus Wilson.

Where a tortfeasor indemnifies the employer for compensation payments to the worker before the workers recovers damages, then on the authority of the case last cited the tortfeasor is only entitled to credit against the damages awarded for the compensation for which the employer has been indemnified, and not for any interest awarded in respect of such compensation.

In cases such as the present, the worker recovers damages which will ordinarily include amounts for pre-judgment interest. This will be reduced to reflect any payments of weekly compensation which diminished the worker's pre- trial economic loss. See Batchelor versus Burke <case>; [(1981) 148 CLR 448] and to reflect any payments of lump sum compensation which diminished his non-economic loss. See Haines versus Bendall <case>; [(1991) 172 CLR 60.] Thus compensation payments by the employer benefit the tortfeasor by diminishing the pre-judgment interest he must pay to the injured worker. In such circumstances there will be no substantial injustice to the tortfeasor if he is ordered to repay the compensation with interest, although there could be arguments about the relevant rate or rates.

Where the employer has not enforced its right of indemnity before the worker recovers damages, the worker is bound to repay the employer any compensation previously received up to the amount of his damages. However, as Hope JA said in Howard Rotavator Pty Limited versus Wilson at 500, the employer's cause of action in such a case does not arise until the worker receives his damages.
Accordingly interest would not commence to run against the worker until that time and the employer will be worse off than if he had enforced the indemnity before the worker recovered damages. The tortfeasor however will still have the benefit of the reduced award for pre-judgment interest in favour of the worker.

The appellant employer sought to avoid this detriment by suing to enforce its indemnity while it still had a cause of action against the respondent tortfeasor. When the worker recovered damages the employer could no longer obtain judgment on its indemnity. Originally there was no power to award interest under provisions such as <case> A unless the Court also gave judgment for the principal. See President of India versus La Pintada Compania [(1985) AC .] This gap in <case> was closed by the addition of [ss ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/s1.html) (A) which provides: "Where - 
Proceedings have been commenced for the recovery of a debt or liquidated demand; and 
Payment of the whole or part of the debt or demand is made during the currency of the proceedings and prior to or without judgment being given in respect of the debt or demand, the Court may order that interest be paid at such rate as it thinks fit on the whole or any part of the money paid for the whole or any part of the period between the date when the cause of action arose and the date of the payment".

In this case the tortfeasor with the authority of the worker repaid the compensation to the employer direct and hence in law the payment was probably made by the worker. It is not clear at first sight that sub <case>(1A) applies where the payment which destroys the plaintiff's cause of action is received from a third party and not from the defendant. However the sub section is expressed in general terms, and any restriction appears to require words to be read into it. The matter was not fully argued, but I see no reason for denying the application of the power in this case even if the payment was made by a third party.

The final question concerns the effect of the judgment recovered by the worker against the respondent in the light of the decision in Watson versus Newcastle
Council <case>; [(1962) 106 CLR 426.] 
The respondent submitted that Watson was authority for the proposition that the employer's right of indemnity ceased when the worker recovered damages.
Since the employers cause of action lapsed before its action could be heard there had to be a verdict for the defendant. No such question arose in Howard
Rotavator Pty Limited versus Wilson where the worker did not pursue his common law rights against the tortfeasor.

In Watson's case the worker's dependants were paid [sterling]2,700 compensation by the council as his employer. They then recovered [sterling]2,700 damages from the tortfeasor Watson. The council did not pursue its rights against the dependants to recover the compensation, but sued the tortfeasor to enforce its indemnity. The Full Court by majority upheld the employer's claim, but the High Court by majority (Menzies J dissenting) held that it failed.

The reasons of the majority differed significantly. McTiernan J held that in the events that had happened the employer's only right of recoupment was from the dependants to the extent of the damages recovered, and that the tortfeasor had no further liability to indemnify the employer (432, 433, 434). Kitto J considered that the employer's right of indemnity survived the recovery of damages by the dependants, but thereafter was limited to such compensation, if any, as was not recoverable from the dependants (436). Taylor J held that the recovery of damages by the worker terminated the employer's right to indemnity, and that thereafter its only right to reimbursement was from the dependants (440, 441), and the judgment of Windeyer J was to the like effect .

Thus Taylor and Windeyer JJ held that the employer's right of indemnity terminated when the worker recovered damages. McTiernan J came to the same conclusion because the tortfeasor was not required "to bear a financial burden outside the liability for damages" (433). In practice the view of McTiernan J always leads to the same result as those of Taylor and Windeyer JJ. On the other hand the view of Kitto J is not part of the majority ratio.

Watson's case therefore decides that the recovery of damages by this worker from the respondent terminated the appellant's right to be indemnified under the Act. That right however was limited to the compensation it had actually paid and as Howard Rotavator Pty Limited versus Wilson demonstrates it did not extend to any interest on that compensation which might be awarded under <case>
A.

In my judgment therefore the appellant, having had a cause of action when it commenced these proceedings which it lost when its compensation payments were repaid, is entitled to an order under <case> A (1A) for the payment of interest on its compensation payments for the periods between payment and recoupment.
The parties should be given an opportunity to agree upon the amount of such interest and to bring in short minutes.
 * * * 
