

Dalysmith Corporation (Aust) Pty Ltd versus Cray Personnel Pty Ltd (No 2)
Matter No 2789/96 [1997] NSWSC 411 (18 September 1997) 
Last Updated: 4 March 1998 
DALYSMITH CORPORATION (AUST) PTY LTD versus CRAY PERSONNEL PTY LTD (NO 2) /96 September 1997 
Young J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiffs, on the one hand, and the first defendant on the other hand, are in the field of selecting and placing labour. The second defendant was employed by the plaintiffs up until early 1996 under a contract which contained a covenant restricting his activities in the relevant field after termination of employment. 
For reasons which I gave on 14 April 1997, I found that the second defendant had breached the covenant in circumstances under which both he and the first defendant were liable either to pay damages or to give an account of profits.
Subsequently, the plaintiffs elected the remedy of damages and it is that matter that I am considering in these reasons.

I also said in the reasons that the defendants might at their option have an account of damages suffered since 1 December 1996 because of the continuation of an interlocutory injunction beyond that point. They have elected not to pursue this matter. I also found that the plaintiffs were entitled to an account of profits in respect of documents which were taken from their possession. This matter also has not been pursued.

In my earlier judgment, I found that there was evidence indicative of the probability of damages as that expression was used by Rath, J in Enkelmann v Glissan (1982) 2 BPR 9640, 9643. I did not intend by that statement to say there either was or was not damages flowing from the relevant breaches; I merely made the finding that the conditions existed that warranted an inquiry as to damages.

The inquiry was conducted by me on 5 August 1997, Mr R W Cameron of counsel appearing for the plaintiffs and Mr C R C Newlinds appearing for the first, second and fourth defendants.

It was common ground that I was able to look at any of the evidentiary material that was before me at the hearing. However, Mr Cameron made it clear that he relied on Exhibits PX02, PX03 and PX04, together with two new exhibits which were tendered on 5 August, PX20, a bundle of documents discovered by the defendants, and PX21, accounts kept by the defendants pursuant to an interlocutory order. He also relied on the affidavit of Terese McCowen of 1
August 1997, who is the financial controller of the plaintiffs. Mr Cameron also sought to rely on the affidavit of K M Batcheldor of 25 February 1997. I rejected this affidavit at an earlier stage of the proceeding on the basis that the "history" in the affidavit was not proved, and the calculations done by Mr Batcheldor, an accountant, were just pure mathematics and not a matter for expertise. I continued to reject the tender of the affidavit when it was sought to be read on 5 August, though I indicated that I would use Mr
Batcheldor's calculations as an aide memoire. Mr Cameron also handed the court a copy of annexure "B" to Miss McCowen's affidavit which had certain pencil calculations on it, which I have marked MI22, which will be left with the papers. This, again, is being used as an aide memoire.

Mr Newlinds, who called no evidence on the inquiry, strongly submitted that the plaintiffs had not shown that any loss had been caused by the breach. He reminded me of what the High Court had said in Sellars versus Adelaide Petroleum
NL <case>; [(1994) 179 CLR 332], 355, viz, "Damages for deprivation of a commercial opportunity ... should be ascertained by reference to the court's assessment of the prospects of success of that opportunity had it been pursued. ...
 "... Hence the applicant must prove on the balance of probabilities that he or she has sustained some loss or damage. However, in a case such as the present, the applicant shows some loss or damage was sustained by demonstrating that the contravening conduct caused the loss of a commercial opportunity which had some value (not being a negligible value), the value being ascertained by reference to the degree of probabilities or possibilities." 
In the present case, Mr Newlinds says that what the plaintiffs are really saying is that "If before the breach we are doing business and are now not doing that business but you are doing it, you have caused damage by your breach." This is an inadequate way of proving of a case of damages and there are several pieces of evidence which point the other way.

There is no evidence, Mr Newlinds says, that the plaintiffs could have done the business that was done by the defendants if the breach had not occurred.

The work affected was the work at the Rydalmere branch of the plaintiffs' enterprise, which on the evidence had only been open a year and that was conceded by Mr Smith, the principal of the plaintiffs, not to have been long enough to develop a close relationship with the customers of that branch.

The evidence showed that in this particular business, customers come and go, and indeed, they may "use" more than one employment agency, using different companies for different facets of their work.

None of the major clients had traded with the plaintiffs since December even though Mr Crowe, the second defendant, continued to work through until March 1996. Mr Newlinds points out there is no allegation that in that period Mr Crowe was not doing his job properly with the plaintiffs. Mr
Newlinds acknowledges that Bristol Myers, one of the clients, was an exception to this proposition, but Bristol Myers only involved one worker on one site which the plaintiffs retained.

Other persons beside Mr Crowe were also in breach of their covenants though they were not pursued by the plaintiffs. It is almost impossible to differentiate between any damage inflicted on the plaintiffs by Messrs Hall and Judd from that inflicted by Mr Crowe. It is clear that some of the customers who passed to the defendants were connected with Mr Crowe, but there is no evidence as to which customers had contact with Messrs Hall or Judd.

There was no evidence that the employees in breach were replaced in the plaintiffs' enterprise except Mr Crowe and he was only replaced after a six months gap. Furthermore, there is no evidence as to the quality of Mr Crowe's replacement.

The evidence showed that there was virtually no contact between the
Rydalmere branch and the customers whom the defendants are alleged to have taken between December 1995 and May 1996.

There is a high level of staff turnover in this industry.

At least six of the ten main clients taken by the defendants were persons who were introduced to the plaintiffs by Mr Crowe. It is thus not surprising that they would sever their connection with the plaintiffs at the same time as
Mr Crowe left even if they did not take their business to the defendants.
Indeed, six of the customers gave sworn evidence that they only did business with the plaintiffs because Mr Crowe was there.

As to Bristol Myers, one of the biggest clients, there has been no change because Bristol Myers only did business with the plaintiffs over one employee and that situation still continues.

There was a lot of evidence though no finding yet, that the morale of the plaintiffs' business was in any event at rock bottom just before the defendants left its employ.

The plaintiffs did not really answer any of these submissions, but stuck to their case that they had not made the "sales", the defendants had made "sales" to persons who were previously the plaintiffs' customers, therefore damages followed as night followed day.

I have found what Ogus on Damages (Butterworths London 1973) says at p of value in resolving this case. He says of injury to a business interest resulting in loss of profits, "The amount of profits made by the defendant may usefully be taken as the starting point in the quantification process. But the court must then reduce the sum by an appropriate part to represent the fact that the plaintiff would not have procured all of the defendant's custom either because a certain proportion of the successful dealing resulted from the defendant's own special exertions, or because he could have made part of the sales without committing a tort, or because other competitors would have captured a share of the market. The scales may be tipped in the reverse direction by other factors: for example, that as a result of the defendant's unlawful competition the plaintiff had to lower his prices in order to minimize his loss of profits ...".

One must keep, however, clearly in mind that there are two questions to be addressed, (a) has it been shown on the balance of probabilities that any loss was caused to the plaintiff by the defendant's breach? and (b) if the answer to (a) is yes, how much? The passage from Ogus really deals only with the second question.

There is no doubt on the material that the defendants did make sales to people who were customers of the plaintiffs during 1995. The sales can be put into three groups, (a) the sales to Bristol Myers; (b) the sales to those persons who were introduced to the plaintiffs' business by Mr Crowe; and (c) all other sales.

As to Bristol Myers, the evidence clearly was (T39) that the relationship between the plaintiffs and Bristol Myers involved the placement of one person who is still there. Mr Smith gave evidence that he did not suggest that
Bristol Myers was not using other employment agencies during the relevant period and they just happened to have one person placed through the plaintiffs.

Even though the defendants have been dealing with Bristol Myers, I do not consider that the evidence allows me to come to the conclusion that if the defendants had not breached their contract, any other business from Bristol
Myers would have flowed to the plaintiffs. Accordingly, I cannot see how I can find any damages in respect of Bristol Myers.

As to category (b), I am not completely clear as to who the six clients are, but they certainly include the persons who are described in Miss McCowen's schedule as CP, SC, OP and M, probably they also include RC whom Mr Crowe claimed was a person introduced by him though Mr Smith had said that the plaintiffs had dealt with RC off and on over ten years. I cannot see on the balance of probabilities how the mere fact that these people traded with the defendants after Mr Crowe left the plaintiffs' employ can of itself show that the plaintiffs would have retained the client. Accordingly, in my view, no damages should be allowed in respect of those clients.

I now pass to the balance of the clients. As to these, the points made by Mr
Newlinds all have to my mind fair persuasive effect. I find indeed that on the evidence morale at the plaintiffs' Rydalmere branch was at a low ebb in
December, 1995 and that this factor plus the fact that there were few staff members to do the work were any offering is a significant matter. Again this is in a business where there are a lot of suppliers and where customers retain more than one company to satisfy their needs and tend to do business off and on. However, those factors do not seem to me to have such a profound effect that one can say that the plaintiffs have not demonstrated that any damage flowed from the defendants' breaches. Where one finds, as is the case here, that up until the end of 1995 customers did business with the plaintiffs and that in March 1996 and following they did business with the defendants, one can infer that, but for the defendants, some at least of their work would have passed through to the plaintiffs.

Accordingly, in my view even though I must say I was surprised that the evidence presented by the plaintiffs was not much stronger than it was, the plaintiffs have established on the balance of probabilities that some loss was suffered as a result of the defendants' breach.

Accordingly, the exercise I must now do is to work out from MI22 what sales were made by the defendants to clients other than Bristol Myers, CP, SC, OP, M and RC, then consider whether had the plaintiffs made those sales at the same rate, what their profit margin would have been, and then discount the resultant figure by a very substantial percentage to deal with the factors that Mr Newlinds has enumerated and I have already set out.

MI22 shows that the plaintiffs claim a total of $95,250.88. This figure is derived by taking the work done by the defendants for former clients of the plaintiffs between February 9 and 31 December 1996, taking the rate of profit in respect of each client that the plaintiffs would normally have derived from that particular customer, and thus assessing the profits that they would have made had the plaintiffs had that work.

A number of things should be said about MI22 and about the evidence which supports it. The first is that I held that the covenant ceased to be effective on 1 December so that one must exclude the figures for December. Excluding these, and excluding the clients that I have already mentioned, means that there are 49 sales from which profit might have been derived by the plaintiffs.

The fact that differential rates applied to each customer is probably a warning that one should not be too precise about the moneys that the plaintiffs might have earned. However, this can be dealt with in a general discount factor. I believe that if I average the 49 transactions, I get an average percentage of 28.5% and I think it is tidier to use this approximation rather than to apply a rate to each client.

Adding up the 49 claims, one gets a total of $61,484.50. 28.5% of this is $17,523.

The next question is what discount rate should be applied? 
In my view, a very heavy discount rate should be applied because of the factors mentioned by Mr Newlinds which were really unanswered and would have an effect on the profit. Some of these factors such as the fact that the staff weren't replaced show that overheads weren't incurred; others go to the chances of the plaintiffs actually getting the work. I would think that were it not for the fact that I have already taken into account some of the factors outlined by Mr Newlinds in removing from consideration Bristol Myers and six other clients, the discount factor would be somewhere between 70 and 75 per cent. However, I do not wish to over-compensate for those facts, so I will adjust that figure back from 72.5 to 62.5 per cent. It follows that the plaintiffs are entitled to a verdict of three/eighths of $17,523, namely $6,571.

I merely publish these reasons. There will be need for the plaintiffs to bring in short minutes. I believe that I have now dealt with all aspects of the case other than the question of costs. This is on the assumption that the cross claims are now academic and can simply be dismissed or otherwise disposed of without further argument.

On the question of costs, the plaintiffs have basically succeeded so I have been assuming that there would need to be some orders for costs in their favour. Clearly the plaintiffs are not entitled to costs in respect of Mr
Batcheldor's affidavit or the preparation involved in that. Other matters may be up for debate.

Because it may well be that 15 to 30 minutes might be needed to discuss the matter of costs and the form of the orders, I have tentatively listed the matter before me on Monday 27 October 1997 at 9.50 am, a day when I am the
Duty Judge and may have half an hour to devote to this matter. If that date is unsuitable to counsel, provided that they contact my Associate not later than
Tuesday 21 October, it may be that an alternative date can be arranged.
 * * * 
