

David versus David Matter No 3788/97 [1998] NSWSC 3 (4 February 1998) 
Last Updated: 19 March 1998 `

JEAN NELLY REA DAVID - BY HER TUTOR THE PROTECTIVE COMMISSIONER versus JOHN JOSEPH HENRY DAVID` ` 3788/97` `4 February 1998` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` `JUDGMENT` 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff/cross-defendant, who is represented by her tutor The Protective Commissioner, is the mother of the defendant. The plaintiff's estate was made subject to the Protected [Estates Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea103/) as and from 31 March 1992. The plaintiff is the registered proprietor of real property at 6-8 The Boulevarde, Cheltenham. There is erected a house on number 6 in which the defendant/cross-claimant, his wife and two children are currently living. Number 8 is adjoining vacant land. 
There have been previous proceedings between the parties in respect of the property, but, apart from noting that I am aware of them, it is not necessary to go into great detail as to the outcome of those proceedings.

The plaintiff by her statement of claim seeks judgment for possession. It is clear that all matters entitling the plaintiff to judgment for possession have been pleaded out, other than the matters which are contained in the defendant's defence and cross-claim.

The defence and cross-claim assert that there is an irrevocable licence entitling the defendant to remain in possession and so defeat the plaintiff's claim in ejectment. Alternatively there is a constructive trust arising from what is said to be the facts and circumstances of expenditure by the defendant of an amount in excess of $700,000 from 1983 to present on the property.
Alternatively, again it is said that following a conversation between the plaintiff and the defendant in mid-1988 (which conversation is set out in paragraph 23 of the defendant's affidavit of 28 May 1997) by virtue of the doctrine of proprietary estoppel the defendant is entitled to remain in possession or the defendant is entitled to a fee simple in equity or the defendant is entitled to an equitable charge.

The subject property has been valued and it would appear that it is worth just over a million dollars. It is subject to two charges; a mortgage on which the defendant has been making the repayments for some time and in respect of which there is about $180,000 owing, and a charge for land tax. The plaintiff's equity in the property is accordingly worth in round terms about $800,000.

The story really begins in 1983 when the defendant incorporated a company,
Communication Technology Pty Ltd. Initially that company's business grew rapidly and the defendant needed more working capital. The defendant approached his father and mother and because they were prepared to secure the borrowing with a registered first mortgage over property 3-7 Bridge Street,
Epping, the National Bank granted finance.

Shortly afterwards, there was a further transaction whereby $200,000 was borrowed by the defendant's father and mother from a company, Hunter BNZ
Finance Ltd, and was secured by registered first mortgage over 6-8 The
Boulevarde, Cheltenham and by second mortgage over 3-7 Bridge Street, Epping.

The exact nature of this transaction is unclear. Although there is relatively little evidence on the matter that was actually admitted, the defendant would have the court accept that it was an arm's length transaction in which his father, who he claims was an astute businessman, was given 75 percent of the shares in that company in return for his investment. The company, as did at least one other company controlled by the defendant, went into liquidation and the value of any "investment" made by the defendant's father became valueless.
The only comment that the defendant made about that was that so did the defendant's own investment in the company.

The defendant's father died in July 1986. About this time Hunter BNZ Finance sought to sell the property at The Boulevarde, Cheltenham and there were also enforcement noises being made by the National Australia Bank. In order to protect the properties the defendant organised refinancing so that the properties were made the subject of new mortgages and were not sold up.

The defendant then went into other business ventures. One was a company, of which he says in paragraph 20 of his affidavit that he was the de facto general manager. The share register actually showed the shareholders as his mother and his sister, who were also the directors, but this was a company which was the vehicle for the defendant's business venture.

The defendant continued to be involved in business ventures which were initially successful, but ultimately unsuccessful and continued to maintain quite high borrowings secured over his parents' properties.

The defendant says that in mid-1988 he was "about to receive $250,000 ... from the sale of a company he wholly owned called Australnet Pty Ltd". He says that at that time a conversation took place between himself and the plaintiff as follows: "PLAINTIFF: 'You have already spent a lot of money on the properties and the only way we can hold on to them is for you to pay for whatever is required.
You should transfer them into your name'.

DEFENDANT: 'I will do whatever I can to preserve the properties but I can't transfer them into my name until the mortgage is paid out. In any event, I don't want them in my name now because if my other business ventures require guarantees from me the properties could be put at risk. Perhaps some time in the future when this mess is sorted out I can get proper advice as to how I can hold the properties and protect them from attack by creditors'." 
The defendant says he received $250,000 from the person he described as "the purchaser of Australnet Ltd" and in paragraph 24 of his affidavit, I think, says that he paid $215,000 to various mortgagees over his parents' properties.

He then says he owned another company called Novacor Pty Ltd and received moneys when that company sold certain equipment in August 1988 and paid a further $185,224.77 which reduced the amount owing under the mortgages on the properties.

When the loan on 3-7 Bridge Street was due for repayment it was not able to be repaid and the property was sold. However, in the meantime rents were received, some of which were used to pay either capital or interest on the mortgages.

The defendant says that he did renovations on 6 The Boulevarde, including new kitchen, flooring, ceiling, a new stove, dishwasher and sink, new carpet, and relocated the laundry and these renovations and repairs totalled over $35,000.
A few supporting documents have been tendered, but certainly nowhere near what one would expect to be available to substantiate that claim. However, there does not appear to be any contrary evidence that this work was actually done, whatever its cost might have been.

The plaintiff suffered a stroke in August 1991 and her estate was, at, it would appear, the insistence of the defendant's sister put in the charge of
The Protective Commissioner from March 1992. Since then there have been continuous debates between the two, the Commissioner seeking to recover the assets and the defendant resisting, and this included the litigation to which
I have already referred. It is clear that relations between the parties are not good.

At present the defendant and his wife are living in the property with their children and an appropriate notice to determine any licence was served on 27
August 1996. The plaintiff's position is that she has a judgment against her for income tax for $190,000 and she is said to owe considerable moneys for land tax. The defendant says as to that that there should not have been any land tax because he was in occupation of the property as his principal home.
Notwithstanding, there is a liability for land tax and the plaintiff is currently 90 years old, living in the Chesalong Nursing Home at Beecroft and her sole source of income is an aged pension of $428 per fortnight.

The evidence suggests that the state of health of the plaintiff is so poor at the moment that she is not capable of making any further testamentary instrument and that the probability will be that her existing Will will be her last Will and Testament under which the defendant will receive, I think, 45 percent of her estate.

In those circumstances the defendant says that it was unconscionable for the plaintiff to make the statements that she did in mid-1988 and to sit by while the defendant expended at least $400,000 on the property in the expectation that the property would be his, and that she should not be allowed to renege from that arrangement.

Although the case was put on both the basis of constructive trust and proprietary estoppel, there is no essential difference in the analysis that needs to be made. The conversation in mid-1988 and the action that followed are significant.

One of the problems identified in this case is that the cross-claimant's principal affidavit of 28 May 1997 was a very defective affidavit and a large amount of the material was rejected either as being hearsay, conclusion or irrelevant. There was little supplementation of the material so that what was left was a very basic sketch.

As the onus is on the cross-claimant to prove that there was inappropriate conduct on behalf of the cross-defendant, any falling short on any element will mean that the cross-claimant has not established his cross-claim.
Essentially the cross-claimant has to establish that there was unconscionable conduct, there was reliance on that conduct and that he suffered detriment as a result of that reliance and that it would be equitable for an order to be made to eliminate that detrimental effect.

Although Mr Reddy, the solicitor for the defendant, occasionally spoke in terms of contract, it is clear that there is no contract in the instant case.
Analysing strictly the conversation that I have already set out (and in oral evidence the defendant was not able to do any better than what I have already set out), there was for past consideration an offer by the plaintiff to transfer the properties into the defendant's name. The defendant rejected this offer because it would not be in the interest of anyone in the family to have properties in his name able to be attacked by creditors.

The very most that one can get out of that conversation is that there was an understanding that the properties were going to be lost unless the defendant paid for whatever was required and that the plaintiff was willing at some stage in the future to transfer the properties into the defendant's name once the mortgage was paid out. The mortgage or the mortgage's successor never was paid out. The defendant did do something to preserve the properties. He was not able to preserve Bridge Street, Epping, though he says that was not his fault, but because he has refinanced and paid money on the mortgage most months on The Boulevarde Cheltenham he has suffered detriment.

The reply of Mr O'Loughlin, for the plaintiff/cross-defendant virtually the reply of The Protective Commissioner, was that there was no unconscionability, there was no promise, there was no reliance on any promise and there was no detriment.

The Australian approach to this sort of problem basically requires the court to look to see whether there is unconscionable conduct. Unconscionable conduct is hard to define but Deane J made it clear in the seminal decision of
Muschinski versus Dodds <case>; [(1985) 160 CLR 583] at 617 and following that it is not just because a particular judge thinks that something is unfair that there is unconscionable conduct, rather the judge must look to the decisions made by Courts of Equity over the century and assess whether what has happened in the instant case falls short of the standards of conduct which would compel Equity to leave the transaction undisturbed. Deane J says that one of the exercises that a court normally conducts is to look to see whether there is some precedent in Equity for giving relief in the instant type of situation. Thus, if there is a dissolution of a commercial partnership or a defacto-relationship type partnership there are a whole string of authorities to the effect that one party should not be able to benefit from a windfall that results because of the holding of the legal title.

One can look at the current situation in at least two different ways. First one can say that one looks at the position in mid-1988. At that time the reality was that the plaintiff's continued ownership and possession of the subject property was in jeopardy because of the mortgages to which she had consented or her husband had consented. She did not appear to have the wherewithal to extricate herself from that situation, and, accordingly, had to encourage the defendant to continue to pay the mortgage instalments.
Accordingly, he having done that, he should not suffer a detriment and she should not be permitted to renege on her promise.

If that is the correct analysis, at first sight the defendant would be entitled to some relief, but as I will indicate in a moment in the present case he would not get relief.

However, there is another scenario and that is the one that one does not look at the situation in mid-1988 completely free of what had happened before 1988.
One sees that in 1983 the parents had two properties which they had obtained from their own exerts and which were completely unencumbered. Their son had a business, the business needed finance, the plaintiff and her husband provided their properties to enable the son to raise finance, the son's business ventures were unsuccessful and this brought about the result that in mid-1988 the plaintiff was about to lose all her properties.

In that scenario a dutiful son would wish to repair the damage that he had caused to his parents by paying out the moneys that were needed to keep the roof over his parents' head. On that scenario there is no unconscionable conduct when before the mortgages were paid out and the mother suffers a mental illness she does not transfer the properties into his name. I prefer this second scenario as I believe that it is more in accordance with community behaviour than the first. However there is some doubt about this matter because continually throughout his evidence the defendant maintained his own position that he was completely innocent of causing any loss to his parents, that it was someone else's fault that his businesses always failed and that his father was an astute businessman who had consciously made a decision to invest in the defendant's business and had then made a loss.

The onus is on the defendant and I would have needed a lot more evidence than was presented that the father, who was an analytical chemist and retail chemist and who had acquired two properties from his chemist shop, was a person who had astute business ability to be able to know that he was not just helping his son but making a hopeless investment.

There was some legal and accounting advice given to the father and the plaintiff, but that was given by people who were also acting for the son. The son seeks to excuse this by saying the solicitor and accountant had previously acted for the father as well and that is how he came to know them, but certainly a situation where the son was mainly in control of the company and, as he says, that they were his companies, if a judge was to be satisfied that there was some astute investment by the parents he would need more evidence than what has been put before me here. The attempt to justify it by saying the father was involved in weekly or fortnightly business meetings really does not take the matter very much further at all.

Accordingly, it seems the cross-claim fails in limine. However I will deal with the alternative scenario that I first put.

Under the arrangement what was promised to the defendant? The statement by the mother was that the properties would be transferred into the defendant's name, but this he did not want, wisely.

What then was the mother to do? The highest the matter really goes is in the last sentence of what I have quoted: "Perhaps some time in the future when this mess is sorted out I can get proper advice as to how I can hold the properties. " 
That does not seem to me to be anywhere near an indication of common intent that the properties would in fact be the properties of the defendant from that moment. All it indicates is that there was a family arrangement that the defendant would pay and the matter would be reviewed "when this mess is sorted out", whatever that mess might be.

There is then the question that the defendant never at this stage said that he relied on what his mother did or said to make the payments that he did. This is not a case where reliance can be assumed because there are at least three reasons why the defendant might have been making the payment: (a) because he relied on what his mother said; (b) because he felt some regret as to the position that had come about; or (c) that he wants to keep a roof over his own head. Without some specific evidence that he relied on the statement made by his mother I do not think that I should infer it.

Nextly, did the cross-claimant suffer any detriment? The law is well analysed in the leading work on this subject Pawlowski in The Doctrine of
Proprietary Estoppel, Sweet and Maxwell London 1996. The concept of detriment is set out at pages 630 and following and the learned author clearly shows that there can be at least two categories of detriment: (a) expenditure of money; and (b) personal disadvantage. The case was purely put on the first of these so that that is the only matter I need consider.

What was the detriment by the expenditure of money? 
Before answering that question one must look at the other problem as to whether the doctrine of proprietary estoppel is an exception orientated remedy or a detriment orientated remedy. See Pawlowski at 77 and following. In
Australia the authorities now seem clear after Commonwealth versus Verwayen CLR 394 that it is a detriment orientated remedy.

Accordingly, one does not look particularly at what the complainant claims and expected would fall into his or her lap if the conduct or statement was well and truly performed, but rather the detriment that has been suffered by the claimant because he or she acted on the faith or conduct of the statement. The only time that an expectation will be fulfilled under this doctrine is if fulfilment of the expectation is not disproportionate to the detriment.
Accordingly, the only way in which the cross-claimant could succeed in having an interest in the fee simple is if it was demonstrated that the detriment suffered was relatively close to the value of the property.

There is difficulty in the concept that a person suffers a detriment if he or she expends money on a property which apparently is to be the subject of a gift. I analysed this type of situation in Beaton versus McDivitt [(1985) 13
NSWLR 134.] 
However, if the agreement was not fulfilled then the defendant has spent money. That expenditure of money has protected the plaintiff, but it has also protected the defendant and it has also protected the defendant's possession of the property over at least the last ten years.

It is difficult to determine on the scanty evidence before me just what the degree of detriment was or whether there was any at all. Doing the best I can, it would seem that the defendant spent the $390,000-odd that I have already mentioned on repaying capital of the mortgage. He has paid mortgage payments as they fell due of principal and interest over the last ten years. He has paid the rates and taxes and insurance and he and his family have also had the benefit of occupation.

The evidence is that in 1996 the rental of the property was $550 to $560 per week. However if one is going back to 1988 one would not allow quite so much rental. Even taking a figure of $375 a week rent for ten years would bring a figure of about $200,000. Accordingly, the detriment which the cross-claimant suffered at the very most would appear to be in the range of $200,000-250,000.
To give the defendant the fee simple on a property worth about $800,000 would be completely disproportionate to the detriment which he has suffered.
Accordingly, no order should be made that he receive the fee simple or a part of the fee simple.

As to irrevocable licence it does not seem to me this is a case where that is an appropriate way to meet any claim that the cross-claimant actually has. If something is not done, and there has been no offer by the defendant to do anything, the property may well be sold to pay the judgment debt for income tax of about $190,000. It is quite clear that any licence to occupy was to be subject to the registered proprietor being able to remove the licensee should financial stringencies mean that the property needed to be sold. No-one could read out of the conversation of mid-1988 that no matter what the situation was the defendant was entitled to remain in possession. Accordingly, it is not a case where there should be any order that there be an irrevocable licence or that the claim in ejectment should be dismissed for that reason.

If the cross-claimant is entitled to any remedy it would be an equitable charge for an amount to be determined by the Master. However, because there was either no unconscionable conduct or no promise or no reliance it is not a case to give any relief.

I have discussed with the legal representatives the appropriate order to make and accordingly I will make the following orders.

Judgment for possession for the plaintiff of the land comprised in folio identifiers 27/5440 and 28/5440 being land at 6-8 The Boulevarde, Cheltenham.

Order that a writ of possession issue.

Order that the execution of the writ be stayed until 14 April 1998 on condition that each month until execution the defendant pay $1,600 per calendar month, either to The Protective Commissioner or to the mortgagee.

Order that the cross-claim be dismissed.

Order that the defendant/cross-claimant pay the costs of the proceedings.

Order that the exhibits be returned.

Liberty to apply.
 * * * 
