

Kempsey District Hospital versus Thackham Nos Ca 40373/94 and Cl 10525/89
Workers' Compensation - Statutes - Law Reform [1995] NSWSC 43 (19 September )
 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
KIRBY P(1), MEAGHER(2) AND HANDLEY(3) JJA
HRNG
SYDNEY, 6 April 1995 #DATE 7:6:1995 #ADD 19:9:1995 
Counsel for the Appellant:    J J Graves with R Bellamy 
Solicitor for the Appellant:  
Dunhill, Madden Butler 
Counsel for the Respondent:   P J Deakin QC with P T Taylor 
Solicitor for the Respondent:  Stacks
ORDER
Appeal allowed; 
Orders of Newman J in the Common Law Division of the
Supreme Court set aside except as to costs;
In lieu thereof, order that the defendant pay to the plaintiff the sum of $186,681.42; 
This judgment to take effect as from 3 June 1994; 
Order that the respondent pay the appellant's costs of the appeal but to have a certificate under the [Suitors' Fund Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/) if otherwise so entitled; and 
Cross-appeal dismissed with costs.
JUDGE1
KIRBY P:  This appeal and cross-appeal come from a judgment entered by Newman
J in the Common Law Division of the Supreme Court. The question presented concerns the application of the [Workers Compensation Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) (the Act) to circumstances in which the respondent worker also had the right to common law damages.
 
A nurse is injured in the course of successive employments
Mr Murray Thackham (the respondent) was employed by the appellant in 1981 as a full time casual nurse.
For the purpose of this appeal, both parties accepted that the respondent was injured on 13 December 1981 in the course of his employment for the appellant, and that his injury was caused by the negligence of another employee of the hospital, for whose negligence the appellant was vicariously liable. It was accepted that the respondent injured his back when he assisted a patient of the hospital who was trying to pull himself out of his bed, the bed rail having negligently, and contrary to instructions, been left in the down position. The patient was a very heavy man.
Although the respondent felt an "unusual sensation" in his back at the time of this injury, he only realised the extent of his injury a few days later, when, whilst trying to shift timber, he found himself unable to straighten up. He received treatment from a chiropractor and then from a physiotherapist. Eventually the pain went away. He was able to return to his employment with the appellant in January 1982. He continued working there until 25 April 1982, during which time he suffered no further problems with his back.
Over the next six years the respondent worked as a registered nurse in
Sydney, and then as a lecturer in nursing. During this time he experienced muscle spasm in his lower back. However, he did not seek any treatment for these difficulties. In March 1988, the respondent commenced employment with the Hastings District Hospital at Port
Macquarie. Newman J found that the respondent immediately began to suffer pain in his lower back. That finding has not been challenged in this appeal. The pain persisted. It affected the respondent's work at the hospital, forcing him to seek medical attention.
Although the general practitioner who initially saw the respondent, Dr
Simpson, considered him fit for light duties, Dr Glascott, who subsequently examined him certified the respondent unfit for work. He remained off work until September 1988. During that time the respondent consulted Dr Page, an orthopaedic surgeon in Port Macquarie, who, in turn, referred him to Dr Y. A.
Ghabrial, an orthopaedic surgeon of Newcastle.
In September 1988 the respondent resumed his employment at the Hastings
District Hospital. However, when the back pain subsequently recurred, he found himself unable to continue with his work. In January 1989, the respondent's services were terminated by the Hastings District Hospital. He was then referred to two more orthopaedic surgeons, first Dr A. Hodgkinson and then
Dr
D. McDonald. Although the last named initially adopted non-surgical techniques to treat the respondent, he eventually decided that surgery was required. In
October 1989, Dr McDonald carried out surgery which involved a fusion from the fourth lumbar vertebra to the sacrum. The surgery provided some relief from the pain. However, in February 1990, to complicate things just a little more, the respondent was involved in a motor vehicle accident. The whip lash injury received by the respondent as a result of this accident caused a recurrence of the symptoms which he had felt prior to the operation. He took District Court proceedings in relation to the motor vehicle accident. Eventually he settled these proceedings for a sum of [S40](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s40.html),000, inclusive of costs. Fortunately, those proceedings have been treated as irrelevant. To introduce their complications would be intolerable.
 
The worker recovers compensation and sues one employer for damages
The respondent received workers' compensation payments during the time he was off work from the Hastings District Hospital and for some time thereafter.
The payments were made at the maximum rate then applicable under the [Workers
Compensation Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) from 24 March 1988 until 25 February 1991, excluding the period when he was back at work.
The respondent lectured in clinical nursing at the School of Health within the University of Newcastle between February 1991 and January 1992. However, he claimed that the practical demonstrations associated with these lecturing activities caused him to suffer muscle spasms and lower back pain. He eventually ceased his lecturing duties because of this pain. He decided to study to become a minister of religion of the Seventh
Day Adventist Church. To this end, he enrolled as a student of theology at the Avondale College, near
Sydney. He was expected to graduate from that institution in December 1994, from which time he anticipated that he would commence employment as a minister of religion, full time.
At the trial in February 1994 Newman J accepted that the respondent still suffered back pain from time to time, and that this pain would continue indefinitely. He found that the respondent was restricted in every day activities by his disability. Dr Seaton, who gave evidence in the respondent's case, suggested that there is a possibility that Mr Thackham might have to undergo further surgery in the future Newman J accepted that this was a possibility.
 
The findings of the Primary judge
Newman
J accepted the respondent's evidence as to the history of his back injury on 13 December 1981. He found that the appellant was vicariously liable for the common law negligence of the member of its staff who had left the bed rail down. He rejected the appellant's claim that the respondent had contributed by his own negligence to his damage. None of these findings is challenged in this appeal.
 .
His Honour rejected the claim of the appellant that any injury suffered by the respondent on 13 December 1981 had only a minor effect, and that this effect had subsided by January 1982. He preferred the opinion of Dr Seaton, who gave evidence in the respondent's case.
Dr Seaton was of the opinion that the respondent had suffered a rupture of his L4 / L5 disc in the 1981 incident. He stated that the L4 / L5 disc prolapse which Dr Ghabrial found had occured in 1988 and was related to the 1981 rupture. The sclerosis discovered in the L4 vertebra was also a direct consequence of the injury of December
Applying the law relating to novus actus interveniens expressed by the
High Court in Bennett versus Minister of Community Welfare <case>; [(1992) 176 CLR 408], these findings led Newman J to conclude that the events of March 1988 at the
Hastings District Hospital did not constitute a new intervening event so as to absolve the appellant of responsibility for the respondent's condition at the time of the trial. Although not so liable under the workers' compensation legislation, the appellant was responsible for the later damage by the principles of the common law.
Newman J found that, upon the proper construction of the Act, the
Hastings District Hospital alone was obliged to pay the respondent compensation under that Act. He then examined the decision of this Court in
Government Insurance Office of
New South Wales versus Warwick, Court of Appeal, 23
November 1993, unreported; (1993) NSWJB 124. He considered the effect which the workers' compensation payments had on the assessment of damages at common law. His Honour concluded that the decision in Warwick meant that, in assessing damages, he was obliged to take into account the fact that the respondent had received workers' compensation payments from the 1988 accident, and also, the fact that Mr Thackham was entitled to lump sum payments pursuant to [ss 66](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) and 67 of the Act. As to the quantification of these lump sums,
Newman J found that there was "little argument" that the respondent had suffered a 20 per cent impairment of his back.
Turning to the assessment of damages, Newman J found that the respondent's loss of net earning to the date of trial amounted to $136,695.
From this figure, his Honour deducted the amount of workers' compensation which the respondent had actually been paid by the Hastings District Hospital, to give a net figure of $93,793.56. Interest on this amount was calculated to be $38,736.74.
Newman J assessed the respondent's future loss of earnings on the basis that he would commence work as a minister of religion in January 1995. He awarded damages over the period of the respondent's training, and also for the period from when he became qualified to his estimated retiring age of 65.
Allowing a figure of $190 per week as the difference between the earnings of a
Seventh Day Adventist minister of religion and a nurse, Newman J estimated that future economic loss, taking into consideration a discount of 15 per cent for vicissitudes, at $165,712.26. He also awarded $125,000 as general damages, with interest of $12,200 on the component of that sum which represented past general damages, namely $50,000.
His Honour then considered that the decision in Warwick required him to deduct an amount representing the respondent's lump sum entitlement under the
Act from the damages which he awarded. On the basis of [sections 66](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) and 67 of the Act, Newman J calculated the respondent's lump sum entitlement, including interest, as $41.399.54.
Combining each of the foregoing figures, Newman J therefore entered judgment in favour of the respondent against the appellant in the sum of $394,043.02. The appellant has appealed to this Court from this judgment. Mr
Thackham later filed a cross-appeal.
 
Arguments presented on appeal
Although the appellant initially challenged Newman J's finding of negligence, the finding that the 1988 injury was an aggravation of the 1981 injury, and his Honour's assessment of general damages, the only point which was ultimately pressed in the appeal related to the failure by Newman J to deduct Mr Thackham's entitlement to compensation payments under the Act. The appellant argued that, as well as deducting the amounts the respondent had already actually been paid under the Act and the lump sums which he was entitled to receive pursuant to [sections 66](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) and 67 of the Act, his Honour should have deducted the amounts which Mr Thackham was entitled to claim from
Hastings District Hospital in any future proceedings before the Compensation
Court brought against that employer. The cross-appeal filed by the respondent challenged the deduction by Newman J of the lump sum entitlements under [ss 66](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) and 67 of the Act.
The appellant relied on Warwick. It submitted that the common law position, as set out in Warwick, is that entitlements to workers' compensation payments must be taken into account in determining common law damages. The appellant maintained that, although Newman J was correct in holding that
Warwick applied to this case, he did not go far enough in applying it. To give proper effect to the principle of avoidance of overcompensation in an award of damages, Newman J should have deducted all of the respondent's found entitlement under the Act (even though they had not actually been paid) from the damages awarded. It was submitted that this principle, which requires the deduction of both received payments and future entitlements, was confirmed by the High Court decision in Manser versus Spry <case>; [(1994) 68 ALJR 869], in the context of analogous provisions of the South Australian workers' compensation legislation. In addition, the appellant argued that this principle was analogous to [s 151Z](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s151z.html) of the Act, which also helps to prevent overcompensation.
It contended that the failure of Newman J to apply the principle in Warwick to its full extent involved error which this Court should correct.
The respondent relied on two related arguments in the appeal.
The first contended that this case fell within the terms of [s 151Z](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s151z.html), on the true construction of that section. That section applies to the case where a worker is injured, and that injury is compensable under the Act but also "creates a liability" in some person other than the worker's employer to pay damages in respect of the injury.
The compensation mechanism provided by the section can be summarised as follows: if a worker first recovers workers' compensation and thereafter damages, those damages are to be reduced by the amount of compensation already paid, and the worker is barred from recovering any further workers' compensation; and if the worker recovers damages first, the worker is thereafter barred from seeking any workers' compensation benefits in respect of the same injury.
The respondent contended that, properly construed, the section focused attention upon the question of causation. It was argued that an injury which was caused by the negligence of a tortfeasor, such as the present appellant fell within the terms of the section. The respondent rejected the assertion that [s 151Z](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s151z.html) of the Act required that liability of the stranger should arise at the time of the injury compensable under the Act, In this regard, he argued that [s 151Z](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s151z.html) of the Act should be read with the words "(whether at the time of the injury or at any prior time)" inserted immediately after the words "...caused under circumstances".
This Court rejected the stated construction of [s 151Z](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s151z.html) in Warwick.
However, the respondent submitted that Warwick was incorrectly decided and should be overruled. In Warwick, Handley JA held that his preferred construction was supported by the judgment of Glass JA in Kornjaca versus Steel
Mains Pty Ltd and Ors [(1974) 1 NSWLR 343 (CA)], and that this judgment was not challenged on appeal to the High Court: see Dillingham Constructions Pty Ltd v
Steel Maim Pty Ltd <case>; [(1975) 132 CLR 323.] The respondent submitted that, in fact,
Barwick CJ had approached this matter in a totally different way (at 327), and had reached a conclusion which was inconsistent with what Glass JA said in the
Court of Appeal.
The respondent also argued that Manser could be distinguished on the basis of the differences between the South Australian legislation there in question, and the provisions of the New South Wales presently before this
Court. It was submitted that the vital difference between the two pieces of legislation was that the South Australian act spoke of compensation "paid or payable", whereas the [Workers Compensation Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) talks only of "payments made". On this basis, the respondent argued that the High Court had decided that amounts paid and amounts payable must be taken into account only because this is what the South Australian Act clearly stated.
The second argument put forward by the respondent turned on the interpretation of the general policy behind the [Workers Compensation Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/).
Counsel for the respondent noted that, if this case did not in fact fall within [s 151Z](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s151z.html) of the Act, there was nothing in the terms of the Act which required that the respondent's common law damages should be reduced by entitlements to future payments. Thus, it was argued, [s 151](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s151.html) of the Act was applicable in this case. That section reads: "151. This Act does not affect any liability in respect of an injury to a worker that exists independently of this Act, except to the extent that this Act otherwise expressly provides."
The respondent submitted that, if the present situation were not covered by <case> of the Act, this Court should treat the situation as a casus omissus. It should apply a purposive construction of the Act. One express purpose of this Act, so it was submitted, was to implement the important public policy that there should not be overcompensation of injured workers.
The respondent argued that the mechanism provided for in Warwick to apply this policy was inappropriate and extremely complex and burdensome. Rather than requiring a court in a damages claim to estimate a worker's entitlements under the Act, and then to deduct this estimated figure from any damages award, as the decision in Warwick obliged, the respondent argued that this Court should apply the compensation mechanism detailed in <case>. If necessary it should do so even to cases which fell outside the specific instances covered by that section.
The respondent also argued that, even if it were accepted that 151Z did not apply to the present factual situation, the evident policy of the provisions of <case> was to require payment by the tortfeasor rather than the employer where the worker had an entitlement to payment by both.
The respondent also submitted that the application of this proposed compensation mechanism would be consistent with the policy requirement of avoiding double compensation, while at the same time also satisfying the fundamental requirement that successful plaintiffs should be entitled to be paid the sums awarded which represented their losses. Without clear authority of law those sums should not be reduced.
In order to reinforce its argument against the law stated in Warwick, the respondent sought to highlight a number of practical difficulties inherent in the holding in that case. These perceived difficulties included, first, that, if the common law court deducted more for the worker's entitlements than the
Compensation Court subsequently deemed appropriate, the worker would be left with no remedy to cure the deficiency. Thus, any prejudice to the worker would be incurable. Secondly, the respondent suggested that there were great difficulties inherent in any attempt to estimate how much a worker would eventually be held to be entitled to recover under the Act. Thirdly, the respondent argued that the adoption of the mechanism dictated by Warwick made it almost inevitable that in every case there would be two sets of proceedings, one in the Common Law Division, and one in the
Compensation
Court. There would be an increase in, rather than an avoidance of, a multiplicity of proceedings. This could not have been what Parliament intended.
There was also some conflict in the evidence over how strong the respondent's entitlement to future compensation was. The respondent argued that, even if this Court were to accept that the decision in Warwick correctly stated the law, in should not apply that principle in this case because there was no evidence that he was in fact entitled to recover future workers' compensation payments. At the trial, the appellant had sought to show that Mr
Thackham was clearly entitled to future payments from Hastings District
Hospital under the Act. In certain passages in the judgment of Newman J his
Honour had found that the 1988 injury was causative of the respondent's incapacity. At the trial, the appellant argued that the effect of the 1981 injury had effectively passed before the 1988 injury intervened and incapacitated the respondent.
The respondent contended that at the trial, Newman
J had rejected such a view. He argued that his Honour actually found that the 1988 episode was not a new injury, but rather an aggravation of the existing rupture (caused in 1981) in the form of a prolapse. The fact that Newman J held that Mr Thackham was entitled to lump sum payments from Hastings District Hospital did not mean that his Honour was thereby concluding that the continuing incapacity arose from the second injury. Rather, it was argued, the payments were based on a finding that the second injury was a contributing cause to the incapacity, and the application of the transitional provisions of the Act as construed by this
Court in New South Wales
Department of Technical and Further Education versus Pitt,
Court of Appeal, 11 June 1993, unreported; (1993) NSWJB 58. The respondent submitted that Pitt established that, if the post 1987 injury contributes to the incapacity even to a minor extent, then the whole of the incapacity was deemed to have arisen after 1987, and liability for the lump sum payments would rest with the subsequent employer.
The respondent stressed that these deeming provisions only applied to lump sum benefits, and not to weekly compensation benefits.
 
Arguments in the cross appeal
Turning to the cross appeal, the respondent urged that if his submission on the appeal were to be accepted i.e. that there should be no deduction for entitlements to future payments, Newman J should not have deducted the amounts he did for lump sum permanent loss compensation. However, the respondent also pressed a separate point. He argued that the provisions of <case> of the Act, whereby an injured worker can elect to receive permanent loss compensation or damages, do not apply in respect of the 1988 injury, since it was received before 4 pm on 30 June 1989. This is because <case> provides that: "151V.(1)
Section 151A (Election - damages or 'Table of
Disabilities' compensation) does not apply: in respect of an injury received before 4 p.m. on 30 June ...

If a persson commences proceedings to recover damages, or accepts payment of damages, in respect of an injury to which section 151A does not so apply: the person is not entitled to any permanent loss compensation claimed but not yet received; and the amount of any such compensation previously paid is to be deducted from those damages.
The respondent argued that since, by virtue of the preceding sections of the Act, he had no entitlement to claim any permanent loss compensation, no such amounts should have been deducted.
The appellant highlighted the common law position dictated by Warwick in its response to the cross appeal. This position justified the deduction of the respondent's lump sum entitlements. As regards the respondent's alternative argument, the appellant argued that sections 151A and 151V of the Act had no application. The appellant claimed that <case> (2) was only relevant where the employer from whom compensation is payable under the Act in respect of the injury, is the same employer from whom the damages are recoverable in respect of that injury. Thus, it was argued, since Newman J had found that the
Hastings District Hospital alone was liable for payments of compensation under the
Act, and the respondent's claim for damages was only against the appellant, <case>, and consequently <case> of the Act had no application.
 
Damages verdict - adjustment of future compensation rights
I have taken pains to set out the respective arguments of the parties in this appeal to demonstrate the completely unsatisfactory state which the law has reached on this subject.
The facts of this case are by no means unusual. In the nature of human physiology, it is a frequent event that an injury with one employer is subsequently aggravated by an injury, perhaps years later, with another. One incident may give rise to an entitlement to sue either the employer or a third party for damages. The other may not. The adjustment of past and probable future compensation entitlements must then be made. It should not have been beyond the skill of the drafter to provide a simple regime for cases when this occurred.
Thus, the proposal of the respondent seems a sensible one. Upon recovery of damages, the worker (who has elected to pursue them) should be excluded thereafter from recovering future compensation payments under the Act in respect of the same injury, and the disabilities flowing from it.
However, I agree with Handley JA, that this Court has no authority to impose such a regime where Parliament has refrained from doing so.
Particularly is this so when, as has been pointed out, the Court has repeatedly called attention to the incompleteness of the statutory provisions (past and present) to deal with the circumstances which have arisen here. Yet
Parliament has held back from providing the cure. Cf Hood Constructions Pty
Limited versus Nicholas and Anor [(1987) 9 NSWLR 60 (CA)], 72.
The result has been that, in default of a clear and simple statutory regime, the courts have been forced to construct a common law mechanism designed to achieve the universally accepted objectives:
The avoidance of over-compensation; and
The achievement of justice as between the plaintiff, the tortfeasor liable to pay damages and the remaining employer who is still liable to pay compensation benefits.
The difficulty (as the respondent properly complains) with the regime which has been instituted by the Court in such earlier decisions as Tipper v
Williams and Anor (No 1), Court of Appeal, unreported, May 1993; (1993)
NSWJB 54, and Warwick, is that, in a particular case, they may achieve neither of these objectives. Thus, in the present case, there is a real risk that the final orders of this Court will:
Result in a serious under-compensation of the worker;
Involve an adjustment which is unduly weighted in favour of the remaining employer, at the cost of the worker;
Involve the judge in the common law trial (or, where one is summoned, a jury) in an extremely complicated endeavour, by a
trial within a trial, to predict the possible future workers' compensation claims of the worker and their likely outcome; and
Virtually force the worker into litigation in the
Compensation Court in the future in order to enforce his entitlements to compensation as they are due, or may fall due, in the future - but with the peril that the judge of the
Compensation Court may take a different view of the aetiology of the worker's disabilities than that taken by the tribunal of fact (judge or jury) which determined the damages claim.
The other members of the Court consider that this is a result to which the Court is obliged to come, in default of statutory provision in the light of the earlier decisions in Tipper and Warwick. I do not believe that the decision of the High Court in Manser can be taken to affirm either Tipper or
Warwick. I would accept the respondent's arguments that the provisions of the
South Australian Act with which the High Court was there dealing (with their express reference to "paid or payable") sufficiently distinguish the holding in Manser from the earlier decisions of this Court in Tipper and Warwick.
 .
The result of the orders favoured by the majority in this Court is so apparently unjust to the worker that I find it almost impossible to believe that such was the intended operation of the Act or of the common law devised to fill the gaps of the Act. It is one thing to deduct from the worker's judgment to which, by law, he has been found to be entitled, the amounts of compensation actually paid to him in the past, so as to avoid over-compensation and to recoup the employer who has paid those amounts. But it is an uncertain and potentially unjust thing to deduct the full measure of the worker's possible future entitlements to compensation when so many potential impediments lie between him and actual recovery of those sums. Thus, the worker: must commence proceedings in the
Compensation Court; must succeed in them must establish an entitlement to recover no less than the sums predicted by the judge (or jury) trying the common law claim; must embark upon litigation, perhaps well into the future, to recover weekly entitlements that may well be disputed and, in the nature of things, are almost certain to be contested; must run the gauntlet that the Compensation Court judge may conclude, contrary to the judge (or jury) determining the damages claim, disputed evidence on the aetiology.
In the present case, it would be by no means inconceivable that a judge of the
Compensation Court could take the view that the fundamental problem which gave rise to the present worker's back trouble arose in (for which he had been fully compensated when he recovered his judgment at common law) and not in 1988 (in respect of which his compensation entitlements remained alive).
Meagher JA observes that the conduct of a trial within a trial "is hardly a
unique feature of the law". I agree. But given that in some cases, at least, such a trial will be conducted before a jury upon which a judge is expected to give clear instructions, it is hardly an inviting prospect for the legal resolution of the case which this
Court can accept with easy equanimity.
Handley JA suggests, in his reasons, that the problems presented could "largely be overcome by crystallising a plaintiff's compensation rights prior to the trial of common law proceedings". But with respect that solution involves a number of assumptions about the willingness of parties to pursue workers' compensation rights at a given time and the wisdom of a worker's forsaking such rights in a case where recovery at common law may be dubious.
 
Conclusions and orders
If I were approaching this appeal without the constraints of authority in this Court binding on me, I would be inclined to give s 151Z(1) of the Act a broad construction. Approaching the matter afresh, I do not consider that the phrase "creating a liability" presents such an obstacle that <case> could not be adapted to apply to circumstances such as the present. However, there is now twenty years of decided cases which stand in the way of the construction of that subsection urged for the respondent. It begins with
Kornjaca versus Steel Mains Pty Limited on the predecessor section. It extends up to Warwick which Newman J correctly held that he was obliged to apply.
Numerous amendments of the Act have been adopted in that twenty years. Indeed, a whole new statute has been enacted.
Many opportunities to remove the problem which is presented to the Court by the present case have been forfeited. This has driven this Court to the expedient of permitting future benefits under the [Workers Compensation Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) to be taken into account in reduction of a worker's entitlement to damages. I am bound to follow that approach.
Once that approach is taken, I agree with Meagher JA and Handley JA that it is not possible, as a matter of principle, to differentiate between benefits actually paid Cs and received (on the one hand) and future benefits payable (on the other). Of course, the former are readily ascertained and easily deducted. The latter are speculative, involve uncertainty and may produce injustice and will promote multiplicity of litigation. But they must be calculated, the judge (or jury) doing the best they can to assess the variables.
Despite the earnest argument for the respondent, I do not consider that it is possible to use [s 151](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s151.html) of the Act to escape the difficulties presented to the Court. Nor do I consider that the factual findings in this case permit this
Court to substitute a view of the future of this worker different from that which Newman J took. In the crossappeal I see no merit in the arguments of the respondent (cross-appellant). As to the application to reargue the correctness of Warwick I am forced to the conclusion, by the reasons which
Handley JA has given, that such a course should not be allowed. Not only is
Warwick a recent and unanimous opinion of the Court which has been followed several times. It is, as Handley JA has pointed out, to be understood in its place in a line of authority which has repeatedly complained about the lack of clear statutory guidance but followed the course which Warwick mandates. Upon this basis, there is no footing in principle for distinguishing, between past compensation payments, actually made and received and future payments found, on the probabilities, to be the worker's entitlement. Each must be deducted.
Still less is there a footing in principle for distinguishing among the future payments the lump sums payable under [ss 66](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) and 67 of the Act from other future sums payable under other provisions of the Act. All of these past and future entitlements to compensation must be ascertained as best they can be and deducted to prevent over-compensation.
I leave this appeal, with a conclusion which I regard as most unsatisfactory, with a fresh request that the legislature might, belatedly, address the problem which it Presents. Until Parliament acts, there will continue to be serious risks of injustice, difficulties for primary courts in applying the law and an enforced burden of multiple litigation with uncertain outcomes, which cost the parties and society dearly.
I agree with the orders proposed by Meagher JA.
JUDGE2
MEAGHER JA: This is a case in which there is both an appeal and a crossappeal from a verdict and judgment of Newman J in favour of the plaintiff/respondent in the sum of $394,043.02. The plaintiff alleged, and his Honour found, that in the course of his employment in late 1981, as a male nurse at the Kempsey
District Hospital, the appellant was injured as a result of the hospital's negligence, sustaining a rupture of his LA/L5 disc. He left the appellant's employ in April , and between then and 1988 undertook various pursuits. In
March 1988 he commenced employment as a nurse with the Hastings District
Hospital at Port Macquarie. His new employment caused the prior L4/L5 injury to prolapse. His Honour held that in respect of the injury, from 24 March until 23 February 1991, the plaintiff received weekly payments of compensation from the Hastings
District Hospital at the maximum. rate applicable under the Workers' Compensalion Act, 1987, amounting to $48,633.90, so that on this amount the plaintiff paid income tax totalling $5,732.46; that as a result of the 1988 injury, in October 1989 the plaintiff underwent a two level lumber fusion from the 4th lumber vertebrae to the sacrum; that, as a result of the 1988 injury the plaintiff is and will remain unfit to carry on work that involves bending or lifting; or any work which gives rise to repetitive strains on the plaintiff's back; that since 1992, as the result of the 1988 injury, he has been and will remain unfit for work as a nurse. None of these facts has been challenged.
His Honour also held that since March 1992 the plaintiff has been retraining as a minister of the Seventh Day Adventist Church, as a result of which he will be eligible for appointment as a minister in January 1995; that as a result of the 1988 injury, in the period from March 1988 to February , his loss of earnings amounted to $78,945.00 after tax; that from January until the date of trial in February 1994, his loss of earnings was $57,750.00 after tax; that from the date of trial until 6 January 1995 they would be $25,078.06 after tax; and from January 1995 until retirement they would be $140, .20 after tax. None of these facts was disputed.
His Honour held that at common law the damages suffered by the plaintiff as a result of the 1988 injury could be recovered by the plaintiff against the defendant, since the defendant's negligence in 1981 rendered him predisposed to the sort of injury he suffered in 1988. Whilst this was in dispute at the trial before Newman J, the appellant did not dispute it at the hearing of the appeal.
His Honour then held, which must be correct, that the 1988 injury conferred rights under the [Workers' Compensation Act, 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/), against the
Hastings District Hospital, but not against the appellant, and these were to weekly and lump sum compensation, together with payment for medical expenses.
His Honour then purported to follow Government Insurance Office of New
South Wales versus Warwick (unreported, NSWCourt of Appeal, 23 November 1993) holding, as that case requires, that the [Workers' Compensation Act, 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/), did not provide in circumstances such as the present any mechanism for the adjustment as between the two hospitals of the damages owed by one and the compensation payable by the other. He also, again correctly, in my opinion, concluded that if damages were awarded at common law without taking Workers'
Compensation liabilities into account, the plaintiff would obtain an impermissible overpayment.
The figure at which his Honour arrived is best understood from the following table, taken from the conclusion of his Honour's judgment: "Past wage loss (as adjusted pursuant to Warwick's case) ,793.56
Interest thereon              38,736.74
Future economic loss            165,712.26
General damages: ,000.00
LESS: [s66](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) (incl int)  27,592.24
LESS: s67 (incl int)  13,807.30     41,399.54  83,600.46
Interest on past general damage ,200.00
TOTAL                   394,043.02"
In order to understand his Honour's figures, it is necessary to recall that the facts found were as follows:
Between March 1988 and February 1991 the plaintiff's loss of earnings arising from the second injury was $78,945.00; 
Between these two dates the Hastings District Hospital paid him $48,633.90 by way of workers' compensation payments (which becomes $42,901.44 after making a Fox versus Wood <case>; [(1981) 148
CLR 438] adjustment).

Between January 1992 and February 1994 (the date of the trial) his loss of earnings attributable to the second injury was $57,750.00.

Between January 1992 and February 1994, no workers' compensation payments were made to the plaintiff, although on his Honour's findings of fact they were payable.

His Honour's figure for future economic loss (i.e.
$165,712.26) contains no discount for workers' compensation payable during that period, although on his Honour's factual findings it would be payable.
Further, his Honour deducted from the plaintiff's verdict the aggregate of the amounts he would be entitled to under ss. 66 and 67 of the Act. These are amounts which, on his Honour's reasoning, would be payable to the plaintiff but have not yet been paid.
The figure of $93,793.56 for past wage loss represents actual wage loss less workers' compensation payments actually received (i.e relating to the period between March 1988 and February 1991). It does not take into account any workers' compensation payments payable but not paid for the period between
January 1992 and February 1994.
His
Honours judgment thus contains an obvious internal inconsistency.
Sometimes he deducts workers' compensation payments payable but not paid, sometimes he does not.
Both the appellant and the respondent agree that amounts actually paid ought be deducted from the damages. The appellant submits that amounts payable ought also be deducted, and that hence his Honour's figures both for past and future wage loss are incorrect. The respondent/cross-appellant submits that amounts which are not actually paid but are merely payable should not be deducted from the plaintiff's damages, and hence the ss. 66 and 67 figures should not have been taken into account, so that the plaintiff's correct verdict would have been $41,399.54 greater than it was.
If over compensation is to be avoided, both amounts paid and amounts payable ought, so it seems to me, to be deducted. I can see no rational basis for deducting one and not deducting the other. This seems to me to be the law as decided in Warwick's Case, and also in such other cases as Tipper v
Williams (no 2) (unreported, NSWCourt of Appeal, 6 May 1994).
That does mean that within a common law case there must be a trial-within-a-trial so that the Common Law judge must decide what a Workers'
Compensation judge would probably determine.
However, this is hardly a unique feature of the law.
It was also submitted that this result would be contrary to s.151Z. In my opinion it is not. The expression "creating a liability ... to pay damages" in that section denotes, and denotes only, a liability to pay damages for that injury if that were the sole injury in question. In the present case, the second accident did not create any tortious, liability in the appellant.
The appellant has demonstrated that a further $66,727.40 should be deducted from past loss of wages and interest thereon, and that the future economic loss will be reduced to nil, if workers' compensation payments to which the plaintiff is entitled are taken into account.
In my opinion, it follows that the following orders should be made:
Appeal allowed and cross-appeal dismissed.
Order below set aside.
In lieu thereof, order that the defendant pay to the plaintiff the sum of $186,681.42.
This judgment to take effect as from 3 June 1994.
Order the respondent to pay the costs of the appeal, but to have a certificate under the [Suitors' Fund Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/) if otherwise entitled.
JUDGE3
HANDLEY JA: In this appeal I have had the benefit of reading in draft form the reasons for judgment of Meagher JA. I agree with his Honour but in view of the challenge by Mr Deakin QC for the respondent to the decisions of the Court on [s 151Z](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s151z.html) of the [Workers Compensation Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) and its predecessors, ss 63 and 64 of the 1926 Act, I will add some additional reasons of my own.
The respondent suffered a work injury on 13 Decemnber 1981 while employed by the appellant and a second work injury in March 1988 while employed by the
Hastings
District Hospital. The first gave rise to a cause of action independently of the Act, the second did not, but increased the damages for the first. The question is whether, in terms of <case>, the second injury "was caused under circumstances creating a liability in some person other than the worker's (second) employer to pay damages in respect of the injury", that is in the appellant.
 .
Under <case> a worker entitled to damages and compensation for the same injury may pursue all rights but is not entitled to retain both damages and compensation. The section makes detailed provision for adjusting the burden of damages and compensation between the worker, the employer, and any third party tort-feasor. However it fails to provide expressly for cases such as the present.
It is common ground that the respondent is not entitled to retain his full damages against the appellant and his full compensation rights against the second employer. However the parties differ as to the means by which this result should be achieved. The appellant submits that the respondent's entitlements against the second employer should be deducted from the damages.
The respondent submits that his damages should be reduced by the compensation already paid, but not by that still payable, and that recovery of those damages will terminate his rights to further compensation. It was submitted that this flowed either from the terms of <case> or was a necessary implication in the statutory scheme.
This is not the first time that such questions have come before this
Court.
In Kornjaca versus Steel Mains Pty Ltd [(1974) 1 NSWLR 343] the defendant when sued by a worker for an injury to his back in 1970 crossclaimed against a former employer responsible for an injury to the plaintiff's back in 1968 said to have caused or contributed to his later injury. Indemnity was sought against the first employer under <case>(b) of the 1926 Act, equivalent to s
Z(1)(d). At 347 Glass JA who gave the leading judgment, said:- "It is necessary for the employer to prove against the party from whom the indemnity is sought that the injury occurred under circumstances which created a liability in damages to the worker. It does not seem possible to regard a pre-existing liability which became more extensive on the happening of the injury, as one which was then created."
This part of the decision was not challenged on the appeal to the High
Court and is not affected by that court's decision. See Dillingham
Constructions versus Steel Mains <case>; [(1975) 132 CLR 323] The decision in Kornjaca on the present point has never been disapproved and this Court has since applied similar reasoning in a number of cases.
In Hood Constructions versus Nicholas [(1987) 9 NSWLR 60] the plaintiff suffered a compensable injury which was aggravated by medical treatment which entitled him to increased compensation.
The worker sued the doctor for damages and the
Court had to decide how the burden of the increased compensation would be adjusted.
Hope JA who gave the principal judgment held that the medical injury did not "by itself ... give rise to any right to worker's compensation and was not the injury giving rise to the liability of the employer" (67). Section (1)(a) therefore did not apply and the worker was not bound to repay the increased compensation from his damages. Hope JA said at 72:- "The provisions of the Worker's Compensation
Act show clearly enough a policy against duplication. It does not appear why the present case is not covered ... I do not think that ... the fact that the ... Act deals with the question of duplication in other classes of case precludes the application of a dominant rule in any case with which it does not purport to deal. ... in my opinion ... (the doctor) is entitled to have deducted from any damages awarded to the plaintiff the amount of compensation paid ... in respect of matters for which damages are to be assessed".
The converse situation, on facts indistinguishable from the present, came before this
Court in Dudley versus Condell Park Carrying Co <case>; [(1988) 4 NSWCCR 1.] A worker recovered damages from the tort-feasor for the first injury and then sought compensation for the second. This Court held that this was not "caused under circumstances creating a legal liability in some person other than the employer to pay damages" within s 64(1)(a), and the worker was therefore entitled to compensation. Clarke JA who delivered the principal judgment said at p 8:- "The circumstances that the damages (the tortfeasors) were obliged to pay in respect of the injuries received in the motor vehicle accident contained ... an element in respect of the later injury did not, in my opinion, mean that the circumstances under which the employment injury occurred made (the tortfeasors) legally liable to pay damages in respect of that injury ... This conclusion is consistent with the approach of
Hope JA in Hood Constructions versus Nicholas ... although the factual situations of the two cases are, in a sense, reversed ... In this case (the tort feasors) came under a legal liability to pay the appellant damages in respect of the first injury in the same way as H came under a liability in Hood to pay N compensation for his first injury. In so far as (the tortfeasors) never came under a legal liability to pay damages 'in respect of' the employment injury, section 64(1)(a) does not apply".
He added that this would not lead to overcompensation because, following
Adams versus Ascot Iron Foundry (1968) 72 SR 120, the Court would reduce the damages to take account of compensation payments.

In Vanramer versus Higgins [(1991) 24 NSWLR 661] the worker suffered two work injuries with the one employer, the first tortious and the second compensable only, in circumstances otherwise indistinguishable from. the present case.
This Court, by majority, held that <case> did not apply to the second injury so that the recovery of damages for the first did not affect the worker's rights to compensation for the second. The majority held however that the damages should be reduced because of those compensation rights. The High Court refused special leave [(176 CLR 707).] These decisions have since been followed by this
Court in Tipper versus Williams (No 1) (12/5/93 unreported), GIO versus Warwick (23/11/93 unreported) and Tipper versus Williams (No 2) (6/5/94 unreported).
Recently in Manser versus Spry <case>; [(1994) 68 ALJR 869] the High Court reached similar conclusions on comparable South Australian legislation. At 871 the
Court in its joint judgment said:- ""... on one reading of subs (5)(b) it could be said that a plaintiff who has a 'comparable disability' as the result of an exacerbation of an injury tortiously inflicted has 'a right of action ... against a (tortfeasor) for damages in respect of the disability' within the meaning of those words in that subsection. But there is a preferable construction. The phrase 'for damages in respect of the disability' is descriptive of the nature of the right of action against the tortfeasor when it accrues, that is when the plaintiff first suffers any loss or damage as a result of the defendants tortious conduct. On this construction subs (5)(b) does not comprehend the case where damages are enlarged because a further event has exacerbated the original injury ... "(emphasis supplied)
The distinction which Mr Deakin sought to draw between compensation already paid and that payable in the future finds no support in the authorities. The references to compensation paid in Hood Constructions v
Nicholas are explained by the redemption of the worker's compensation entitlements (9 NSWLR at 63D). In Adams versus Ascot Iron Foundry [(1968) 72 SR ] at 127, 129, 137, 138 and 141 this Court held that both past and future benefits under the Worker's Compensation (Dust Diseases)
Act should be taken into account. This decision has also been consistently followed by this
Court. See Hood Constructions versus Nicholas,
Dudley versus Condell Park Carrying Co,
Tipper versus Williams (No 1), Commercial Minerals versus Hollins (22/12/93, unreported) and Tipper versus Williams (No 2). Adams versus Ascot Iron Foundry was also approved in
Manser versus Spry <case>;  <case>; [(1994) 181 CLR 96] at 106.
In these cases this Court has discerned a clear intention by Parliament that injured workers should not retain both compensation and full damages for the same injury. The decisions challenged by the respondent reflect a constructive and purposive interpretation of the legislation which has not allowed this intention to be defeated by incomplete drafting. Mr Deakin invites the
Court to give effect to Parliament's intention not by adjusting the damages in the case before it but by terminating the worker's rights to further compensation from the second employer who is not before it. The Act confers no power on the Court to deal with those rights in these proceedings and in <case> expressly forbids contracting out. The course urged on the Court by Mr Deakin is not within its powers. For the same reason the Court unanimously declined to accept an undertaking offered by Mr Deakin on behalf of the worker not to pursue claims to further compensation against the second employer.
In my opinion the Court should follow its earlier decisions, implicitly endorsed as they have been by Manser versus Spry, and leave to reargue them should be refused. The practical difficulties adverted to by Mr Deakin which have been recognised by this Court can be overcome in most but not all cases if a plaintiff crystallises his or her compensation rights prior to the trial of common law proceedings by obtaining awards for any weekly or lump sum compensation. The legal advisers for a plaintiff faced with a situation such as the present should be alert to the problems, and to the solution which is readily available if the appropriate steps are taken in time. I agree with the orders proposed by Meagher
JA.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/43.html  
