

Lewis Stavrou versus Government Insurance Office of NSW [1996] NSWSC 433 (17
September 1996) 
LEWIS STAVROU versus GOVERNMENT INSURANCE OFFICE OF NSW /87 
Tuesday 17 September 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
GROVE J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: These are two actions seeking damages arising out of traffic accidents which have, by consent, been heard together. In each case negligence is admitted. The accidents occurred as long ago as 24 October and 4 December 1986.

On the first occasion the plaintiff was stationary in a motor vehicle when a rear collision occurred. A heavy truck loaded with sand was the cause of the impact. On the second occasion, the plaintiff was walking in a marked pedestrian crossing and struck by a vehicle.

There is no information before the Court to explain why so long has elapsed between the occurrences and the matters coming on for hearing. I note that the actions were commenced by statements of claim issued in 1987.

So far as injury to the plaintiff is concerned, the evidence is not entirely clear. There has been placed before the Court what I regret to observe has become the usual accumulation of uncoordinated medical reports, without any focus upon the issues to be determined. I will do the best that I can.

Whatever it was that happened to the plaintiff, it was not grossly disabling.
One curious factor underlying this litigation is that the plaintiff seemed to have been, pre-accident, a modest earner of income, to the extent that it seemed to be less than he would have received by way of Social Security benefit. He has sworn that his income tax returns accurately represent his financial situation.

Since the accident he has, on occasions, earned many multiples in a financial year of anything that he achieved prior to the accident. He seems, in the accidents, and I treat them as accumulative, to have suffered some form of neck strain and what I think was probably an aggravation of a vulnerable lower back which had a congenital defect. In the second accident he also suffered some injury to his arm which seemed to have resolved.

It is, I think, best if I make some brief observation of the medical material that has been put before the Court. The plaintiff tendered a series of reports from a Dr Alam. The first of these is dated 25 February 1987 and refers to the plaintiff seeing the doctor on the 12th of that month. This would be within a couple of months of the second accident. On this occasion the doctor had apparently been supplied by solicitors with a list of injuries but I have not seen this document.

The medical examiner sets out a "problems" list which I assume was derived from the plaintiff as an ordinary exercise in medical history taking. There was complaint about painful low back but it is significant that radiation down the legs of any pain was expressly excluded.

There were also complaints about the left side of the neck. The plaintiff apparently told the doctor that he had headache but this was receding; he was cranky and irritable; suffering from disturbed sleep; memory and concentration were satisfactory but swallowing was difficult.

The plaintiff told the doctor that he had some x-rays but he did not bring these to the examination. It was noted that he was asked to bring them on the next occasion. The doctor thought that he had a neck disturbance of some undescribed aetiology and a lumbar back disturbance caused by an original blunt injury and aggravated by the second accident. Dr Alam also thought that he had a depressive reaction.

He saw the plaintiff again in December 1990. On this occasion the plaintiff again did not bring his x-rays, although as I have noted he was specifically asked to do so. Despite the absence of this material, which the doctor seemed to think would be useful, he purported to diagnose the plaintiff's condition.

In November 1994 the plaintiff was back to see Dr Alam again. The doctor, on this occasion, saw some x-rays taken in June 1994 and, clearly, these cannot be any that were referred to as being in the possession of the plaintiff beforehand. The x-ray material also included apparently reports of CT scans.

At this time the doctor thought that the plaintiff had a neck injury in the nature of aggravation to spondylitic change. He also referred to an upper thoracic injury. I note that in his examination on this occasion he reported tenderness over the first thoracic vertebra.

There had, so far as I can find, been no previous complaint by the plaintiff of injury in this area and this reference comes, it can be observed, some eight years after the relevant accidents.

The implicit attribution of the symptom found on this occasion to the accidents eight years previously causes me some apprehension about relying unreservedly upon Dr Alam's opinions. He also thought that the plaintiff had a lumbar injury, being an aggravation of a previously existing spondylitic process.

He thought the plaintiff was fit for light supervisory work. As I shall later point out, the plaintiff was in fact working as a concreter from time to time in the years since the accident.

Finally, Dr Alam saw the plaintiff in June this year. By reference no doubt to legislation which is not applicable to these accidents, he made some estimates of percentage permanent impairment by reference to what the doctor called "a most extreme case". The source of that phrase is no doubt the [Motor Accidents
Act 1988](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/). As I have pointed out, these accidents occurred in 1986.

I have reached the conclusion that Dr Alam's opinions are not sufficiently reliable to be depended upon for the purpose of assessing the plaintiff's damages.

The next document tendered on behalf of the plaintiff was a letter dated 5
March 1987 from a Dr Stevens. His last remark is "It is impossible to give a worthwhile prognosis". I can make such use of that document then, therefore, as that remark suggests.

Next I have a report from Dr Middleton. Dr Middleton is known to be a rehabilitation specialist. She saw the plaintiff in 1987. She thought that the plaintiff was at that time not fit for heavy manual work due to what she concluded was a back and a neck disorder. She had not, when she had first seen him, had the opportunity of reviewing x-rays and CT scans.

Later she saw this material and she supplemented her report. She came to the conclusion that the plaintiff had a significant disc injury at the L4/5 level.
She attributed it to the motor accident of 4 December 1986. She said that on the basis of this damage it seemed likely that Mr Stavrou would not be able to return to heavy manual work on a permanent basis. Of course, Dr Middleton has not seen the plaintiff since 1987 and the evidence is that at least for some years since then he has engaged from time to time in very heavy manual work indeed.

Dr Middleton predicted that it was likely that the plaintiff's symptoms will continue to improve somewhat with the passage of time, provided the damage heals with significant tissue in a satisfactory manner. She thought he would be left with a weakened back. The history of events since Dr Middleton saw the plaintiff suggests that, as she predicted, he did indeed improve and, in my judgment, improved considerably.

Next I have a single report from Dr Noel Dan who is a neurosurgeon. Dr Dan saw the plaintiff once on 1 February 1995. He thought that the plaintiff had a disc lesion but he was no more specific than that. He opined that the plaintiff was demonstrably fit for work and no doubt this is derived from the circumstance that the plaintiff was in fact doing the very heavy work to which
I have made reference.

He accepted that the plaintiff was reporting having difficulties with repetitive bending associated with being a bricklayer and he thought that was reasonable and he thought that some limitations on his ability to carry out heavy aspects of bricklaying or building were consistent with his demonstrated pathology.

The plaintiff used to do bricklaying work as well as concrete laying but he gave evidence that he was now too slow to be an effective bricklayer. He seemed to judge the amount of money that he could earn was approximately the same in either activity.

There is a report from Dr Psarommatis dated 1 March 1995. He is a general practitioner who has seen the plaintiff from time to time. Unsurprisingly, as the plaintiff's general practitioner, he adopts a sympathetic approach to the plaintiff's complaints and accepts them without qualification.

Finally, the plaintiff tendered two reports from Dr Rivett who describes himself as an orthopaedic physician. Dr Rivett saw the plaintiff on 22 March this year for the first time. He received the history that the plaintiff was doing only concreting work to the exclusion of bricklaying but, significantly, he elicited from the plaintiff apparently a history that sciatic pain was only rare.

Dr Rivett thought that there was a lower ligamentous strain. He thought there were lumbar disc lesions, both at L4/5 and L5/S1 but importantly, in my view, he added, "But no significant nerve root irritation".

Dr Rivett did not see the plaintiff again but apparently received some correspondence enclosing what he describes as numerous medical reports and he replied to the solicitors, including in his response that he did not feel that there was any urgent or immediate indication that the plaintiff should undergo any surgical treatment. He thought that his sciatica was fairly quiescent at the time, by which I take the doctor to be referring to March 1996 when he saw the plaintiff.

He thought that the plaintiff's right thigh slight wasting suggested that such irritation or compression may occur in varying degrees from time to time. He thought that symptoms might escalate if the plaintiff persisted in doing heavy work. Of course, that is a matter for the election of the plaintiff.

The defendant tendered a bundle of medical reports. The first was from Dr John
Furber who saw the plaintiff in August 1991. The history he obtained from the plaintiff was simply that his back aches when he lays bricks or if he bends a lot. Sometimes he cannot get up after sitting and the doctor noted that at that time, 1991, he made no complaints about his neck.

Dr Furber thought it was possible the man suffered some injuries in the two accidents but he thought, as at 1991, there was no clinical evidence of continuing disability and he thought he was fit for his usual work activity.

Dr Eric Goulston, a surgeon, saw the plaintiff in August 1987. This, of course, was in the year following the accidents. The plaintiff then told Dr
Goulston that after the accidents he had six months rest and his neck greatly improved. He then got a job as a concreter and bricklayer and has worked since. He thought that his main trouble now was pain in his back when he did any heavy or sudden lifting.

Dr Goulston reported that the neck was almost symptom-free and said that after six months rest the plaintiff had resumed his trade as a concreter and bricklayer which was heavy work. He said he was able to carry on but he would be better off doing less heavy work. He said his low back symptoms may continue for several months more but he understood the plaintiff was carrying on as a necessity. Eventually he thought he should have a good prognosis but he may have to avoid heavy and sudden strains in the future.

The final medical material which I can use for resource consists of three reports from Dr Donaldson, an orthopaedic surgeon. He saw the plaintiff first on 21 May 1993. The plaintiff told Dr Donaldson that he had been working as a bricklayer but by the second day of a job he was very stiff and sore. It is of significance to note that, no doubt in response to express enquiry from the doctor, the history has recorded that any pain the plaintiff has does not radiate to his legs and the plaintiff has not noticed any numbness or paraesthesia in the lower limbs.

The doctor expressed a view that the plaintiff's back was not made for heavy manual work and, as I shall point out, later investigations showed that his opinion had a sound basis.

On the second occasion the plaintiff was seen by Dr Donaldson in November 1994 and some x-rays were made available. These showed that some underlying degenerative changes in the lower back had been superimposed upon a developmental anatomical anomaly. This underlying disorder showed on x-rays as a lumbarisation of the first segment of the sacrum. The large transverse process on the right of this vertebra formed what the doctors called a pseudarthrosis. It is therefore understandable that the plaintiff had a vulnerability to injury.

The doctor, presumably having discussed this matter with the patient, recorded that the plaintiff had come to realise that he cannot work as a concreter and bricklayer because of the arthritis at the lumbosacral junction. That recording did not follow the history of events because the plaintiff, on his evidence, has continued to do work of that nature.

In March this year Dr Donaldson saw the plaintiff for a final occasion. Again he got a history of pain centrally located in the lower back. It is of interest to note that Dr Donaldson, on this occasion, undertook a routine straight leg raising test. Straight leg raising with the left leg achieved 90 degrees without comment of back discomfort but the right leg caused the plaintiff to feel some slight discomfort when it was raised to 90 degrees. Leg pain was not elicited.

Dr Donaldson noted that there had been the pain in the neck following the traffic accidents but recorded that with the passage of time the plaintiff's symptoms had completely resolved and this is, I think, consistent with the overall refrain of the material which I have. Insofar as there are any symptoms which the plaintiff has, I think they are related to his lower back.

So far as I can judge, any sciatic pain is rare indeed and the extent of disability must be gauged against the unrestricted range of activity in which the plaintiff seeks to engage. One qualification should be applied to the last remark and that is that the plaintiff complains that he cannot work as long or as quickly as he did in the past. No doubt such a disability could have some effect upon his income.

This leads to the not simple task of determining appropriate damages for the plaintiff. As I earlier remarked, as best I can gauge, the plaintiff sustained in the accidents some non-specific forms of injury to the neck, lower back and arm. The injuries to the neck and arm have, for all practical purposes, resolved during the ten years that have elapsed between accident and hearing.

There are some symptoms in the lower back and there have been symptoms in the lower back. It is not of assistance to the contentions being advanced by the defendant that the plaintiff had a congenital abnormality which made his back vulnerable to injury. Nevertheless, it is my task to compensate the plaintiff for the injuries done to him in the torts and not compensate simply the difference between his situation then and now.

I have made reference to the plaintiff's working history. In the course of cross-examination he asserted that in the years prior to the accident - and I refer to income years - he had earned amounts in 1982 of $5,000; in 1983 of $6,500; in 1984 of $7,200; in 1985 of approximately $5,000; and in 1986 he did not reach the tax threshold. In 1983, 1985 and 1986 he was, for substantial periods, in receipt of Social Security benefits.

As contrasted with that he has, in years since, on occasions earned not insignificant amounts of money. In the year ended June 1991 he returned a taxable income of $15,600 against gross receipts of $58,000. In the year /95 he again grossed about $56,000.

The plaintiff has said that the nature of the building industry is cyclical in that he is and has been waiting for a good year and that he is restricted in the jobs he can practically tender for by reason of his disabilities.

One matter upon which the plaintiff suffers, in my assessment of credibility, relates to his pre-accident situation. I regard his pre-accident years of almost trivial income as matters of some mystery, indeed senior counsel for the plaintiff eventually conceded that that description was apt.

The explanation that the plaintiff gave that there was some sort of continuing recession in the building trade is one that I reject. I can reject that with comfort, bearing in mind that his own witness, Mr Alexouis, testified to the contrary and said that in the years prior to the plaintiff's accident there was, for them, plenty of work.

I also have testimony from the plaintiff's wife and I have to observe that when asked questions about the situation prior to the accident, she impressed me as looking about for some assistance as to what answer she should make. No doubt she is a loyal and loving wife but I do not find her evidence of great assistance in the current litigation.

Nor do I derive any assistance from a mass of material which has been acquired by the respective parties from accountants and others describing themselves generally as litigation support. There is some imaginative and creative arithmetic within those documents which I have examined but none of them appears to me to reflect any real judgment that can be made upon the evidence as to the financial effect of the accident upon the plaintiff.

The reports are useful to the extent that from them I am able to derive precise figures which show the parlous situation of the plaintiff's income prior to the accident, and in contrast to the more prosperous years which have succeeded them.

I find that no doubt immediately after the accident the plaintiff was, for a time, in a practical sense totally incapacitated for work and I find that from time to time in the past and likely to an extent in the future he will, by reason of the effects of these accidents, occasionally lose income which he might otherwise have derived. This is not a case in which any extrapolation of hypothesised weekly losses will be of any value.

As can be seen from the medical reports, whatever it is the plaintiff has wrong with him tends to come and go and I have already commented that, whatever it is, the intensity is not sufficient to warrant surgical intervention and has not been of sufficient intensity to prevent him undertaking quite heavy work.

Nevertheless, I do not believe it would be fair to the plaintiff to ignore the circumstance that in the past and in the future he is likely to have missed out on a job here or there because he cannot work as fast as otherwise and I think he should receive some amount of compensation to cushion him against such losses.

I turn, therefore, to the ingredients of damage. The out of pocket expenses are agreed in the sum of $1,914. The plaintiff is entitled to general damages as these accidents occurred prior to the [Motor Accidents
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/).

Doing the best I can, and taking into account all of the matters which are referred to in the various medical reports, and giving such credibility as I think appropriate to the plaintiff's complaints, I have come to the conclusion that a round sum of $30,000 would do justice between the parties.

As I have indicated, I do not regard this case as appropriate for hypothetical extrapolations of weekly losses because, indeed, the plaintiff's losses will not occur and have not occurred in that fashion. Looking at the plaintiff's income pattern and bearing in mind the improvement since the accident and, it is arguable, as indeed the defendant argued, that there has been no loss. I reject that contention.

Doing the best I can to balance the matter between the parties, I have come to the conclusion that in the past ten years the plaintiff should receive $20,000 to represent the interference with his earning capacity which has been productive of economic loss and for the future I propose to award him $15,000 as a cushion against any such loss over the balance of his working life.

The plaintiff has, on occasions, taken digesic to relieve his symptoms. This medication is purchased on an irregular basis and I note the advice of his general practitioner that he should reduce his intake of such drug because it is likely to have an affect upon his internal organs. I have no figures in relation to these matters, although the plaintiff's counsel advanced a claim.
I include $1,000 for medication past and future.

As the law stood and stands in relation to accidents occurring on the dates mentioned, the plaintiff is entitled to interest on his general damages. It is almost ten years since the accident. I propose to award interest at the rate of two percent on half the amount of the general damages, $15,000 for ten years, and this will provide an ingredient of $3,000 to be included in the plaintiff's award.

It is convenient to recapitulate then the elements of damage which I propose to include. They are as follows:
Out of Pocket Expenses $1,914.
General Damages $30,000.
Economic Loss to Date $20,000.
Economic Loss in the Future $15,000.
Medication $1,000.
Interest on General Damages $3,000.

Totalling: $70,914.

I assess the plaintiff's damages in the round sum of $71,000. I note that counsel for the plaintiff expressly did not claim interest on any economic loss to date.

As I indicated at the outset these two cases were heard together. It has been agreed that as a matter of convenience judgments should be entered for such damages as I assess as to half of the sum in each case. This leads to a need to make a special order for costs. The plaintiff is entitled to a full order for costs in respect of a judgment for $71,000. It was indicated that only one order for costs was sought but this should not be reduced simply because the judgment amount lies between $10,000 and $50,000.

The special order I have in mind is that the plaintiff should have an order for costs as to the full amount for one hearing but that he also should be entitled to recover the disbursements referrable to the filing fees and any other disbursements in the second action.

The orders I make are as follows: I direct entry of judgment for the plaintiff in each action for $35,500. I order that in respect of the two amounts the plaintiff has one undiminished order for costs. That order for costs is to include any additional costs incurred by way of disbursements for filing fees or the like in the duplicated action.
 * * * 
