

Williams versus Tracey and Anor Matter No 20268/94 [1997] NSWSC 663 (18
December 1997) 
Last Updated: 4 March 1998 
GARYTH WILLIAMS versus MARK STEPHEN TRACEY and BRADCROFT PTY LIMITED trading as BRADCROFT TRANSPORT /94 December 1997 
Grove J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an appeal by an intending plaintiff against refusal of relief pursuant to <case> of the Motor Accidents Act by Master Malpass. Numerous grounds were filed but not all of these were appropriate nor were they all sought to be argued. I have concluded that the appeal should be allowed and it will suffice to advert to the basis upon which I have reached that conclusion. 
The plaintiff was born on 26 March 1963. On 23 January 1989 he stopped a vehicle which he was driving in response to a traffic control signal. A following articulated vehicle driven and owned by the respective defendants collided with the rear of the stationary car. Upon proof of damage there could be no doubt of the plaintiff's entitlement to recover. The plaintiff's journey was relevantly connected with his employment and he was also entitled to receive and for a time did receive, payments of worker's compensation.

On 24 January 1989, he consulted solicitors (Verekers) in Wollongong. They were instructed to look to his interests both for necessary repairs to his vehicle and damages for personal injuries. A chronology of events is exhibited to the affidavit of Ilko Djajovski sworn 10 September 1997 and, although the affidavit itself was not read, it was agreed that reference may be had to the chronology. No point will be served by mere recitation in these reasons of what can be derived from that resource.

This appeal is limited to questions of law: Do Carmo versus Ford Excavations Pty
Limited [1981 1 NSWLR 409.] 
The plaintiff filed a statement of claim without first obtaining leave, on 29
April 1994 accompanied by a notice of motion seeking such leave. The Master observed that the position was not "rectified" until 10 April 1996 when a summons was filed. Subsequent authority appears to endorse the procedure adopted by the plaintiff: Dandashli versus Dandashli CA unreported 16 December
The particular remarks in the judgment however were followed by observation that the plaintiff's new (and present) solicitor Mr Goudkamp was aware in December 1993 that leave would be required but waited until April to commence proceedings. The plaintiff was inhibited to the extent of the application of ss 52(1A) and 52(2) of the Act. I do not regard these matters as being of critical consequence.

The learned Master correctly recognized the applicability of the principles discussed in Salido versus Nominal Defendant [1993 32 NSWLR 524.] It was vigorously submitted on behalf of the defendant that the position of a defendant (or insurer) resisting an application such as the present had been strengthened by the judgment in Henricks versus Agnew CA unreported 23 October and its appreciation and application of Brisbane South Regional Health
Authority versus Taylor [1996 79 ALJR 866.] As the analysis by Cole JA in Henricks demonstrates the test proposed by Gleeson CJ in
Salido, whether it was "fair and just" to extend the limitation was not dissimilar to the enunciation by Toohey and Gummow JJ in Brisbane South. As
Kirby J (who as Kirby P had delivered a concurring judgment in Salido) dissented, I am unpersuaded that the slightly different approach of Dawson and
McHugh JJ in Brisbane South supplants other expressions of appropriate test.
In particular the specification by McHugh J of the four broad rationales for enactment of limitation periods does not, as seemed to be implied in the defendant's submissions, introduce new shades of meaning to what is "fair and just". No different enquiry is provoked by the "real question ...... whether the delay has made the chances of fair trial unlikely" (per Toohey and Gummow
JJ @ 870).

I turn to the question of whether there is error of law manifest in the judgment presently under challenge. The periods of delay were divided into two broad categories, before 28 July 1993 and after that date. According to the chronology, the plaintiff consulted his present advisers on that day and was provided with a Personal Injury Claim Form. In August 1991 he had served a claim form on the Government Insurance Office at Corrimal. His evidence that a following letter (advising that Suncorp was the relevant insurer) was not received, was not rejected and I therefore assume, accepted.

I note in passing that Suncorp was advised of the accident and the plaintiff's involvement in it both from the GIO and Switzerland Insurance (the worker's compensation insurer of the plaintiff's employer). Correspondence between
Switzerland Insurance and Suncorp dates back to January 1990. The Master found that "there is nothing to suggest that the plaintiff has done other than fully cooperate with his advisers". He took the view that in finding the explanation for delay in the latter period it was necessary to look at the evidence provided by his legal advisers. It is convenient to refer at this point to the expression in the judgment that it may be that there had been selective presentation of material by the plaintiff. It was said that any expert material obtained by the plaintiff prior to November 1994 had not been placed before the Court. The use of the word "may" in this context makes a conclusion about the effect of these considerations upon the ultimate result difficult to gauge. There are similar inconclusive expressions on other topics canvassed in the reasons.

I admitted material in the appeal to respond to this unforewarned possible finding. I am satisfied that the plaintiff did not withhold any relevant material for tactical or other reason. The observations critical of the presentation of the plaintiff's material (by his lawyers) is immediately followed by references to the period up to 28 July 1993 and an express rejection of the plaintiff's provision of a sufficient explanation for the delay prior to 28 July 1993. Contrary to the submission on behalf of the plaintiff, I do not accept that his position needs to be viewed in isolation from the lack of diligence of his advisers, specifically those whom he consulted in the early period: Salido @ 532F-G. It is a matter of concern however that the conclusion appears to be infected by an unsupportable assumption (or suspicion) that relevant material had been withheld.

The issue of prejudice (to the defendants) was dealt with separately. It was held that it was reasonable to infer some prejudice from delay. The form that that prejudice took was not described. Reference was then made to the fact that it was not disputed that the insurer of the defendants had early notice of the claim but it was asserted that there was prejudice in the failure to prosecute, diverting the insurer from investigating the matter itself from the point of view of damages as distinguished from that of liability. The Master found that the defendants chose to "let sleeping dogs lie". He found however that there was specific prejudice for which, for that reason, some responsibility rested upon the defendants. Again he did not state exactly what the prejudice was: cf McIntyre versus Mangan & Anor [1996 24 MVR 122.] 
These somewhat amorphous findings of prejudice are germane to an error of law.
At the commencement of judgment there was reference to the reliance by the defendants upon a report of Dr Revai annexed to an affdiavit by their solicitor. There was no later direct reference to this report or its terms within the judgment. The content of this particular report is short: "In reply to your fax today, I believe that if Mr Garyth Williams had commenced psychiatric treatment earlier, i.e. psychotherapy combined with pharmacological treatment, this may have mitigated his psychological condition." 
The transcript records objection to this report. (The recording in fact relates to the affidavit.) Later there was a call on behalf of the plaintiff for any other reports from Dr Revai. The text of the letter implies the existence of earlier communication and, of course, the plaintiff would know if he had attended for examination. The existence of at least one earlier report was confirmed by a claim of privilege being advanced by counsel for the defendants. The transcript records: "(Counsel for defendants): If directed by the court I will certainly produce them. (i.e. All reports from Dr Revai) 
MASTER: I propose to defer further consideration on that matter and you can raise the matter at a later stage if you choose to do so. I would suggest that we proceed with other matters at this stage." 
It is contended by the defendants that as that the matter was not later raised, the evidence constituted by Dr Revai's report simply remained as part of the assessable testimony. I observed that the transcript did not record a ruling on the objection to the original affidavit but its admission can be inferred from the reference by the Master to the reliance by the defendants on it.

The report ought not to have admitted, over objection, without the other report(s) of Dr Revai. In Attorney General of the Northern Territory v
Maurice & Ors 1986 161 CLR @ 488 Mason and Brennan JJ approved this statement by Professor Wigmore: "[When] his conduct touches a certain point of disclosure, fairness requires that his privilege shall cease whether he intended that result or not. He cannot be allowed, after disclosing as much as he pleases, to withhold the remainder. (Wigmore, Evidence In Trials at Common Law (1961) vol 8, par 2327, p. 636)." 
That principle was applicable.

This leads to a consideration of the significance of the (wrongly) admitted selective part of Dr Revai's opinion. As noted, the exact prejudice contemplated by the Master remained unexpressed but as it did not relate to the conduct of any litigation on the issue of liability it logically must have related to damage. The focus of the defendants' claim to prejudice would, in the absence of any other material to be pointed to, appear to be upon the opinion of Dr Revai concerning the prospects of success of earlier medical or psychological intervention. The conclusion of prejudice was perceptibly infected by material which in the circumstances ought to have been rejected.

The merits of the application are raised for consideration. It might be mentioned that, apparently unknown to Dr Revai, the plaintiff had been for a long period undergoing psychiatric and psychological therapy. I do not regard it as necessary to epitomize the extensive medical material exhibited to the various affidavits of Dr Goudkamp which have been filed.

It is plain that in the period since the accident the plaintiff has been affected by psychiatric disturbances. These have included depression which, properly understood, is a condition inhibiting normal functioning. A person who is not functioning normally neglects himself and his own interests. One matter that may be the subject of neglect in some circumstances is the pursuit of potentially financially rewarding litigation. It is not requisite for present purposes to find whether those disturbances were caused by the accident in any sense. Their existence and their effect upon the plaintiff provide a full and satisfactory explanation for the delay. It is noted that satisfactory qualifies explanation and it is not a requirement of the statute that the explanation be satisfying to the defendants or their insurer. There is a minor paradox in the defendants' position. It selected the report of Dr
Revai, which ought to have been rejected, yet the content is confirmatory of a view that the plaintiff suffers some psychological condition which is serious enough to require treatment.

I reject the construction sought to be placed upon the correspondence from
Verekers to the effect that the plaintiff thereby acquired any knowledge of consequence. He was not told about time limits nor was he told anything about procedural obstacles created by the Motor Accidents Act. He was effectively told that if he insisted upon a view, contrary to that of his solicitors that he should recover more than the "deductible" he should take it up with the insurer himself.

I have discussed the issue of prejudice to some extent in dealing with the inadmissibility of Dr Revai's report. Whether the chances of fair trial are unlikely is, as a matter of practicality limited in this instance to looking at issues of damage. Obviously it would be ideal if every party to litigation later commenced could, if it chose, investigate all matters from the instant of the commission of tort. This in fact would rarely happen. In deciding whether in the context of the present matter it would be fair and just to grant an extension, I consider it is legitimate to take into account that much, if not all, of the material relating to pre-mid 1993 would be sourced from attendants and consultants apparently uninvolved in any purpose of litigation. Since that time the defendants have been well aware of the plaintiff's intention to claim and it has been open to them to take steps as desired. Examination by Dr Revai suggests that opportunity was taken.

I am conscious of the remarks of Toohey and Gummow JJ that a weighing process (of prejudice to an applicant against prejudice to a respondent) is not called for. Bearing that in mind, I reach the conclusion that it is fair and just to grant the extension and that the ultimate trial will not predictably be unfair because of past delay.

The appeal is upheld. The status of the statement of claim already filed is unclear, having regard to the understandable non anticipation of the decision in Dandashli and the requirement that a summons issue. So far as I can discern the statement of claim remains on the file and I presume that that pleading represents what the plaintiff desires to allege but I will grant liberty to apply in order to make any necessary technical adjustments.

I make the following orders:
Appeal allowed and the orders of the Master are set aside, save as to costs.
Costs orders made by the Master are to stand.
The respondents (defendants) are ordered to pay the appellant's costs of the appeal.
If qualified, the respondents are to have a certificate under the Suitors
Fund Act in respect of the costs of the appeal.
Leave is granted to the appellant to rely upon the statement of claim filed on 29 April 1994 and the defendants, as they may be advised, are to file appearance and defence as if that statement of claim were served on the date of this judgment.
Liberty to apply on two days' notice to other parties.
 * * * 
