

Barlow versus O'Brien Matter No Ca 40504/97 [1998] NSWSC 599 (10 September )

Last Updated: 9 December 1998 
GREGORY BRIAN BARLOW versus SHANE O'BRIEN 
CA 40504/97 September 1998 
Mason P, Meagher JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
MASON P: The Court finds itself in an unfortunate position. A trial in the District Court on damages only resulted in a verdict for the plaintiff of $352,950. 
The plaintiff appealed seeking an order that the damages be increased to $750,000. There were two grounds of appeal, the first challenging the assessment of thirty-five per cent general damages under s79 of the Motor
Accidents Act, the second challenging the award for future economic loss from the age of forty. The appellant was aged twenty-eight at the time of the accident and thirty-three at the time of trial.

By affidavit sworn 4 September 1998 the appellant put before the Court fresh evidence which he sought leave to adduce in the appeal. The nub of the evidence was that he learnt only on 26 August 1998 that his secure and long- standing employment in the Commonwealth Public Service had come to an end. The case advanced in the affidavit is that he has been required to compete for a new position and that he was unsuccessful in getting it, losing out to a person who had no disabilities or handicaps.

It was pointed out by senior counsel for the respondent that the issues raised by the fresh evidence really address a ground of appeal that does not presently appear in the notice of appeal, namely, a challenge to the future economic loss awarded by the trial judge for the seven year period between the trial and the appellant turning forty.

If the evidence were admitted and if it had the effect contended for by the appellant it would appear to have a significant prospect of increasing the damages should leave be given to adduce this fresh ground of appeal.

The Court was therefore confronted with two difficulties: One, should the leave be given to adduce the fresh evidence and, two, should the necessary leave be given to amend the notice of appeal. The latter point does not really seem to have been considered until today although it seems to follow rather inexorably from the former.

Senior counsel for the respondent indicated that he is not in a position to respond to the fresh evidence. In his written submissions he challenged it as having been served too late, according to the time limited by the rules. He is correct in that regard. But if the evidence is accepted it deals with an issue that only came to the appellant's notice on 26 August. The lateness in itself would not be a ground for its rejection.

The Court has heard argument about whether or not the evidence would attract a grant of leave in accordance with the principles discussed in Doherty's
Case [(1991) 22 NSWLR 284] and
Noonan versus Australian Newsprint Mills Ltd Court of Appeal (unreported) 23
August 1995.

For my part, I would be presently inclined to grant the leave but it is a matter upon which I would wish to reserve my judgment if that option is possible.

In the light of the indication from senior counsel for the respondent that he would require an adjournment to consider his position should the leave be granted, it seems to me to be inevitable that there should be an adjournment.
In granting the adjournment I would not be pre-empting the issue of leave to amend or leave to adduce the fresh evidence but I would be putting the case in a situation whereby the Court will be able to proceed to deal with the matter in its entirety in the event that the leave is granted.

One matter that would be attended to, now that the extent of the issues has been ventilated, would be that the Court would constitute with a bench of three.

In my view it is appropriate but very unfortunate that the appeal needs to be adjourned. I think at this stage the question of the costs should be reserved.

MEAGHER JA: I agree with the President except on the question of whether leave should be granted. My immediate inclination would be to refuse to grant leave; otherwise I concur with what the President has said. 
MASON P: The order of the Court is that the appeal is adjourned to a date to be fixed. The parties have liberty to approach the Registrar for a suitable date. * * * 
