

Bellara Medical Products Ltd, Application of [1996] NSWSC 23 (9 February )

Bellara Medical Products Limited, Application of /96 
Friday, 9 February 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
McLELLAND CJ in Eq 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application under s.411 of the Corporations Law for orders for the convening of meetings to consider a proposed scheme of arrangement between Bellara Medical Products Ltd (Bellara) and (a) its members, and (b) the holders of options to take up shares in that company.

During the course of the hearing I have indicated to counsel what I perceive as procedural difficulties in the proposal as originally formulated which would have caused me to refuse the application, but which have now been avoided or overcome by changes to the proposed scheme and the contemplated methods of its implementation. It is desirable that I place on record what I conceive to have been the major source of difficulty.

One feature of the proposed scheme is that the members of Bellara are to receive, in substitution for their shares in Bellara, shares, and options to take up further shares, in a new holding company (Pharmaction Holdings).
Another is that Bellara and another company (Pharmaction Trading Company) are to become wholly owned subsidiaries of Pharmaction Holdings. One of the steps to be taken in the course of implementation of the scheme is a reduction of the capital of Bellara by the cancellation of all its present issued shares, other than certain shares to be issued by it to Pharmaction Holdings. For collateral reasons, the proponents of the scheme do not desire that there should be brought into existence a contract to which Pharmaction Holdings is a party, binding it to acquire the shares in Pharmaction Trading Company, or
Bellara, or to issue its own shares to the present members of Bellara.

Accordingly, in order to ensure that the present members of Bellara obtain the contemplated benefits under the scheme, the scheme is being formulated in such a way that a series of what are called "Preliminary Events", necessary for the securing of those benefits, is to take place by way of fulfilment of conditions precedent to the further steps implementing the scheme, which are dependent upon the reduction of Bellara's capital having become effective. The reduction of capital cannot be effected by the scheme itself, but must be achieved by the procedure prescribed by s.195 of the Corporations Law. Since the reduction of capital is not intended to be effective unless and until the scheme, after approval by the Court, comes into operation, and unless and until the Preliminary Events have taken place, the special resolution for the reduction of capital will include as conditions precedent to the reduction (a) the coming into operation of the scheme, and (b) the occurrence of the
Preliminary Events. It is at this point that a procedural problem intrudes by virtue of the terms of subs.(6) of s.195, which is as follows: "195 ...

Orders made under subs (5) shall show: the amount of the share capital of the company as altered by the order; the number of shares into which the share capital is to be divided; the amount of each share; and the amount (if any) that at the date of the order is deemed to be paid up on each share." 
One effect of subs.(6) is that at the time the Court makes an order confirming a reduction of capital under s.195(5), all conditions precedent to the reduction, including those specified in the special resolution by which it is effected, must have been satisfied, otherwise the order cannot show "the amount of the share capital of the company as altered by the order", as s.195 (a) requires. The evident purpose of subs.(6) is to provide by a confirming order clear and authoritative evidence of what the share capital is immediately after the order is made, as a result of the reduction. This purpose cannot be fulfilled if at the time of the confirming order the contemplated reduction remains contingent upon the fulfilment of outstanding conditions. In other words, I consider that the provisions of subs.(6) preclude the Court from confirming a reduction of capital which at the time of the confirmation order is still conditional on future events which may or may not occur. In a case such as the present, where the reduction is intended to operate on a date fixed under the scheme, as part of a chain of events essential to the implementation of the scheme, but subject to the occurrence of conditions precedent, it may well be necessary for the application for the order confirming the reduction to be heard on or after that date, after the fulfilment of the conditions precedent, and for the necessary documents to be lodged with the Commission under s.195(7) before consequent steps dependent upon the reduction of capital having taken effect can take place.

In the present case changes have been made to the proposed scheme and ancillary documents so that the steps to be taken to implement the scheme are divided into pre-reduction of capital steps and post-reduction of capital steps, allowing a time interval between them for the application for confirmation of the reduction of capital to be heard. It has not been considered necessary in the present case to include in the scheme any express provision for the winding back of the Preliminary Events in the (unlikely) event that the Court approves the scheme but subsequently refuses to confirm the reduction of capital. Counsel has informed me that it is anticipated that, in fact, the pre-reduction of capital steps, that is the Preliminary Events, will have taken place by the time the applications for approval of the scheme and confirmation of the reduction of capital are brought before the Court.

I will make orders under s.411 for the convening of the necessary meetings.
 * * * 
