

Reitano versus Jones [1996] NSWSC 107 (7 May 1996) 
Reitano v. Jones /94; ED 3686/94 May 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
Meagher JA, Handley JA, Powell JA 
CATCHWORDS: Practice - Separate determination of questions - Particularity required - "Question" based upon assumptions - Inappropriate for separate determination.

Ex Tempore/Reserved: Ex Tempore 
Allowed/Dismissed: Allowed - Remitted to Equity Division 
JUDGMENT 
MEAGHER JA: I will ask Powell JA to give the first judgment.

POWELL JA: This is an appeal from a judgment delivered, and order made, by Windeyer J on 28 September 1994 when his Honour determined what was said to be a preliminary issue which had been formulated for him by the parties. In order that one might appreciate why it was that both the form of the preliminary issue which his Honour was asked to determine, and the procedure of inviting his Honour to determine a preliminary issue was totally inappropriate in the circumstances, it is necessary that I record some facts, albeit as shortly as possible.

It would appear that prior to 23 December 1993 the appellant, ("Mr Reitano"), together with, Messrs J Oliveri, E Oliveri and D L Oliveri, were registered as the proprietors - but whether as tenants in common or joint tenants is not clear - of the land comprised in folio identifier 8/255780 upon which land was erected a residential property known as 161 Palmer Street, East Sydney ("the subject property").

On 23 December 1993, the estate of Mr D L Oliveri was sequestrated.

At first, the administration of that estate was left in the hands of the
Official Trustee in Bankruptcy, but, on 15 April 1993, the respondent, ("Mr
Jones") was appointed the trustee of the bankrupt estate of Mr D L Oliveri.

At some time after his appointment - but when is not revealed by the material before the Court - Mr. Jones appears to have lodged a caveat, given dealing number U289822, to protect the interest of the bankrupt estate in the subject property.

It would appear that, both prior to the appointment of Mr. Jones and afterwards, there were negotiations by Mr. Reitano with, originally, the
Official Trustee in Bankruptcy and, later, either Mr. Jones or one of his officers with a view to Mr. Reitano - or, perhaps, it was Mr. Reitano and his associates, the Messrs J and E Oliveri - acquiring the interest of the bankrupt estate in the subject property. There was a difficulty in that being done in a simple fashion as it would appear that there earlier had been granted by the Commonwealth Bank of Australia ("the Bank") to Mr. Reitano and the Messrs Oliveri a Residential Property Investment Loan the repayment of which, and the interest payable in respect of which, were secured to the Bank by a registered mortgage given dealing No. U45510.

On 5 July 1993 Mr. Reitano wrote to Mr. Jones' firm a letter (Annexure "F" to the affidavit which he was later to swear in these proceedings on 6 September ) setting out in general terms an offer to purchase the interest of the bankrupt estate in the subject property. Thereafter on 22 July the appellant wrote to the defendant a further letter (Annexure "J" to his affidavit) setting out, in more specific terms, his offer for the acquisition of the interest of the bankrupt estate in the subject property.

One of the conditions of the offer which he set out in his letter was that the offer was to be accepted in writing before 4 pm on Friday 5 August 1994.

The letter concluded: "Settlement can occur shortly after my solicitor, as a matter of prudence, has settled the sale documentation. Based on our discussion of last Wednesday I am proceeding on the basis that if this offer is acceptable to you settlement would occur before the end of August 1994" (my emphasis) 
On 5 August 1994, Mr. Jones, by one of his officers, a Mr Russell, wrote to
Mr. Reitano a letter (Annexure "K" to Mr. Reitano's affidavit), the second paragraph of which was as follows: "On the basis of information currently available to me, I am willing to accept your offer to purchase a 25 percent interest in the property located at 161 Palmer Street, East Sydney, currently in the name of the above mentioned." (my emphasis) 
Thereafter, there were set out certain calculations - apparently based on the information available to Mr. Jones - as to the appropriate sum to be paid in accordance with the formula which Mr. Reitano had set out in his two letters.
That sum was $29,750, representing the net value of the interest of the bankrupt estate in the property. That letter was not transmitted by facsimile to Mr. Reitano until 4.06 p.m. on 5 August 1994.

At the trial before Windeyer J it was accepted by the parties that, in the circumstances, the letter could not be treated as an acceptance of the offer which had been made by Mr. Reitano in his letters of 5 and 22 July, but that it should be treated as a counter-offer by Mr. Jones.

Thereafter, on 8 August 1994, so it was said (para. 11 of Mr. Reitano's affidavit) there was a conversation between Mr. Reitano and Mr Russell, in the course of which conversation Mr Russell, so it is said, asked, "When do you propose to settle?" to which query Mr. Reitano replied, "Let's say settlement to take place by the end of the month, say 26 August".

On 15 August 1994 - or perhaps it was a day later - there was said (para. 11 of Mr. Reitano's affidavit) to have taken place a conversation between a Ms
Rebecca Halpin, whom Mr. Reitano says he believed to be an employee of Mr.
Jones, in which conversation Ms. Halpin is alleged to have said: "I'm ringing to find out what is happening," to which Mr. Reitano is said to have replied: "It's still my intention to settle on the 26th. I have asked the bank to give me a pay-out figure from the 26th." 
Thereafter, on 23 August 1994, Mr. Reitano wrote to Mr. Jones' firm a letter (Annexure "M" to Mr. Reitano's later affidavit) in which, after complaining at considerable length about the fact he had been served with a Summons requiring his attendance for examination in relation to the affairs of Mr D L Oliveri,
Mr. Reitano concluded: "Notwithstanding the regrettable situation which has arisen and the fact that I received no documentation from you as the vendor, it is still my intention to conclude the agreement for the purchase of the bankrupt estate's 25 percent in 161 Palmer Street, East Sydney. As indicated verbally by me to Ms Halpin last week, I propose to settle on 26 August 1994.
 
For settlement, I will require from you the following: - 
A signed transfer from yourself on behalf of the bankrupt of the bankrupt estate's 25% share in the property.
 
As per my offer of 22 July 1994, a withdrawal of the caveat and your written agreement to release the property from any further claims.
 
In exchange, I shall be providing you with a cheque for 429,048.85 determined as follows: - $275,000.00 agreed gross value ,804.50 less total amount payable to Commonwealth Bank as at 26 August 1994 - see attached Commonwealth Bank letter of 11 August 1994 ,195.40 net value ,048.85 bankrupt estate's 25% interest in the net value.
 
Please let me know in advance in whose favour you wish the cheque to be made and the place and time for settlement to occur." 
Thereafter, on 26 August 1994, Mr. Reitano wrote to Mr. Jones' firm a letter, (Annexure "O" to Mr. Reitano's affidavit), which letter concluded: - "As I am ready, able and willing to conclude the agreement I will hold the Trustee personally responsible for all costs incurred by me and the other interest holders in the property arising from the failure to conclude the agreement by 30 August 1994. To allow settlement to occur on that date I need from you the following information in writing by 4 pm today, Friday 26 August 1994: 
Payment details; 
Confirmation that you will have available at the settlement all the paperwork, in a completed state, necessary to satisfy the conditions included in my offer of 22 July 1994; 
Confirmation that you will have a signed transfer from yourself on behalf of the bankrupt, of the bankrupt estate's 25% interest in the property; 
Confirmation that settlement will occur at the Law Society Building, Level 1, 170 Phillip Street, at 4 pm on 30 August 1994.
 
The recalculated amount payable by me to you on a settlement occurring on 30 August 1994 is $28,988.66. This is determined as follows: - $275,000.00 agreed gross value ,804.60 less 26 August 1994 payout amount to the bank ,195.40 .76 less 4 days additional interest payable to the bank ,954.64 net value as at 30 August 1994 ,988.66 bankrupt estate's 25% interest in the net value 
I will immediately apply to the Court for specific performance of the agreement and subsequently for damages, if I am not provided with the necessary information in writing by the requested time." 
The proceedings appear to have commenced on 7 September 1994 when counsel, or solicitors, for Mr. Reitano approached the then duty Judge in the Equity
Division for leave to file, and to give short notice of, a Summons - which was made returnable on 12 September 1994 - in which Summons Mr. Reitano sought (inter alia) a declaration that there was a binding and enforceable agreement for the purchase by him of the interest of the bankrupt estate in the subject property and an order in general form for specific performance, together with a number of ancillary orders.

That Summons came before Windeyer J - but whether merely as the duty Judge in the Equity Division for the time being, or as the result of an order for expedition and grant of a special fixture is by no means clear - on 28
September 1994.

The transcript record of proceedings before the learned trial Judge is singularly cryptic, but following discussion which appears to have taken place between counsel for the parties, and, later, with his Honour, the transcript records: "HIS HONOUR: I order that the following issue be determined as a preliminary issue prior to the determination of any other issues in the proceedings: 'On the assumption (1) that the parties intended to enter into a binding contract without any more formal contract being entered into and (2) that the conversation as set forth in paragraph 11 of the plaintiff's affidavit sworn 6 September 1994 took place as set forth and if (sic) letters being annexures F, J, K, N and O to the plaintiff's said affidavit, together with the said conversation, constitute a contract for the sale and purchase of a one-quarter share in property 161 Palmer Street, East Sydney; it is an agreed fact that annexure K was not forwarded to the plaintiff until after 4 pm on 5 August 1994 and was received by the plaintiff at 4.06 pm on 5 August 1994.' 
I note the agreement between the parties that if the answer to this preliminary question is 'no' then the whole of the proceedings should be dismissed, such agreement being made pursuant to Pt 31 r. 4 of the Rules." 
The matter appears then to have proceeded with counsel on each side addressing, at the conclusion of which addresses his Honour determined that the question as he interpreted it (see Appeal Book p.26) should be answered in the negative, as a result of which determination his Honour, in accordance with the agreement of the parties, dismissed the suit with costs.

From that judgment and order, Mr. Reitano filed a Notice of Appeal raising a number of grounds that it is not necessary to set out in this judgment.

If I may say so, it seems to me that the form of the question which his Honour was asked to determine was meaningless, since it raised no question for determination. Further, as it seems to me, even if some meaning could be given to the question as framed, it seems to me that it was totally inappropriate for the learned trial Judge to accede to the request of the parties that he determine the question.

I say this since the question, if it is to be given a meaning, is postulated on the basis of certain assumptions - both of fact and of law - the validity of which assumptions, in the light of what I have recorded, was, to say the least, open to significant question, and the basis for which assumptions, insofar as they were assumptions of fact, could remain open for further debate if the answer to the question which his Honour interpreted in the way I have set out above were to have been found in the affirmative.

Much as one appreciates that the parties were endeavouring to postulate a finite issue, the determination of which, in a particular way, would have led to the determination of the proceedings without the need for there to be examined what we are told was a significant variety of issues, it seems to me that it is impossible, in the circumstances, to avoid the conclusion that the whole procedure that was adopted miscarried.

For that reason alone, it seems to me that the appeal should be upheld and the order of his Honour set aside and the proceedings remitted to the Equity
Division for determination in the ordinary way.

As both parties have contributed to the miscarriage which has occurred, it seems to me that there should be no order for the costs of either the hearing before Windeyer J or of this appeal.

I would accordingly propose that orders such as I have suggested be made by the Court.

MEAGHER JA: I agree. In my view, no litigation of this magnitude ought be conducted on the face of non-binding assumption.

HANDLEY JA: I also agree.

MEAGHER JA: The orders of the Court therefore are the orders proposed by Powell JA.
 * * * 
