

Sydar Pty Limited and The Corporations Law Sydar Pty Limited versus K Simmonds
Finance Pty Limited No. 1320/95 Corporations [1995] NSWSC 23 (1 September )
 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
EQUITY DIVISION
SANTOW J
HRNG
SYDNEY, 20 March 1995 #DATE 30:3:1995 #ADD 1:9:1995 
Counsel for the Plaintiffs:     M W Joseph (sol.) 
Solicitor for the Plaintiffs:    Kemp Strang and Chippindall 
Counsel for the Defendants:     R Newlinds 
Solicitors for the Defendants:   Middletons Moore and Bevins
ORDER
I award costs to the applicant in this matter and invite the parties, within seven days, to submit orders giving effect to this judgment.
JUDGE1
THE ESSENTIAL ISSUES
SANTOW J:  The undisputed facts of this case require this Court to determine which of two conflicting intermediate Appellate Court decisions it should follow, in a matter of some importance concerning the Corporations Law and its interpretation.
This is in order to decide whether there is power in the Court under s1322(4)(d) of the Corporations Law to extend the twenty-one day time period laid down by s459G(2) and (3) of Part 5.4 of the Corporations Law. In particular, should this Court follow the Queensland
Court of Appeal in
Cavetina Pty Limited versus Synthetic Dye Works Industries Pty Limited [(1994) 14
ACSR 274] ("Cavetina"); or the Victorian Court of Appeal which considered
Cavetina "plainly wrong" in David Grant and Co Pty Limited versus Westpac
Banking
Corporation <case>; [(1995) 15 ACSR 771] ("David Grant")? What David Grant considered "plainly wrong" was Cavetina's decision that the dispensing power of s1322(4)(d) of the Corporations Law was capable of application to permit the
Court to extend the time limits in s459G(2) and (3) of Part 5.4 of the
Corporations Law to set aside a creditor's statutory notice of demand.
Section 459G permits a company to make application within twenty-one days to set aside a creditor's statutory notice of demand, by filing and serving the application and supporting affidavit within that time period. That notice is based on the creditor's claim to an undisputed debt owed by the alleged debtor company. Such notice would otherwise lead to the winding up of the company. This is subject only to the Court's inherent jurisdiction in the case of abuse of process and to s459S of the Corporations Law permitting the company concerned if it can, to establish solvency prior to the final application for winding up and thus avert it.
This case also raises the question whether the alternative dispensing power in s467A of Part 5.4B of the Corporations Law, applicable only to "defects and irregularities", is capable of application to the present circumstances, though contrary to the view in both David Grant and Cavetina in the circumstances there applicable.
If this Court concluded that the dispensing power in s1322(4) of the
Corporations Law were capable of application, contrary to the Defendant creditor's submission, then it must determine whether as a matter of discretion, it should exercise that power in the present circumstances, in favour of the Plaintiff debtor; or alternatively, if capable of application, whether it should exercise the dispensing power applicable only to defects and irregularities in s467A of the Corporations Law.
 
ELABORATION OF FACTUAL CIRCUMSTANCES
In the present case the following is not in dispute. First, that the
Plaintiff failed to file the supporting affidavit for the relevant application to set aside the Defendant's Statutory Demand, within the twenty-one day time limit laid down by s459G(2). Second, that the Plaintiff failed also to serve that affidavit on the Defendant, as the relevant creditor, within the twenty-one day time period defined by s459G(3). Third, that the actual application was made, by the Plaintiff, though without the supporting affidavit, within the twenty-one day time limit under s459G(2). Fourth, that it was served, again without the supporting affidavit, on the Defendant creditor within the twenty-one day time period defined by s459G(3).
The Plaintiff applies by Notice of Motion in the alternative that the time for compliance with s459G of the Corporations Law be extended pursuant to s467A of the Corporations Law and/or s1322(4) of the Corporations Law.
I briefly record the relevant dates that are part of the agreed facts. On January 1995 the Statutory
Demand was posted by the Defendant to the
Plaintiff On 24 January 1995 the Statutory Demand was received by the
Plaintiff. On 13
February 1995 the Summons was filed and served, seeking to set aside the Defendant's Statutory Demand pursuant to s459G of the
Corporations
Law. No supporting affidavit was filed or served then, or within the twenty-one day time period after the Statutory Demand was served on the
Plaintiff, but was filed in Court for the first time in these proceedings, having been earlier rejected by the Registrar as out of time.
On 14 March 1995 the Summons was made returnable before the Registrar. The
Plaintiff sought leave to file the affidavit, sworn 14 March 1995, of Mr John
Serafino, a director of the Plaintiff, in support of the Summons, in Court.
Leave to do so was refused by the Registrar. The affidavit in support however was served on the solicitor for the Defendant on 14 March 1995.
When the matter came before me for hearing, by consent, the affidavit in support was filed in Court, though without admissions on the part of the Defendant.
The affidavit dated 20 March 1995 of Mr John Serafino, in support of the
Notice of Motion, contends that amount claimed to be owing by the Plaintiff to the Defendant is overstated. According to the Defendant's calculation, as set out in the Notice of Demand, the Defendant received from the Plaintiff only the sum of $55,000 between 22 April 1994 and 6 January
Whereas, according to the Plaintiffs calculation, made on 13 March 1995, between the relevant dates the Plaintiff paid the
Defendant the sum of $60,500. Thus the
Plaintiff claims that the Defendant's Notice of Demand, in claiming $60,553.62, overstates the principal owed by the Plaintiff to the Defendant by $5,500 plus any interest on that sum claimed in the Statutory Demand.
 .
The affidavit also states that during the period between 9 January 1995 and 23 January 1995 Mr Serafino was overseas on business in Hong Kong and
China. Further that when he returned, he was not fit to go to work as "he was suffering from high blood pressure caused by stress".
The affidavit then states: "When I returned to the office on 21st January 1995 I perused the
Demand and considered that it over-stated the amount that the
Plaintiff owed to the Defendant.
The affidavit then sets out to further explain the Plaintiff's tardiness: "4. The Plaintiff conducts a personalised tailoring business at
Double Bay and traditionally in the first week of February each year it has a sale. To all intents and purposes the business is run by myself and my Assistant Tina Saunders. therefore when I returned to the business at the end of January, I was very busy organising the sale which commenced on 6th February 1995 and did not have the time to calculate the overstatement in the Demand.
Instead,
I obtained copies of the Statements relating to the
Plaintiff's bank account at the State Bank at Double Bay and handed them to the Plaintiff's Accountant, MrGovendir, and asked him to check the amount demanded. Mr Govendir informs me, and I verily believe, that he was very busy at the time and fully committed to other clients and could not do the necessary calculations straight away.
I did not receive the calculations from Mr Govendir until 10th
March 1995. Those calculations form the basis of Annexure "C" in my Affidavit sworn on 15th March 1995.
For the reasons mentioned above it was not until 13th
March that I was in a position to provide my solicitors with the information I deposed to in my Affidavit sworn 14th
March 1995."
The affidavit dated 14 March 1995 in support of the original application for extension states: "My mother is currently very ill in Italy having undergone two operations recently. I am currently making arrangements to travel to
Italy to be with her for three to four weeks.

I am the only Director of the Plaintiff with any direct knowledge of its financial affairs."
The Plaintiff's grounds for seeking a favourable exercise of the Court's dispensing power, if it be available, thus come down to two matters. First there was an alleged overstatement ($5,500 plus interest) of what is otherwise an undisputed debt (such alleged overstatement being not insignificant in amount relative to the total sum claimed). Second, there was the Plaintiff's stated inability to check what was actually owed in good time, for the reasons given.
It is not disputed by the Defendant that if the Court were to make such an order, assuming it had power to do so (contrary to the Defendant's submission), then "no substantial injustice is likely to be caused to any person". The Court must be satisfied as to this before it can make such an order under s1322(6) of the Corporations Law. However, the Defendant does not concede that, assuming the Court had power to make such an order as a matter of discretion, such order should be made in the circumstances.
 
THE LEGAL ISSUES AND THEIR RESOLUTION
The Sequence of Cases .
The history of recent judicial interpretation of s459G is one in which the conflicting cases have proceeded at such a pace that they seem, on occasion, to pass unrecognised like ships in the night. Thus in several of these, the court concerned appeared not to have before it all of the cases bearing on the point. However the Victorian Court of Appeal in David Grant, the most recent appellate decision, did appear to have before it what were by then the fourteen cases bearing directly or indirectly on the issue. There has been one further case reported since David Grant and which followed it; that of Master Adams in Streets Ahead Pty Ltd versus Amelia Developments
Pty Ltd [(1995) ACLC 341.] I have attached a brief summary of those fourteen cases to this judgment. Although this is a somewhat unusual course, I do so not merely for convenience, but in order better to show the competing considerations which have so far influenced the Courts in attempting to resolve this issue and which produce the present precedential conflict.
That conflict requires early definitive resolution.
This is especially given the importance of the issue for both creditors and debtor companies and the need for uniform interpretation of the Corporations Law, to which the High
Court has made recent reference; Australian Securities Commission v
Marlborough Gold Mines
Limited <case>; [(1993) 177 CLR 485] at 492.
It will be apparent that the principal argument in favour of the view, first expounded by Hayne J in Texel Pty Ltd v Commonwealth of Australia <case>; [(1993) ACSR 535], that s1322(4)(d) did not apply to permit the Court to extend the time limits in s459G(2) and (3), turns on use of the words "only", in the expression "may only" in sub-section (2) and "only if" in sub-section (3) of s459G. Those expressions are said to have given such an emphasis to the twenty,-one day time period, as to preclude the dispensing power of s1322(4)(d).
However, that decision, with other decisions to similar effect, draws on other arguments in support. Thus there is the notion of Part 5.4 as a self-contained scheme or code, the need for certainty from the creditor's viewpoint, and the presence of clearcut language within Part 5.4 for time extension in s459R (though in a different context). Finally, in answer to the argument that the Texel result was repellent, two contentions are made. First, that this is irrelevant if the clear words of statute compel that result, but second, there is in any event mitigating what might be otherwise a repellent outcome, the availability of the Court's inherent power to correct abuse of process as well as the admittedly limited capacity to avert winding up under s459S, where the debtor can demonstrate solvency to the Court.
That conclusion in Texel was opposed in Re Cavetina Pty Ltd [(1994) 12
ACLC 44] when it came before Derrington J. It appears that his Honour's attention was not drawn to Texel (supra) nor to a later decision, of Mildren J in CFC Corporation Pty Ltd versus Lanier (Australia) Pty Ltd (1993) 11 ACSR 772.
CFC Corporation Pty Ltd was however clearly distinguishable. There the deficiency lay only in an irregularity in the form of service. Service had been by facsimile within the requisite time period, rather than personal.
Mildren J had no difficulty in making an order confirming the irregular service. However he did so, not by resort either to s1322 or s467 of the
Corporations Law, but to the Rules of Court.
Then followed a series of conflicting decisions. The first to reach an intermediate court of appeal was Cavetina Pty Limited versus Synthetic Dye Works
Industries
Pty Limited [(1994) 14 ACSR 274.] The Queensland Court of Appeal did have Texel before it, but only some of the other decisions referred to in the summary. With McPherson
J dissenting, the Queensland Court of Appeal declined to follow Texel and upheld the decision of Derrington J.
The Queensland
Court of Appeal was directly followed by a further decision of Hayne J in David Grant and Co Pty Limited versus Westpac Banking
Corporation [(1994) 12 ACLC 886.] Hayne J concluded that neither s467A nor s1322(4)(d) of the Corporations Law, conferred power on the Court to extend the time limits described by s459G(2) and (3). Hayne J (at 898) again emphasised his view that the fundamental question is how to give meaning to s459G(2) and (3) and, in particular, the meaning or effect to be given to the word "only" in each sub-section. Hayne J, as in Texel, concluded that the word "only" made the language imposing the twenty-one day time limit "emphatic". He held that the consequence of that emphasis, understood in light of the legislative scheme introduced into the new Corporations Lam, by the new Part .4, precludes s1322(4)(d) from application.
After a number of further decisions, referred to in the attached summary,
David Grant went to the Victorian Court of Appeal on 10 February 1995; David
Grant and Co Pty Limited versus Westpac Banking Corporation <case>; [(1995) 15 ACSR 771.]
The Victorian Court of Appeal had before it the admonition from the High
Court in Australian Securities Commission versus Marlborough
Gold Mines Limited at 492: "Uniformity of decision in the interpretation of uniform national legislation such as the Corporations Law, is a sufficiently important consideration to require that an intermediate appellate court should not depart from an interpretation placed on such legislation by another Australian intermediate appellate court unless convinced that that interpretation is plainly wrong."
The Victorian Court of Appeal in David Grant did however conclude that
Cavetina was "plainly wrong".
In a unanimous decision, the Victorian Court of Appeal relied principally for its conclusion on the emphasis said to have been lent to the time limits in s459G(2) and (3) by use of the word "only" in each sub-section. That ground was reinforced by several other considerations from those earlier mentioned.
It also emphasised what it described as "a very important matter".
This was that no consideration was given in Cavetina to what the Victorian Court of
Appeal termed "the difficulty presented by s459F":
I will return to that shortly. It also added that "the authority of the (Cavetina) decision is affected by the dissent of McPherson
J.A." 
Significance of use of the words "may only" in s459G(2) and "only if" in s459G(3). 27. For convenience, I first quote s459G below: "SECTION 459 COMPANY MAY APPLY 
G(1) (Company may apply) A company may apply to the Court for an order setting aside a statutory demand served on the company.

G(2) (Time limit) An application may only be made within 21 days after the demand is so served.

G(3) (Affidavit and copy of application) An application is made in accordance with this section only if, within those 21 days: an affidavit supporting the application is filed with the court; and a copy of the application, and a copy of the supporting affidavit, are served on the person who served the demand on the company."
I turn first to the words "may only" in s459G(2), read in the context of the s459G and in particular sub-section (3).
 .
Neither Texel nor any of the cases following Texel have undertaken any detailed exegesis of the word "may", as it appears in s459G(1) and (2). A useful starting point, is the relevant Interpretation Acts and alternative uses of "may" and "shall" in other contexts, before turning to the
Corporations Law itself.
Section 23 of the Interpretation Act 1897 provides as follows: "
Wherever in an Act a power is conferred on any officer or person by the word 'may', such word shall means that the power may be exercised, or not, at discretion; but where the word 'shall' confers the power, such word shall mean that the power must be exercised."
Similarly, in the Interpretation Act 1901 (Cth) s33(2A) provides as follows: " (2A) Where an Act assented to after the commencement of this subsection provides that a person, court or body may do a particular act or thing, and the word 'may' is used, the act or thing may be done at the discretion of the person, court or body."
There is no definition in the Corporations Law which gives the word "may" any different interpretation, beyond such difference if any as may be implied from the particular context where it appears.
In Stroud's Judicial Dictionary, 5th Ed. Sweet and Maxwell 1986, the word "may" and similar phrases are said to "give, in their ordinary meaning, an enabling and discretionary power". However they may occasionally, in context, carry with it a connotation of obligation or compulsion.
Thus Stroud quotes Lord Blackburn in
Julius versus The Right Reverend Lord
Bishop of Oxford [(1880) 5 App Cas 214] at 2434 as the leading case on the principles for construing as obligatory, phrases which, in their ordinary meaning, are merely enabling. In that case, Lord Blackburn 244, after referring, with approval to the judgment of the Queen's Bench in R versus Tithe
Commissioners El and Bl 459, 474; <case>; [117 ER 179], 185, said, "The enabling words are construed as compulsory whenever the object of the power is to effectuate a legal right" whilst at 233, referring to the word "may" in a statute he says: "For where a statute directs the doing of a thing for the sake of justice or the public good, the word "may" is the same as the word "shall"; thus, 23 Hen. 6 says the sheriff may take bail. This is construed he shall, for he is compellable so to do."
Stroud cites, inter alia, Finance Facilities Pty Limited v Commissioner of Taxation <case>; [(1971) 127 CLR 106] at 138-9. The latter case concerned s46 of the [Income Tax Assessment Act 1936](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/itaa1936240/) (Cth). Under s46, the Commissioner of Taxation "may" allow a rebate, for tax, on dividends and lays down the conditions for doing so. The Court held that where those conditions were fulfilled, the
Commissioner had to allow that rebate.
Stroud concludes that: "'May', and such enabling words as those above referred to, therefore group themselves into three classes according as they impose or give - 
I. An Obligatory Duty; 
II A Discretionary or Enabling Power.

III. Undetermined." .
Indeed that tension between "may" as alternatively obligatory or merely discretionary (the latter its ordinary meaning) is reflected in the opposing cases on variation of fights articles.
This was in answering the question whether class rights can be varied only in conformity with such an article or instead, may be varied merely by special resolution, compare Fischer versus Easthaven Ltd [(1964) NSWR 261] and Simon versus H.P.M Industries Pty Ltd and Ors [(1989) 7 ACLC 770.] The latter two cases concluded that the word "may" in such articles should be construed as enabling alteration only in accordance with the variation of rights article and not merely by special resolution, whereas the first case reached the opposite conclusion.
The question those cases thus posed was whether, when articles provide that class rights "may" be varied in a particular manner, this should be taken to mean "may only". It is evident that use of the word "may" by itself, was intrinsically ambiguous, leading to the conflict of authority.
It is thus not surprising to find Asprey M M in her work Plain Language for Lawyers Federation
Press 1991 at 154, explaining how the word "may", though traditionally the language of permission, finds itself in some contexts used interchangeably, and confusingly, with the word "shall", so as to suggest obligation or command. She says: "May 
If shall traditionally implied obligation or command, then may is the language of permission. May states what is allowed. This is consistent with normal language use and is not liable to be confused with the future.

Unfortunately, the courts sometimes say that shall means may and may means shall. This is not due to any defect or ambiguity in either word: it is only done to correct poor drafting. Black's Law
Dictionary notes that: courts not infrequently construe may as shall or must to the end that justice may not be the slave of grammar. ((24) Under May, 6th edition. 1990. West Publishing Co. St Paul. Minneapolis.
p979.) 
GC Thornton also recognised this point, when he wrote: 
Not infrequently, courts have been obliged to construe "may" as obligatory but these instances amount rather to judicial amelioration of drafting errors than a licence to draftsmen to say one thing and mean another. ((25) Thornton, GC. 1987, Legislative
Drafting, 3rd edition. Butterworths. London, p91.)"
Black's Law Dictionary 6th Ed. 1990 in fact adds this important qualification to the earlier quoted observation: "However, as a general rule, the word "may" will not be treated as a word of command unless there is something in context or subject matter of act to indicate that it was used in such sense. Bloom v
Texas State Bd. of Examiners of Psychologist, Tex.Civ.App., [475
S.W.2d 374], 377. In construction of statutes and presumably also in construction of federal rules word "may" as opposed to "shall" is indicative of discretion or choice between two or more alternatives, but context in which word appears must be controlling factor. U.S. versus Cook, C.A.Ill., <case>; [432 F.2d 1093], 1098."
In Finance Facilities (supra) Owen J said at 13 8: "The relevant principles are set out in the joint judgment of this
Court in Ward versus Williams <case>; [(1955) 92 CLR 496], at pp. 505-506. There it was held that: "...it is necessary to bear steadily in mind that it is the real intention of the legislature that must be ascertained and that in ascertaining it you begin with the prima facie presumption that permissive or facultative expressions operate according to their ordinary natural meaning. 'The authorities clearly indicate that it lies on those who assert that the word "may" has a compulsory meaning to show, as a matter of construction of the Act, taken as a whole, that the word was intended to have such a meaning' - per
Cussen J: Re Gleeson [(1907) VLR 3] 68, at p 373."
These general observations about the word "may" bear directly on its use and meaning in the context of the
Corporations Law and in particular s459G.
One gains some insight as to its meaning in that particular context if, in looking at s459G(2), one compares use of the words "may only" with the use of the word "may" alone in, for example, s414(7) of the Corporations
Law. In the latter case, "may" alone is contrasted with the word "shall" in s414(9).
Section 414 of the Corporations Law deals with the compulsory acquisition of shares of shareholders dissenting from a scheme or contract approved by the majority and the fights of dissenting shareholders. In similar fashion to s459G(1), the word "may" is used in a clearly permissive sense. Sections (7) and (8) provide: "414(7) (Notice requesting statement of dissenting shareholders)
When a notice is given under subsection , the dissenting shareholder may, by written notice given to the transferee within one month after the day on which the notice was given under subsection (2), ask for a statement in writing of the names and addresses of all other dissenting shareholders as shown in the register of members.
 (8) (duty to comply with notice) Where a notice is given under subsection (7), the transferee shall comply with it."
Thus s414(7) read with s414(8), makes clear what the dissenting shareholder needs to do, in giving notice, if that notice is to achieve the consequence that the transferee is bound to comply with it. First, the notice must comply with the requirement that it be written and, second, it must be given to the transferee within the one month period prescribed. In effect, the section gives permission to give the notice but in doing so, sets out what must be done in exercise of that permission if the notice is to have the necessary legal effect of obliging the transferee.
Section 414(8) makes reasonably clear, though not so clear that clarificatory words would be redundant, that it imposes an obligation on the transferee (only) where "notice was given under sub-section (7).
Had "only" been expressly added before "where", it would simply have denoted what was reasonably implicit, doing so by way of helpful clarification, rather than significant emphasis.
Section 414(9), in contrast, imposes a positive obligation on the transferee to do a particular thing. It follows a common pattern in the
Corporations Law for such positive obligations. It applies where the condition of nine-tenths' acceptance has been satisfied. That positive obligation is connoted, naturally enough, by the word "shall" not the word "may". Here one is not dealing with a conditional or qualified permission but a simple positive obligation.
It would therefore be hardly logical to treat the availability of the dispensing power under s1322, In the context of s414(7), as dependent on whether the word "only" was added or not, when its only purpose in being added is clarificatory. This is particularly when there would be no doubt the dispensing power would apply to the positive obligation in s414(9).
I turn now to s459G(2). Section 459G, quite naturally, commences its permission with the word "may". It would have been nonsensical to commence those words of permission with the word "shall", as if an obligation were conferred. This is in sub-section . This subsection states that a company "may" apply to the Court for an order setting aside a Statutory Demand served on the company; that is to say, the company is given permission to do so. The word "only" is not used. Sub-sections (2) and (3) then set out the qualifications to that permission, in terms of the conditions of time and procedure to be complied with. Here the word "only" is used, in qualifying the earlier permission. Those qualifications are the twentyone day time period in both sub-sections and the requirement in sub-section (3) for filing and service.
Naturally enough, s459G(2) in elaborating on the requirements attaching to that permission, also uses the word "may". Here though, "may" is qualified, for clarity, by the preceding word "only". This is in order to make it quite clear that the permissive "may" is qualified by the time requirement of application within twenty-one days. Otherwise, one would be relying on the ambiguous word "may", as doing the work not only of permitting, the natural meaning, but also of going beyond that and qualifying that permission by the requirements attaching to that permission.
It is thus, in truth, fallacious to see in the word "only" before "may" any special emphasis, or any greater emphasis than would have been denoted by the word "shall" (or "must" if you prefer plain English). All "only" does in sub-section (2) is ensure the legislation does not rely on a beneficial interpretation of "may" to have it qualify the earlier permission. "May only" is obligatory only in the limited sense that to do what is permitted, one is obliged to comply with the terms of that permission.
I turn to s459G(3) where the words "only if" precede the formal requirements. There, requirements for filing and service of the application and supporting affidavit are set out, together with, again, the defined time limit of twenty-one days. All of this is for the purpose of identifying applications "made in accordance with this section".
The usage is thus similar to ss414(7) and 414(8). In sub-section (7) is defined the notice "under ss(7)". In sub-sections (2) and (3) of s459G is defined the application "made in accordance with this section", Without the word "only" in s459G that result might well have been inferred, as indeed it is in ss414(7) and (8). But good drafting should not rely on inference. Here the draftsman in s459G(3) has simply left the position properly clear by using the word "only".
It is thus clear enough that use of the word "only" in s459G(3) is simply a natural way of defining the qualification applicable to the permission to apply for an order.
The foregoing thus provides a basis for answering the question, whether use of the word "only", in both s459G(2) and s459G(3), precludes, by sufficient expression of a contrary statutory intention, the application of the dispensing power applicable under s1322(4)(d). The latter permits the
Court to give extensions of the period "for doing any act, matter of thing, or instituting or taking any proceeding under this Law ... ". Section 1322 is not expressed to be subject to earlier provisions of the Corporations Law nor is it expressed to be subject to contrary intention. The opening words are: "Subject to the following provisions of this section but without limiting the generality of any other provision of this Law ...". (my emphasis)
It is clear that the Court shall not make such an order unless, under s1322(6)(c), it is satisfied "that no substantial injustice has been, or is likely to be caused, to any person". That condition is clearly satisfied here, as conceded by the Defendant.
 .
It would be a strange result indeed if, by clarifying the use of the notoriously ambiguous word "may", in order to make it clear that the permission it connotes is qualified by the need to comply with a time period (and other formal requirements), the legislature is to be taken to thereby intend to preclude the remedial or dispensing effect of s1322. The word "only", properly understood, performs the function of desirable clarification rather than exclusionary emphasis.
It is well settled that the remedial purpose of s1322 requires that it be given a liberal construction. The sub-section is a remedial provision intended to permit to be made perfect what is imperfect in respect of some failure to comply with the provisions of the Corporations Law (or the constitution of the company).
To interpret "only", despite its clarificatory function, as sufficient to exclude the application of s1322(4)(d) is clearly incompatible with such a liberal construction. Thus, for example, it has been held that the section should not be restricted in its scope to instances of inadvertence or accidental noncompliance; see Re Pembury Pty Ltd [(1991) 4 ACSR 759] at 1224. It has even been held that such a provision even confers power "to validate something which otherwise would be completely and utterly void, per Young J in
Sydney Aussie Rules Social Club Ltd versus Superintendent of Licensing [(1989) 7
ACLC 991] These decisions did not follow the Western
Australian Supreme Court which held that it is not intended to breathe life into something which has been specifically rendered void by another provision of the Law (such as s225(2)) - not the case here, Harman versus Energy
Research
Group Aust. Ltd [(1985) 3 ACLC 536.]
It would also be anomalous that where the legislature actually intended, by use of the word "shall", to impose a positive obligation (such as to file a notice or, in the example earlier given, give notice to dissenting shareholders), the dispensing power would apply, whereas when the legislature simply gave a qualified permission, using the words "may only", no such dispensing power would apply.
All of these considerations point in favour of the conclusion in Cavitina and against that in David Grant.
It remains to be considered whether, notwithstanding those considerations, there is anything in the associated s459F which nonetheless compels me to the conclusion reached by the Victorian Court of Appeal in David
Grant.
I am satisfied that there is nothing in that section which compels me to conclude that s459G must be construed so as to preclude the dispensing power in s1322(4). If s459G(2) and (3) were otherwise amenable to the dispensing power and if that dispensation were given, then s459F(2)(a)(i) would necessarily apply. This is if one were to treat, as I believe one should, the application as then being made "under s459G". The dispensing power would have permitted the dispensation to be given for an application to be made under s459G though outside the prescribed time.
Even if that were not so, the dispensing power could be applied, mutatis mutandis, to extend the period for compliance in s459F(2)(b) by a similar extension as in relation to the application under s459G. While the Notice of
Motion of the Plaintiff does not, in terms, seek such an extension for purposes of s459F(2), the Defendant fairly indicated that it would not oppose such an application if made on that ground, though obviously without prejudice to the Defendant's opposition to the dispensing power applying at all.

However, I take the Victorian Court of Appeal in David Grant to have put s459F(2) as supportive of a particular construction in relation to s459G, rather than suggesting that, of itself, s459F(2) placed an absolute bar on the dispensing power applying. In doing so, the Victorian Court of Appeal placed emphasis on the uncertainty and adverse consequence for the creditor, if the dispensing power were capable of exercise after the twenty-one days. However, there are also consequences even more seriously adverse to the debtor, if, for example, it were even a day late in making its application. Those consequences may be mitigated by the Court's inherent jurisdiction and s459S but they are certainly not removed. It is rightly said that Part 5.4 should be clear and certain and thus that the Court should not encourage laxity on the part of those debtors who fail, without good reason, to make their applications under s459G in timely fashion and in the proper form; see, for example, Mauntill Pty
Ltd versus Cadoroll Pty Ltd [(1994) 12 ACLC 976] at 984. As Higgins J in that case recognised, that can be achieved by the manner in which any discretion in applying the dispensing power under s1322 is exercised. This should not be therefore a consideration leading to the conclusion that the Court is without power to apply the dispensing power. That, in my judgment, sufficiently meets the argument put in that behalf by the Court of Appeal in David Grant.
Nor do I consider s459R, in its express provision for extension of time in a different context, gives rise to any implication that s1322 is to be excluded from application to s459G.
Finally, it is clear that Part 5.4 is not a self-contained scheme. In that regard I adopt what was said by Young J in Bartex Fabrics Pty Ltd v
Phillips Fox [(1994) 12 ACLC 462] at 468 where he cites a number of provisions outside Part 5.4 which impinge upon Part 5.4.
I should briefly, for completeness, turn to s467A. In light of the conclusion that I do reach that s1322(4)(d) is capable of application, I do not need to consider whether s467A might also apply. However, in Bartex
Fabrics Pty Ltd (supra) the case is put for giving that section an independent application, where there is failure to serve an application within the twentyone day time period, even though that failure was not the result of irregular service such as by fax within the time period.
Where neither filing nor service of the supporting affidavit has occurred within the twentyone day period, there is a deal to be said for the view that this was not a mere "defect or irregularity in connection with the application" within s467A(a). Thus see Omega Estates Pty Ltd (supra) at 1223, where a distinction is drawn between a defective exercise of a power to appoint (in the context of s119 of the [Companies Act 1961](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/ca1961107/)) and the non-exercise or non-existence of the power, taking the matter out of the realm of defect or irregularity, as discussed in
Grant versus John Grant and Sons Pty Ltd <case>; [(1950) 82 CLR 1] On the other hand, it might be said that the application has been made, though not in accordance with s459G, and that it merely suffers from "the defect or irregularity" of not having been accompanied, within the time period, by a supporting affidavit.
However, it is not necessary for me to decide between these views, as I am satisfied s1322(4)(d) applies in the circumstances. Thus, and consistently with Cavetina and David Grant, I do not apply s467A in the present circumstances as a basis for dispensation, whatever may be its potential reach in other circumstances.
I now turn to the question whether, on the basis that I have the dispensing power under s1322(4)(d) and there is no substantial injustice likely to be caused by its exercise, I should in fact exercise it in the present circumstances. After some consideration, I conclude that I should exercise it, having regard not only to the conceded absence of substantial injustice and to the very serious potential consequences if the matter is to proceed to winding up (subject only to the life-belt of s459S), but also because there does appear to be genuine dispute as to the amount of the debt.
 
ORDERS
I award costs to the applicant in this matter and invite the parties, within seven days, to submit orders giving effect to this judgment.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/23.html  
