

Songul Sahin versus David Charles Carroll No. 13161 of 1991 [1995] NSWSC 48 (25
September 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COMMON LAW DIVISION
SPENDER AJ
HRNG
SYDNEY, 20-21 June, 28 and 31 July 1995 #DATE :8:1995 #ADD 25:9:1995 
Counsel for the Plaintiff       Mr. Jobson 
Solicitors for the Plaintiff      Stacks -
The Law Firm with
Goudkamp Mahony 
Counsel for the Defendant       Mr. Kennedy 
Solicitors for the Defendant      Abbott Tout
ORDER
Orders made
JUDGE1
SPENDER AJ These proceedings are brought by the plaintiff against the defendant to recover damages under the Compensation to Relatives Act, ("the
Act") and damages for what is generically and misleadingly described as nervous shock. Liability to the claim under the Act has been admitted, but not for the nervous shock claim.
I shall deal with each claim separately, although there is some overlapping between the facts relevant to the dependency claim and those relevant to the nervous shock claim.
 
The dependency claim
The plaintiff was born in Turkey on 1 March 1970.
She left school at the age of sixteen and received a secondary school certificate. It is the only qualification she has. She then lived with her family on a farm in northern
Turkey.
She met her husband, Kemal Sahin, in 1985. He was born on 1 June 1967 and was her second cousin. In 1985 he spent a short time in Turkey and then returned to Australia. They kept in touch through correspondence and phone calls; he proposed marriage; they married in Turkey on 27 July 1989. They went for a honeymoon of one week. He returned to Australia leaving her behind; there were visa problems. They kept in touch; he sent her sufficient money for her survival.
 .
She intended to join him in Australia but before she was able to do so he was killed in a motor vehicle accident on 13 October 1989.
He was not then employed, but there is evidence before me, which I accept, that he had worked as a process worker for A.C.I. from to 1989 under his mother's maiden name; he had approached Mr Joe Alves who was the senior union delegate at
A.C.I's plant at
Waterloo for a job; there were jobs open; Mr Alves knew him to be a good process worker and recommended that he be given employment.
The probabilities are, I find, that he would have taken up employment with A.C.I.
It is common ground that his nett salary at A.C.I. had been before his trip to Turkey in 1989, and would have been on taking up employment again with
A.C.I., $350 a week.
The plaintiff arrived in Australia shortly after her husband's death and took up residence with his parents. She soon got work.
She had a month with the cleaning company and then started to work part-time (twice a week for four hours each day) in December 1989 with the Tresillian Hospital. In about
October 1990 she took up full-time work at the Gazebo Hotel. She has done well, and is well regarded by both employers. In 1994 out of 180 or so staff she was awarded the Employee of the Year Award at the Gazebo Hotel.
She has lived frugally. In 1994 she purchased a home unit in Marrickville for $133,000; $70,000 was borrowed from the Commonwealth
Bank; the deposit and the balance came from her savings. The unit is presently rented at $175 a week. There was no evidence of outgoings or interest charges.
The plaintiff has given evidence of the effect of her husband's death on her (which I will consider in more detail when I come to the nervous shock claim) but which has some relevance when I come to look at future contingencies. There is also some evidence before me, or inferences open on the evidence, on her present living conditions, and her future intentions.
The plaintiff's evidence is that she has felt the loss of her husband keenly; that they intended to have children; that his accident was a great shock to her; that she has almost no social contact outside of her husband's family; that she has no male friend and no interest in having one. Her own family is still in Turkey. She has no intention to remarry in the near future or, I infer, she would say at all. She is uncertain about her future intentions; she may stay in Australia, she may return to Turkey.
Her living conditions are, I infer, difficult. It appears that one family member - not her parents-in-law - who lives under the same roof, may have a drinking problem. There is evidence before me from Dr Attia-Soliman to the effect that her living and cultural conditions are a limiting factor in her life and may inhibit her prospects of remarriage. I put to some weight on Dr
Attia Soliman's opinion on this, but less than I think the doctor did. I place no weight on the doctor's evidence that rumors about the plaintiff might harm her remarriage prospects.
With these matters in mind I turn to the issues that arise under the dependency claim, and to the submissions put to me.
The plaintiff makes the following submissions. 
At the time of the accident the deceased was to be re-employed by A.C.I.
Based on his pre-accident earnings the loss of the dependency from 13 October to 20 June 1995 (291 weeks) should be valued at 70% of the nett wages the deceased would have earned, giving $71,019; this allowed 30% of the deceased's nett earnings for his personal use. 
At the time of the accident the deceased was 23; he would now be aged , leaving 37 years of working life to the age of 65. 
The onus was on the defendant to establish contingencies adverse to the plaintiff's claim; 
Contingencies were not all one way: there would have been an increase in the deceased's weekly wages in the period from the accident; if the court took $350 nett as the working figure, further discounts should not be made; 
That - I infer - consequently and overall it was appropriate to allow % for vicissitudes; 
There should be no discount by reason of the plaintiff's work history since her husband's death and this could not, or should not, be considered when looking to the dependency issue, past or future; 
The plaintiff had shown no interest in remarriage and any discount for remarriage should be minimal; there should be none for the past; she would be restricted to the Turkish community for remarriage prospects; and to take - as
I infer a minimum - 10 years from now would not be an unreasonable period. 
There should be no discount against the contingency that the marriage might have failed by now, or in the assumed future dependency period. 
That looking to future dependency it was reasonable overall to approach the issue on a 50% dependency for the whole of the deceased's assumed future working life on earnings of $350 a week discounted by 70% to take account of remarriage and vissicitudes.
The defendant's submissions were to this effect: 
A measure of the extent of the dependency was the bare sum of around $50 a week (or so) provided by the deceased after returning to Australia to his wife in Turkey; 
There was no evidence of his financial habits or demands and at best 50% of the nett income - as a starting point - was the most that could be conceded; 
There was a very substantial prospect of remarriage within the next three to five years; she was young, presentable, without children, with an income, and some assets. Her present nett earnings were around $350 per week and she was receiving $175 per week rent (although this, I note, makes no allowance for interest charges and outgoings on the property). 
It could be inferred it was probable she would return to Turkey with enhanced prospects of marriage. But if she did not, Sydney has a substantial
Turkish community; 
A number of adverse contingencies existed at the time of trial: the deceased had not started work; he was required to do national service in
Turkey; his left arm had been injured; his potential employer was to close down its Waterloo operations. The appropriate discount was put at 20%. 
There was always the prospect, these days, that the marriage would not last, and this should be taken into consideration: at least a 10% further discount should be made; 
There was no evidence that the plaintiff would not have worked if the deceased had not died; given her income levels her dependency would have been reduced from her own income and an appropriate reduction would be not less than 25%. 
It could be inferred on remarriage she would marry somebody whose financial circumstances were no less good than those of her deceased husband.
The principles that govern cases of this nature are well established. See generally Moore versus Limb (1994) Aust Torts
Reports par. 81-295 at 61,575-61,576 ; Luntz, Assessment of Damages for Personal Injury and Death, 3rd Ed. page and following pages and cases cited; McGregor on Damages, 15th Ed, page and following. They have been debated before me and I think it useful to set them out. But, because they are so well known I shall do so by way of brief summary only. Relevantly, they are these: 
The basic rule is that damages are to be based on the reasonable expectation of pecuniary benefits reducible to money value: Moore v Limb at ,575. 
It is not necessary to prove the plaintiff was receiving a pecuniary benefit at the time of death; a prospective loss is sufficient: Luntz, at 391;
McGregor, at 982. 
The defendant bears an evidentiary burden regarding the allegation that a plaintiff is, will or is likely to recover benefits from remarriage or other supporting relationships formed after the death of the deceased: Moore versus Limb at 61,575. 
Mathematical accuracy is always impossible but arithmetic may provide a guide in an assessment of what is in essence the valuation of a chance; Luntz at 390,394,395. 
In valuing a worth of a dependency one looks to nett probable earnings less, relevantly, what the deceased would have spent on himself Luntz at 397; 
There is no deduction for shared benefits: Luntz at 397.
 
Contingencies must be allowed for. In assessing damages the Court must consider all circumstances which may be legitimately pleaded in diminution of damages: Moore versus Limb at 61,575; Davies versus Powell Duffryn versus Associated
Collieries
Limited [(1942) AC 601] at 611-612 (HL); 
In allowing for contingencies - which may go either way - one should consider, and place such weight on them as the evidence may require, amongst others: 
The chance of the prior death of the deceased had he not been killed; 
The chance of death of the dependant;
The chance of a divorce;
Such matters as changes in income and expenditure patterns, or the prospect of increased support.

No deduction should be made for post-death income: Carroll versus Purcell <case>; [(1961) 107 CLR 73] at 79. However if it can be shown that the dependant would have worked anyway and as a result would have had a diminished expectation of benefit from the deceased, this factor should be taken into account so far as it would support the conclusion that had the husband not died, the extent of the dependency would be less: Dominish versus Astill [(1979) 2 NSWLR 368] at 374C,
B, 396D (CA); Luntz at 401 and 431 and the cases cited.
 
Findings
I make these findings: 
The plaintiff had an actual, if limited dependency on the deceased, and a probable prospective dependency. 
Looking to the past: 
No allowance should be made for remarriage. This has not happened and on balance I don't accept that this case has been the cause. Her family circumstances are difficult and have, I think, weighed against remarriage. 
Looking to the extent of her dependency I think it should be more than put by the defendant, and less than put by the plaintiff. Adverse contingencies must be taken account of, but I do not think that the adverse contingencies relied on by the defendant as existing at the time of the trial are of any importance, and I put them to one side. I can see nothing to take the case out of the normal run when one comes to look at vicissitudes. 
The likelihood or possibility that the plaintiff would in any event have worked for some part of the past, had her husband not been killed, should be taken account of (See below, where I consider the future). 
On the plaintiff's side of the ledger there was the prospect that, between death and the trial, the deceased's earnings would otherwise have increased in accordance with the general upward trend of wages over that period. 
In all the circumstances I think a reasonable approach to the extent of her dependency for the loss of past support, which would take account of contingencies, is to allow 60% of nett earnings of $350 a week. Contrast Luntz at 396. 
Looking to the future: 
The first matter to be considered is the contingency - always difficult to assess - of remarriage.
This is the more difficult by reason of the plaintiff's background, and the scant information before me about the effects of that background and its culture and traditions on her remarriage prospects.
The plaintiff is young, well groomed, attractive and presentable; she has no children and some income and assets. There is evidence, which I accept, that in employment at the Gazebo Hotel she related very well with guests, and got many compliments from them. This indicates to me a personable and warm nature.There is no evidence - or none I would accept - that her prospects of remarriage are diminished because of custom, traditions or cultural attitudes in the Turkish community. There were some slight indicia in her own evidence that she could, if she wanted, find male friends. 
Her present home circumstances - so long as they exist - will or may (it is not possible to be more certain) continue to be a constraining factor.
 
Exhibit "3", the 1971 statistics on widows remarriage rates, provides some historical data. It indicates that a 25 year old woman without children has a 50% prospect of remarriage within five years. See however Schiffmann v
Jones (1970) 70 SR 455 at 463, and on appeal to the High Court <case>; [(124 CLR )] the remarks of Barwick CJ at 306. This kind of data does no more than reinforce experience and commonsense: younger, childless women generally have better prospects of remarriage than older women with children. 
Taking account of what I know about the plaintiff and her present circumstances - far less than I would wish, and my assessment of her as a person and a personality, the best judgment
I can make in this formidably difficult exercise is that the probabilities are that she will remarry, and sooner rather than later.
Now aged 25, I cannot see her unmarried for another ten years; I think remarriage within three to five years is more likely, and perhaps less than three. Rather than taking a discounted percentage of the assumed full working life dependency, as submitted by the plaintiff, I think I should be guided by experience, commonsense, and what I see as a realistic assessment of the probabilities.
I think a four year's dependency is appropriate, and that within or by the end of that period the probabilities are that she will have remarried to someone whose earning capacities and opportunities will be not less than the deceased's - modest enough as they were. 
In so far as the plaintiff's evidence, or the opinions expressed by Dr
AttiaSoliman, which were necessarily influenced by the plaintiff's presentation to her, are to the contrary, I do not accept that evidence or those opinions. (See further below as to the plaintiff and my assessment of her credibility). 
No discount should be allowed in that period for divorce, on the assumption her husband continued to live; if anything, I infer the plaintiff's background and its more traditional life-style would make the marriage less liable to a formal breakdown. 
Taking account of the youth of the plaintiff and her husband, and their desire, I would infer, to find a home of their own, I think it reasonable to conclude that it is more likely than not she would have taken paid employment in the early years of her marriage in their joint financial and matrimonial interests and that this would have resulted in some decrease in future dependency. Looking to the next five years - the assumed future dependency period - I think a reasonable figure is 50% on nett earnings of $350 a week.
In reaching this figure I also take account of the factor that the plaintiff could well marry before the end of the four year period which I have allowed, and the ordinary vicissitudes the deceased would have faced.
 
The Nervous shock claim
The claim for nervous shock is pleaded in these terms: 
Nervous shock as a consequence of the sudden death of her husband. 
Prolonged grief reaction. 
Anxiety and major depression.
In support of this claim the plaintiff relied on her evidence, and the evidence of Drs Attia-Soliman and Choudhary. The defendant relied on the evidence of Dr Roberts.
To expand on the plaintiff's evidence about her reaction to her husband's death and the effects it has had on her until now, I shall begin with her evidence of the news being given to her in Turkey. She said that she fainted and that after she felt isolated and was crying all the time. She saw a local doctor who gave her some medication. Her husband's body was flown back to
Turkey two weeks later. She said that she was completely in shock.
She said that the tradition was that once a girl is married the husband's family has to take care of her, and she went to live with her husband's family in Sydney.
She saw
Dr Choudhary in January 1991 because she was upset by the accident; she saw Dr Attia-Soliman in September 1992. Medication has been prescribed for her. She has no friends; she does not go out; she says that when she is not working she is always emotional, and very sick, and therefore devotes herself to work; she remains troubled by her husband's death; she is unhappy.
She has been back to Turkey twice; she has visited her husband's grave and taken photos of it.
The medical evidence was to this effect: 
Dr Attia-Soliman said that she suffered shock, depression, anxiety and prolonged grief, and while she had improved she had not fully recovered because of entrapment in a depressive environment, i.e. living with her in-laws in unsatisfactory social circumstances, isolated, and unable to speak
English. She would encourage her to move out and hoped that when her brother comes back from Turkey - possibly, or probably married - she will be able to live with him in her home unit at Marrickville. 
Dr Choudhary, a psychiatrist, who had not seen her for some time had given a guarded prognosis in a report of 19 August 1992. His diagnosis was bereavement and related depression and anxiety. In his report he said the plaintiff and other family members would need further counselling until things improve to a point when she could hold a full-time job. I infer that Dr
Choudhary, was not told by the plaintiff that she had been in full-time employment since shortly after arriving in Australia. 
Dr Roberts, a psychiatrist, saw the plaintiff in mid 1994 and on 18 July for a medico-legal assessment. He was of the opinion that there was no evidence of any psychiatric illness, disease or disability as a result of the death of the plaintiff's husband. He found her normal and pleasant, she smiled, and had what he called a friendly affect when interviewed. His opinion was that someone with a significant psychiatric illness - as put forward on the plaintiffs behalf would be unable to function exceptionally well in a workplace situation and the burden of his evidence on the subject of the plaintiff's capacity to work successfully, and indeed, hold down two jobs, was that this capacity was inconsistent with the existence of the claims made by the plaintiff. When he saw her, he did not find the confirmatory symptoms and signs he would have expected to find had she been suffering from a severe reactive or depressive illness.
Doctors are of course, when assessing an alleged psychiatric or psychological illness, dependent on their patients for an accurate history and an accurate statement of their symptoms. It seems to me that the way the plaintiff presented to Dr Attia-Soliman was more the way she presented in court and different to the way she presented to Dr Roberts - whose assessment of her presentation to him I accept.
In the witness box the plaintiff was subdued, lacking in animation, and yet well presented and obviously a woman who took care of her appearance. There was a distinct contrast between the picture she sought to paint of herself, and my own judgment of her and what I gained from Dr Roberts, Ms Brache, domestic supervisor, Tresillian Hospital and Ms Gurler, executive assistant in housekeeping at the Gazebo Hotel who praised the plaintiff's "best smily face" and friendly manner. (See also above, on her relations with guests).
I formed a very clear view that she has consciously or unconsciously exaggerated the depth of her reaction to her husband's death, and I do not accept the evidence she has given as to how this has continued to affect her life. I accept that she felt grief at her husband's death; I do not accept that there is any depressive or reactive illness, or any other mental or emotional consequences suffered by her which were in any way different to those naturally experienced by human beings when someone close and dear is lost.
In my opinion the period of grief has come to an end. I regret to say that I do not think it was by chance she did not tell Dr Choudhary that she had full-time work. It is commendable that she has applied herself so hard to working in this country while she has been living in a difficult home environment. But I find that her capacity to work as she has done quite inconsistent with the claim she has made for damages for nervous shock.
On the issue of her psychiatric and psychological state, of the medical evidence I prefer Dr Roberts'. I also think it is not without significance that allegedly suffering from a depressive or reactive condition - it was well over a year before she sought any medical help for it, and her attendance on her doctors, Dr Choudhary and Dr Attia-Soliman, has, as to the first ceased entirely well over two years ago, and as to the second has I think been somewhat sporadic and influenced,
I am inclined to think, by the pending litigation.
To establish the plaintiffs claim for "nervous shock" within section 77 of the [Motor Accidents Act 1988](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/) it is necessary to show she has suffered a demonstrable psychological or psychiatric injury, and not merely a normal emotional or cultural grief reaction. Compare Jaensch versus Coffey <case>; [(1984) 155 CLR ] at 565, Brennan J; and see generally Tort Liability for Psychiatric
Damage, by Mullaney and Handford (1993) at 14 and following pages and 244. I am clearly of the view that no such injury has been made out. I find that such reaction as the plaintiff had to her husband's death was a normal emotional or cultural grief reaction.
It is common ground that it would also be necessary, by reason of the date of the accident, to show that the plaintiff's ability to lead a normal life is significantly impaired at the time of trial.
Assuming, contrary to the finding I have made, that the plaintiff is suffering from a psychiatric or psychological illness within section 77, I find that her ability to lead to normal life is not significantly impaired.
I dismiss the claim for nervous shock.
 
ORDERS
Calculations to reflect the findings made by me should be agreed on by the parties, and Short Minutes submitted to me. The defendant will pay the plaintiff's costs.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/48.html  
