

Dorothy Winifred Clegg versus David Richard Henwood and Ors No. 3021 of 1993
Trade [1995] NSWSC 135 (6 November 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
EQUITY DIVISION
BRYSON J
HRNG
SYDNEY, 13-14, 21 September 1995 #DATE 5:10:1995 #ADD :11:1995 
Counsel for the Plaintiff       S.J. Motbey and G. Raffel 
Solicitors for the Plaintiff      S.A. Teen 
Counsel for 1st and 2nd Defendants:  J. Ireland QC 
Solicitors for 1st and 2nd Defendants Nocholas James Eddy 
Counsel for the 3rd Defendant     S. Goddard 
Solicitor for the 3rd Defendant    G.M. Laurence and Wherry
ORDER
Judgment for the first and second defendants with costs
JUDGE1
BRYSON J These proceedings arise out of an agreement Exhibit A dated 22 July for the sale by Mr and Mrs Henwood to Mrs Clegg of the business of retailing jams and preserves known as Mrs Old Bucks Pantry. The sale was completed about 30 July 1986. The price was $143,950, of which $3,950 was apportioned to plant fittings and chattels and $140,000 to goodwill. There was an interdependent agreement for Mr and Mrs Henwood to sell the furniture to
Mrs Clegg for $12,050, and this too was completed. The business was carried on in Shop 3 of shop premises in Hume Highway, Berrima, in a building owned by Mr and Mrs Henwood which contains four shops. The sale was conditional (cl. 11) on the grant of a new lease by Mr and Mrs Henwood as lessors for three years, with an option of renewal for three years and a further option also for three years, so potentially Mrs
Clegg could have remained in possession of the premises for nine years. The leases were to provide for annual rent reviews according to CPI increases.
A number of provisions of the agreement had the effect of assuring Mrs
Clegg in the enjoyment of the benefit of the purchase. These include express statements in cl. I which established that the business sold included the goodwill, as well as including plant, fittings, chattels and fixtures. By
Special Condition 28 the vendors agreed that the purchaser would obtain the benefit of all current agreements with suppliers and the vendors would introduce her to the suppliers, and by Special Condition 29 the vendors were to assign any registered trade name, but there was a limited reservation to the vendors of the name "Mrs Oldbucks" for products other than food products.
(The Henwoods have used the name for furniture polish.)
The litigation arises out of the Restraint of Trade in cl. 13, which must be read with particulars O: "13. (a) The Vendors or any one of them will not directly or indirectly and whether solely or jointly with or as director, manager, agent or servant of any person or corporation carry on, or be engaged or interested in, any business of the nature of the business hereby sold, or any significant component thereof, or permit their names or the names of any of them to be used in connection with any such business within the area set out in O(a) of the Particulars, and for a period set out in O(b) of the Particulars.
Except to the extent otherwise agreed the Vendors shall not after completion of this agreement during the period referred to in subclause (ii) engage in conduct derogating from the Purchasers' right to obtain the full benefit of the goodwill of the business.
The area and period are acknowledged by the Vendors to be no greater than reasonably required to protect the goodwill sold to the Purchasers." "O. RESTRICTION OF VENDORS' COMPETITION
Area 10 kilometres
Period 9 years" .
Counsel for Mr and Mrs Henwood suggested that the restraints were invalid under the Common Law. I reviewed the law relating to restraints of trade on sale of a business in my unreported judgment in Skatem Pty Ltd v. Dalkic, 9
November 1992 and sought to collect authoritative judicial statements which place restraints in a sale of a business in a relatively favourable position.
In my opinion it is clear that the restrictions imposed are reasonable in the interests of the public, as no significant impact on the public interest in a competitive retail trade in jams and preserves would be caused by removing Mr and Mrs Henwood from competition in Berrima and 10 kilometres around for nine years. Anyone else would be able to go into the trade there. There is no possibility that this restraint would truly injure the public interest in availability of supply by retail of jams and preserves everywhere on a competitive basis.
It must also be considered whether the restraint is reasonable in the interests of the parties to it. The Henwoods carried on the business successfully for some years and were about 67 years of age when they accepted the restraint, and at that age they could reasonably decide to retire from retail business. They received the very significant sum of $140,000 for the goodwill, and they had other practical advantages including an assurance of a tenant in their shop premises for three years, a favourable prospect of continued letting thereafter and the opportunity to go into any retail business they liked anywhere at all, other than for jams and preserves, at any place, to go into retail business in jams and preserves at any place more than kilometres away, and to use the name "Mrs Oldbucks" for products other than food products. They could not trade in Moss Vale or Bowral, but most of
Mittagong is more than 10 kilometres away. In their circumstances the restriction which they accepted within the limited area of a 10 kilometre radius for nine years is in my finding overwhelmingly reasonable, as indeed would have been a permanent restriction. At their age and in their circumstances it was no burden at all that they should have bargained away the right to compete at Berrima, in the circumstances for which the agreement provides, in return for a sum as large as $140,000. My finding is that the restraint, in the context of the agreement as a whole, was reasonable in the interests of the parties. I regard this as overwhelmingly clear. The acknowledgement in Cl. 13(c) has carried no weight with me, as the decision is for the Court and not a subject for an admission.
It was unfortunate that there were no pleadings. The facts are not simple or undisputed. Counsel for the plaintiff, who I would have thought had the most to gain from pleadings, complained that there was no notice in advance of reliance on the Restraint of Trade defence. In my view there was no difficulty in foreseeing this defence.
This form including cl.13(b) was considered by Waddell CJ in Eq. in
C and
S Constructions Pty Ltd v. Dawson and Ors [(1991) ATPR 41-148.] Waddell CJ in
Eq. found that there had been a breach of cl. 13(b); see pp 53,110-111. In that case Mr Dawson the vendor had sold mincing machines to a competing pet shop business, and had set up and serviced the machines himself. Further he had a personal association in dog racing which gave him special influence over customers. It was a strong case and his Honour did not need to make an analysis of the workings of cl.13(b).
Clause 13 and the alleged breaches fall into two parts. Clause 13(a) relates to engagement by
Mr and Mrs Henwood in any business of the nature of the business sold, and cl.13(b) relates to engagement "in conduct derogating from the Purchasers' right to obtain the full benefit of the goodwill of the business." The purchaser's right to obtain the full benefit of the goodwill of the business is her right, as against Mr and Mrs Henwood under the sale, to be the owner of the goodwill of the business. With her purchase came a penumbra of implied rights to the effect that Mr and Mrs Henwood would not act so as to derogate from Mrs Clegg's entitlement to be the owner of the goodwill of the business. Clause 13(b) enhances this. Clause 13(b) did not increase or alter what she had bought.
Clause 13(a) is the only provision of the agreement which restrains competition by the vendors with the purchaser. It restrains them only in accordance with its terms, and there is no basis for extending its restraints by implication. What is restrained is the conduct of business by the Henwoods, in the ways for which cl.13(a) provides. The use to which the premises may be put, if Mrs Clegg were not to continue to lease them, is not restrained, and the use to which other premises may be put is not restrained.
Clause 13(b) is ancillary to other provisions of the Agreement which confer the right to goodwill on the purchasers. It spells out what would be implied under Trego v. Hunt [(1896) AC 7] at 19 to 21; see too pp24-25. See the observations and citations relating to Trego versus Hunt by Hope JA in Castlemaine
Tooheys Limited and Anor versus Carlton and United Breweries Limited and Anor [(1987) 10 NSWLR 468] at 484-485. Its effect is to make the conferral of goodwill fully effective, not to increase the rights conferred; the vendors are obligated not to derogate from them, they are not obligated to increase them, and the rights must be found elsewhere than in cl.13(b).
The plaintiff's case under cl.13(a), was based on the view that two persons, Mrs Horrocks and Mrs Leet (the third defendant) in some way carried on business on behalf of or as the representatives of Mr and Mrs Henwood. This case was abandoned and only cl.13(b) was relied on in final submissions. As to cl.13(b) the plaintiff's case was to the effect that to let premises to Mrs
Horrocks and to lease premises to Mrs Leet on terms which permitted them to carry on and in the knowledge that they would carry on business which included retail sale of jams and preserves was to engage in conduct derogating from Mrs
Clegg's right to obtain the full benefit of the goodwill. Mrs Horrocks carried on business for a few weeks in 1992 in Shop 3, which Mrs Clegg had leased. Mrs
Leet leased and has carried on business in Shop 4, which is the shop next door, and later she also, in consideration of an additional rent, obtained use of part of Shop 3.
Mrs Clegg's business and the goodwill to the benefit of which she was and is entitled is quite distinct from the business which Mrs Horrocks conducted for a few weeks and from the business which Mrs Leet has conducted. No ordinary customer would be likely to confuse the two businesses; not even a customer who wanted Jam, not explanations. Mrs Clegg's business has been carried on with continuity, under the distinctive name under which it had earlier been carried on for many years, she carried it on in the premises leased from the Henwoods for about six years after she bought it, and then without interruption she transferred it to other premises owned by Mr and Mrs
Clegg about 200 metres away. It is not in derogation of her right to obtain the full benefit of its goodwill that someone else should be in business in
Berrima retailing jams and preserves, and it is not engagement in conduct in derogation of that right that the Henwoods should make premises available to
Mrs Horrocks or to Mrs Leet for the purpose of conducting another business.
The separation of the businesses is complete, in respect of the persons by whom they are carried on, the names under which they are carried on and the places where they are carried on. The separation is reinforced, in the case of
Mrs Leet by her having developed other product lines.
Conduct of trade at a location known to customers is an aspect of goodwill and one of the means by which goodwill is continued and advantage is taken of it. The Agreement gave the plaintiff the means to obtain this advantage, and to retain it for nine years, by taking the lease and exercising the options. The Agreement does not, either incidentally to Its terms or by implication, contain any other protection for her relating to use of the shop premises, nor of course of other shop premises next door. The provisions of the Agreement relating to the lease protect her in the use of the shop premises leased and the advantages of their location for as long as she takes advantage of them, and there are no provisions protecting her in respect of the use of that shop if she ceases to take advantage of those provisions. To imply into the lease a restriction on the uses which the vendors may permit later tenants to make of the premises would be to carry implication to a remarkable and unwarranted length.
An implied restriction could operate in strange ways, particularly if the purchaser surrendered her lease during the first three years or did not exercise any option, or if the Henwoods sold the building. An implied restriction would operate even more strangely if it extended to other shops in the same building. If cl.13(b) did operate to restrict leasing of shop premises after Mrs Clegg's lease expired and she left, I would not regard the resulting restraint as reasonable in the interests of the parties. However in my view cl.13(b) does not have that operation according to its true meaning and effect.
The plaintiff's case on cl.13(b) would require that subclause to be given some reading which equated it with a contractual obligation of Mr and Mrs
Henwood that no competing business in the retail of jams and preserves would be carried on either in the premises once leased to Mrs Clegg or in any other premises in the building which Mr and Mrs Henwood own. Clause 13(b) has no such meaning or effect. Except as to competition by themselves, the Henwoods gave no assurance that there would be no competition. The competition which exists does not derogate from Mrs Clegg's fight to obtain the full benefit of the goodwill sold to her. An exemption from competition was not a characteristic of the goodwill sold to her; exemption from competition by Mr and Mrs Henwood was a characteristic of the goodwill sold to her. In my opinion an implication to the effect that Mrs Clegg was to be protected by Mr and Mrs Henwood from competition other than as they expressly agreed is not an implication which should be made. In my view to lease either the same shop as
Mrs Clegg formerly used, or part of it, or an adjacent shop to some other person after Mrs Clegg had left, and for the purpose of carrying on business which includes retail sale of jams and preserves is not to engage in conduct derogating from Mrs Clegg's right to obtain the fall benefit of the goodwill sold to her. The hypothetical position raised in argument of letting another shop in the same building for use as another jam shop while Mrs Clegg was still in Shop 3 would raise different problems because of the probability of confusion. As things now are, leasing Shop 4 and part of Shop 3 to someone else who retails jam is no more a derogation from Mrs Clegg's right than selling the building to someone who did would be.
The case against Mr and Mrs Henwood was sought to be supported by evidence on which
I do not base any finding of engagement by them in a competing business. Mr Henwood's evidence denying such engagement was firm and clear and I am quite satisfied that it was true. The evidence of Mrs
Williamson about events occurring on or about 1 October 1992 in which Mr
Henwood played a small part in facilitating a delivery of jams to Mrs Leet, at a time when Mrs Leet was absent, is inconsequential, is satisfactorily explained by Mr Henwood and does not establish engagement by him in Mrs Leet's business. The event was no more than a minor neighbourly facilitation of a small event in the business of his tenant and friend.
The evidence of Mr Powell was in my understanding of it quite inconsequential and did not support any adverse finding. But further his recollection is plainly inexact and unreliable in detail for any finding of anything which Mr Henwood may have said. Mr Powell attributed a conversation with Mr Henwood to September 1993 which fairly clearly is a year out. The whole event was of small importance to Mr Powell, and Mr
Henwood's account of the events is more likely to be the correct one. I do not base any finding adverse to the defendants on Mr Powell's evidence.
Evidence relating to Mr Henwood's communications with Mr Powell shows minimal participation by Mr Henwood, without success, in endeavours by Mrs
Leet to obtain supply. In my finding no breach of cl.13(b) is shown thereby.
The observations of Mr Redman, photographs taken by him and the statements which he attributes to Mr Henwood do not in my view tend to show that there have been breaches of cl.13. Mr Henwood's evidence of the conversation was to a different effect in detail. A slight shade of expression could give the exact words used a different complexion, and as Mr Redman went to the shop to investigate breaches it is not surprising that what he was told struck him in a sense favourable to his task. Whichever is correct, Mr
Redman's evidence at its highest does not in my finding establish a breach. On the whole, what he says Mr Henwood told him confirms that Mrs Leet and her husband were independent of the Henwoods.
The evidence of Mr Frank Zarboch with respect to the placement of the touch pad to control the security system, and his conversation with Mr Henwood about the security system are altogether neutral in my view. Participation of
Mr Henwood in the modification of the security system which would cover two adjoining shop premises which he owned goes no distance whatever in my mind to show that he was engaged in Mrs Leet's business.
In my understanding the highest point of the evidence of Mr Payne is his attribution to Mr Henwood of a statement to the effect that he wanted another jam shop in his premises. This statement if made does not tend to establish a breach of cl.13, and the whole subject under consideration, which was a letting to Mrs Horrocks to conduct a shop of her own, points strongly against breach of subcl.13(a). Clearly Mr Henwood was quite prepared to accept Mrs
Horrocks as tenant to conduct a jam shop, or a shop selling jams among other goods, and equally clearly Mrs Horrocks was acting for herself to establish a business and was not acting as a nominee or agent of the Henwoods.
I was asked to find that, contrary to his evidence, Mr Henwood was actively involved in bringing about the establishment of Mrs Horrocks' business. It was suggested that I should infer from Mr Payne's evidence and the course of negotiations that Mr Henwood had persuaded Mrs Horrocks to go into that line of business and had turned her away from other projects which had been mentioned in discussion with Mr Payne including an antique shop and a coffee lounge. However a finding that Mr Henwood brought Mrs Horrocks to this point of view would not be supported by the probabilities. The project of opening a coffee lounge was quite impractical as there was another one in the same building.
Mr Henwood's evidence shows that there were good grounds for deciding against opening an antique shop in Berrima. The range of uses contemplated by Mrs Horrocks, as shown in the letter of instructions for a lease prepared by Mr Payne, was quite wide and the sale of jams and preserves does not appear to me to have been predominant in the plans which emerged from the negotiations.
Mr
Maxwell gave evidence of conversations in which Mr Henwood asked him whether Mr Maxwell would be interested in supplying jams to "the shop" after
Mr Clegg left it, and at a later time asked whether Mr Maxwell would supply Mr
Henwood with jams "on the quiet".
Mr Henwood has denied this distinctly and has given an entirely different account of his communications, with circumstances which assist the view that Mr Henwood's evidence is probably true. On the other hand Mr Maxwell's evidence strikes me as improbable. Even if it were true, no jams were supplied. I regard Mr Henwood's account as more likely to be correct and I accept it. Mr Henwood took no more than a minimal part in an attempt by Mrs Horrocks to get in touch with a supplier, and her attempt did not succeed.
 .
Mr Henwood's participation in Mrs Leet's endeavour to obtain supply through Mr Maxwell had no effect on events and was so extremely slight that if it had had some effect on the outcome it should be disregarded as de minimis.
The evidence of both Mr Henwood and of Mrs Leet shows clearly that it was Mrs
Leet's project, not Mr Henwood's project to establish her shop and in my view
I should not find that Mr Henwood was actively involved in its establishment.
At the very highest, his participation was so slight that it could not be categorised as conduct derogating from Mrs Clegg's right to obtain the benefit of goodwill.
It was suggested that the rent at which Shop 4 was leased to Mrs Leet assists the plaintiff's case. In my view the evidence provides no basis for such a finding.
It is quite clear in my finding that Mrs Leet has conducted her own business, at arm's-length from Mr and
Mrs Henwood. Their dealings are explicable on an ordinary commercial basis in which she leased premises and borrowed money from them.
In view of their past relationship over a long period and the Henwood's interest in not having one of their shops vacant it is unremarkable that the money which they lent her and with which she established the business was free of interest. Valuable concessions to get a
tenant in are a commonplace of dealings in commercial premises. Her evidence was clear, manifestly sincere and convincing, and it refuted the claims against her. After the evidence, including Mrs Leet's evidence had been taken, the claims against her were not pressed by the plaintiff, and she was dismissed from the proceedings by orders made by consent on 21 September 1995.
It was also put by the plaintiff's counsel that making premises available by letting them to Mrs Horrocks and by leasing them to Mrs
Leet on terms which permitted retail sale of jams and preserves was a breach of cl. 13(b). However in my view these dealings in premises do not fall within the area of conduct forbidden by cl.13 (b).
In the circumstances I have no need to consider whether there should be an order under the Restraint of Trade Act 1976.
My Order is: 
I give Judgment for the first and second defendants with costs.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/135.html  
