

Regina versus Barakat Matter No 73004/97 [1998] NSWSC 724 (16 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 18 January 1999 
REGINA versus ZAEN BARAKAT /97 July 1998 
Greg James J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT (On application for bail) 
HIS HONOUR: On 22 October 1997, bail was granted by Justice Graham Barr in this court in respect of a charge of supply prohibited drug in a commercial quantity, a charge in respect of which s.8A of the [Bail Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ba41/) provides for a presumption against bail. Bail was granted requiring two sureties, Nazir and Fatima Barakat and a requirement that they provide security of $100,000 each was imposed. There were various other conditions of bail including a residential condition. 
In February of this year, the sureties applied to be relieved of their obligations by a discharge application in which they gave reasons that they regarded the bail applicant as untrustworthy. Subsequently, they applied again on a similar basis but indicated that the applicant was causing trouble within the family. They withdrew the first application. In the meantime, on 5
February, the applicant was charged with a malicious wounding said to have been committed on 31 January 1998, affray, an aggravated break and enter offence, take and drive conveyance and bail was granted, no doubt, because of the existing Supreme Court bail.

He was, on 23 April 1998, sentenced to three months periodic detention for supplying a drug and on 2 December 1997, only three months after the grant of the bail by Barr, J., was given a six months recognizance for possessing a prohibited drug. No doubt these were offences committed prior to the grant of bail by Barr, J. On 5 February 1998 there was reported a breach of Supreme
Court bail, being a failure to reside with his parents at 50 Old Kent Road
Greenacre. No action, as I understand it, has been taken in respect of that breach.

Before me, Mr. Nazir Barakat has given evidence in support of his application for discharge. He has not received legal advice and he is not represented. Mr.
Niven, who appears for the applicant, has elicited from Mr. Nazir Barakat, as though he were a witness on an application by the applicant to substitute sureties, information as to the basis of the present application. It is put that he wishes to sell his premises and that he wishes to go away. There has been offered in lieu of the surety provided by way of real estate, the assurance contained in the document Exhibit 1, an interest in a 10 year old
Volvo recently purchased for $22,500, which is valued at $20,000 in the document. An undertaking has been proffered not to sell or otherwise dispose of the vehicle.

In all the circumstances, I am of the view that this is insufficient. This would leave the position to be almost no surety on the original grant of bail.
This matter has been raised with the Crown and with Mr. Niven. It was put from the bar table that the Crown case on the supply charge has been exposed as inadequate and that it was expected that the Director would decline to proceed. I have been informed however by Mr. Shroff who appears for the
Director, that the Director has determined that he will proceed.

I am not prepared as things stand to relieve the sureties while the bail is in a situation in which there may be presently existing breaches and at the same time I am not prepared to allow bail for the accused, the applicant, on the basis of such an inadequate surety. I am however, prepared to consider that some appropriate form of changed surety might be provided, but not to the limited extent suggested.

I decline to grant that application as it stands.
 * * * 
