

Beach Petroleum Nl versus Abbott Tout Russell Kennedy Matter No 50030a/96 [1997] NSWSC 655 (17 December 1997) 
Last Updated: 3 March 1998 
Beach Petroleum NL versus Abbott Tout Russell Kennedy /96 December 1997 
Rolfe J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Commercial Division 
Name of Case: BEACH PETROLEUM NL versus ABBOTT TOUT RUSSELL KENNEDY 
Proceedings: 50030/1996 
Dates of Hearing: 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31
October, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 17, 18, 19 November 1997 
Written Submissions: 8 December 1997 
Further Mention: 10 December 1997 
Date of Judgment: 17 December 1997 
Counsel for Plaintiff: Mr J.C. Kelly SC/Mr I.D. Faulkner 
Solicitors for Plaintiff: Piper Alderman 
Counsel for Defendants: Mr T.E.F. Hughes QC/Mr M.A. Pembroke SC/ 
Mr J.W.J. Stevenson 
Solicitors for Defendant: Minter Ellison 
Claim made by the plaintiff against its former solicitors for breach of fiduciary duty, knowing involvement in breaches by former directors of the plaintiff in fraudulent activities against the plaintiff, and negligence.

Held that the solicitors did not act in breach of their retainer, to the extent that they were retained, and did not act in any way improperly or in circumstances giving rise to "objective dishonesty". 
Held that the solicitors were not knowingly involved in breaches by the former directors and were not guilty of negligence.

Circumstances in which fiduciary duty arises and consequences thereof in a commercial context considered.

Plaintiff's proceedings dismissed with costs.

Fiduciary Duty And Its Breach: 
Content of the relevant fiduciary duty: 
Hospital Products Limited versus United States Surgical Corporation & Ors <case>; [(1984-85) 156 CLR 41] at 96-97; Hawkins versus Clayton & Ors (1988) 164 CLR 539 at 579 followed.

Breaches by solicitors of fiduciary duty: distinction between personal interest and conflicting engagements considered: 
Wan versus McDonald & Ors <case>; [(1991-1992) 105 ALR 473] applied.

Fiduciary Duty and Causation: 
London Loan & Savings Co of Canada versus Brickenden [(1934) 3 DLR 465] 
Mr J.D. Heydon QC "Causal Relationships Between a Fiduciary's Default and the Principal's Loss" Vol [110 The Law Quarterly Review 328.] 
Gummow J "Compensation for Breach of Fiduciary Duty" T.G. Youdan (ed) "Equity, Fiduciaries and Trusts" (1989) p.90. 
Other instances of fiduciary duty: Breen versus Williams (1996) 186 CLR 71.

Nature Of The Conflict: Boardman & Anor versus Phipps [1967] 2 AC at p.126.

The Applicability of the Companies Code to a Fiduciary Relationship: 
Story versus Advance Bank of Australia Limited [(1993) 31 NSWLR 722] considered.

Held: A fiduciary relationship is a sufficient connection or relationship to give knowledge.

Accessory Liability: 
Necessity to prove objective dishonesty: 
Barnes versus Addy [(1874) LR 9 Ch App 244]; Royal Brunei Airlines Snd Bhd versus Philip Tan Mok Ming [1995] 2AC 378 followed.

Held: There was no objective dishonesty.

Evidence: 
Standard of proof of serious allegations: 
Briginshaw versus Briginshaw <case>; [(1938) 60 CLR 336] applied.

Causation: 
March versus E & M.H. Stramare Pty Limited & Anor <case>; [(1990-1991) 171 CLR 506] followed. Trust Co Of Australia versus Perpetual Trustees WA & Ors (McLelland CJ in Eq - 9 July 1997 - unreported) considered.

I N D E X 
Page 
Introduction 
Background 1 
The Present Proceedings 8 
The Material Before Me 14 
Matters Not In Issue 15 
The Need For Financial Restructuring 15 
The Spargos Deposit 18 
The "Currency Swap" Transaction 20 
Burbank Oil Interests 25 
The First Acquisition Of The Burbank Oil Field 
Interests (Acquisition By BPC And BOG) 25 
The Second Acquisition Of The Burbank Oil Field 
Interests (From Firstway By Beach Of Legal 
Ownership Of The Interests In The Burbank 
Oil Field Under A Charge And Option Agreement 
Dated 30 June 1989) 27 
The Syndicated Cash Advance Facility 30 
The Heads Of Agreement 31 
The Breach By Directors Of Beach Of Their 
Duties To It 33 
Beach's Case 33 
The Defendants And Those For Which They Acted 50 
Knowing Assistance 77 
The Evidence Of Mr Christopher Paul McDonald Main 79 
The Significance Of Mr Main's Evidence 113 
The Evidence of Mr Ross Philip Glossop 124 
The Evidence Of Mr Gregory Anthony Thomas Bateman 133 
Should The Evidence Of Mr Bateman Be Accepted? 240 
The Evidence of Mr Brian James Thomas 244 
The Evidence Of Mr David James Ferguson 279 
The Charge And Option Agreement 287 
The SCAFA 297 
The Evidence Of Mr Brian Henry Davidson 299 
Exhibit AG 328 
Breach of Fiduciary Duty 334 
Extent Of ATRK's Duty And Breach Of Fiduciary Duty 337 
The Instructions 377 
The Further Submissions Of Mr Kelly 388 
Causation In Relation To Breach Of Fiduciary Duty 396 
The Evidence Of Mr Evan John Worthington 414 
Conclusions As To Breach Of Fiduciary Duty 427 
Beach's Claim Based On Accessory Liability 428 
The Application of Section 68A Of The Companies Code 438 
Negligence 445 
Contributory Negligence 450 
Conclusions on Liability 454 
Damages 454 
A General Consideration 454 
The Option Fee 455 
The Costs Of Other Proceedings 458 
The SCAFA Payments 463 
Currency Swap 465 
The Solvency Of Claremont 466 
The Value Of The Spargos Takeover To Beach 467 
Some Further Matters 480 
Orders 482 
THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
COMMERCIAL DIVISION 
ROLFE J 
WEDNESDAY, 17 DECEMBER 1997 /1996 - BEACH PETROLEUM NL versus ABBOTT TOUT RUSSELL KENNEDY 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
Introduction 
Background 
Between at least October 1988 and January 1991 Independent Resources Limited, ("IRL"), effectively controlled a group of companies, most of which were based in Adelaide and Perth, which were engaged in gold, mineral, oil and gas exploration and production nationally and internationally. Companies in the
Group, which are of particular relevance to the present proceedings, are the plaintiff, Beach Petroleum NL, ("Beach"), which was a sixty five per cent owned subsidiary of another member of the Group, Claremont Petroleum NL, ("Claremont"); Independent Resources (Asia) Group Pty Limited, ("IRAG"); and
Spargos Mining NL, ("Spargos"), Enterprise Gold Mines NL, ("Enterprise"), and
Jingellic Minerals NL, ("Jingellic"). Most, if not all of these companies, were listed, at all material times, on the Australian Stock Exchange, ("ASX").
Exhibit AR is a chart, which the parties agreed sets out accurately the structure of the Group.

The Group's growth depended on the borrowing of money. The main borrower was
IRL and, by October 1988, it owed the major lender, Atlantic Capital
Corporation, ("AAC"), $22,218,289, including accrued interest. ACC was not prepared to refinance the debt and was calling for repayment.

At all relevant times the Group was controlled by Mr Malcolm Keith Johnson. He was not a director of any of the companies. At one time he had carried on business in Adelaide, but he had left Australia in the early 1980's after being made bankrupt and convicted on a corporate fraud charge in the Supreme
Court of South Australia. Thereafter he pursued his business interests from
London where he had offices in Scorpio House. Generally speaking they were conducted through trusts which owned companies. It was not in issue that between 1 June 1988 and 30 March 1990 Mr Johnson was the person in accordance with whose directions and/or instructions the directors of Beach, Claremont,
Jingellic, Enterprise, Spargos, IRL and IRAG were accustomed to act. It was not agreed that this was a matter of which the defendants were aware.

Mr Johnson retained at least two solicitors in London, viz Mr Lynne Brooke, the senior partner of Messrs Brooke Blair Russell, and Mr Sheldon Cordell, a partner of Messrs Joelson Wilson. He also utilised the services of Mr
Ringrose, a partner of Messrs Gardner Weller. Mr Brooke described Mr Johnson as a shrewd, capable and charismatic gentleman.

Mr Michael John Fuller, Mr Joseph Patrick Cummings and Mr Paul Christopher
Macdonald Main were, at all material times, directors of companies in the
Group, who played important parts in the circumstances giving rise to this litigation. Mr Fuller was a solicitor, who practised in Adelaide until he became engaged full time in the affairs of the Group. Mr Cummings was also a solicitor, who, until he commenced to assist Mr Fuller on a full time basis in the affairs of the Group, practised in Adelaide. Mr Main, who lived in
England, worked closely with, but in a subservient position to, Mr Johnson and had offices in Scorpio House. He was referred to as Mr Johnson's "right hand man". There were other directors of whom it is only necessary to refer to one, viz Sir Cecil Burney, who was a director of IRL, Beach, Claremont and Spargos from January 1988 to June 1989 and, at all relevant times, the senior executive officer of ACC resident in the United Kingdom.

The Hong Kong Fidei Commisair Limited, ("HKFC"), is a company incorporated in
Hong Kong. It was the trustee of the Ska Trust, which was created by a deed dated 31 March 1982 for the benefit of members of Mr Johnson's family and through which Mr Johnson benefitted personally by the receipt, at least in the period from June 1988 to February 1990, of fees, commissions and consultancy payments for administering the Trust's affairs. He also benefitted by residing rent free in properties and having the use of motor vehicles owned by the
Trust. By a deed made on 1 April 1982, Mr Brooke was appointed first guardian of the Trust, and had control over HKFC when it exercised power under the
Trust deed to make investments valued at more than five per cent of the Trust
Funds.

Beach was the company in the Group which had liquid assets at all relevant times. The financial pressure being brought to bear on the Group in 1988 made it imperative to release those assets to enable other companies in the Group to meet their considerable financial obligations. Mr Johnson, I infer, devised a thoroughly dishonest scheme to reduce the assets of and withdraw cash from
Beach, which it was expected would benefit other companies in the Group but which was to the positive detriment of Beach. The scheme was quite simple. It involved the acquisition of a minority interest in the Burbank Oilfields in
Okalahoma for about US$3m and its sale to Beach for about US$28m. The purchase price was genuine enough, but the sale price was grossly inflated. It bore no relation to the value of the oilfield interest and was reached solely on the basis of money required, which was to be extracted unlawfully from Beach. In fact what was purchased was the only issued share in a company, which company, in turn, owned all the issued capital in two other companies, which two other companies held the oilfield interest. In so far as reference is made to the acquisition of the oilfield interest or the Burbank acquisition this is a short hand way of referring to that transaction. No assets, other than the oilfield interests, were held.

The implementation of this scheme, which I shall describe at least sufficiently for present purposes in a moment, in all probability was instigated by Mr Johnson. But it could never have been brought to fruition without the active involvement of Messrs Fuller, Cummings and Main, and of Mr
Brooke, Mr Cordell and, probably, solicitors from Messrs Gardner Weller.
Although there were other directors of the various companies it is not alleged that they or senior executive officers of the companies were involved in the improper activities. It was also necessary to have the active assistance of a
Swiss Bank, Rahn & Bodmer, which held money in accounts conformably with directions from Mr Johnson, Mr Brooke and Mr Main in circumstances where the appearance of the parties entitled to those moneys was quite different from the actuality. A perusal of the accounts indicated that each of Spargos,
Enterprise and Jingellic was beneficially entitled to moneys held in them. The truth was that Rahn & Bodmer had paid equivalent amounts to ACC in pro tanto discharge of IRL's debt to it, as a result of which Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic would only be entitled to the money appearing to be credited to their accounts, when IRL and IRAG repaid the money owing to Rahn & Bodmer.
Rahn & Bodmer, in accordance with instructions from Mr Brooke and Mr Main, steadfastly resisted all attempts by other officers of Spargos, Enterprise,
Jingellic, Claremont and Beach to find out the status of the funds or the true situation in relation to them.

The purchase of the Burbank Oilfield interests was achieved by two companies, ultimately controlled by Mr Johnson, viz Burbank Petroleum Company, ("BPC"), a company incorporated in accordance with the laws of Colorado in the United
States, and Burbank Oil and Gas Company Limited, ("BOG"), a company incorporated in the Bahamas. They purchased a minority interest in the Burbank
Oilfields in 1988 and 1989. It has been agreed, for the purposes of this litigation, that those interests were, as at 30 June 1989, worth US$3.2m. All the issued shares in BPC and BOG were owned by Mazeley Limited, ("Mazeley"), a company incorporated according to the laws of The Republic of Liberia on 20
September 1989. Mazeley had no other assets and the whole of its issued capital was one bearer share, which was owned by Firstway Inc, ("Firstway"), a company incorporated according to the laws of The Republic of Liberia on 4
August 1988 and controlled by the Ska Trust and, accordingly, by Mr Johnson.

Messrs Brennan, Raskin, Friedlob and Tenenbaum were, at all relevant times, a firm of lawyers acting for BPC and BOG in the United States, and Mr Ringrose was the solicitor acting in London for the two companies. Messrs Gardner
Weller also acted for Firstway.

Messrs Fuller, Cummings and Main, as directors of Beach and Claremont, and Mr
Johnson, as a deemed director of Beach and Claremont, caused those companies to enter into a Charge and Option Agreement with Firstway, which bears date 29
June 1989, whereby Beach purportedly procured the making of loans by Claremont to Firstway in the amount of US$8,197,564 or A$10,067,638, which were secured by a charge, and was granted an option to acquire from Firstway the whole of the issued capital in Mazeley for US$28m. The Charge and Option Agreement was signed by a London solicitor on behalf of Firstway, and by Mr Main as attorney for Beach and Claremont. On 30 June 1989 the option was exercised by Beach. In consequence the loans, purportedly procured by Beach, were set off against the purchase price and, as between Claremont and Beach, they were accounted for in the books of Claremont and Beach by reducing the amount owed by Claremont to
Beach by that amount. Further, Beach paid out $14,525,000 by way of repayments of money purportedly lent to it to enable it to make the purchase by Spargos,
Enterprise and Jingellic, pursuant to a Syndicated Cash Advance Finance
Agreement, ("the SCAFA"), which bears date 19 October 1989. The balance of
A$6,028,704 was provided by way of vendor finance and it was never paid. The reduction in Claremont's indebtedness to Beach and the payments made pursuant to the SCAFA are only explicable on the basis of the fraud perpetrated on
Beach whereby it acquired an asset, now agreed to be worth US$3.2m, for
US$28m.

In proceedings G53 of 1991, ("G53"), in the Federal Court of Australia, Beach and Claremont, as applicants, sued Messrs Johnson, Fuller, Main and Cummings and Firstway, Spargos, Enterprise, Jingellic, IRL, IRAG and some others alleging that they had conspired to defraud it. They sought damages in relation to the conspiracy and breaches of fiduciary duty. Those proceedings were heard by von Doussa J between 3 July 1992 and 6 April 1993 and, on 10
June 1993, his Honour delivered judgment <case>; , [(1993) 115 ALR 411], as a consequence of which judgment for A$44,455,000 was entered against each of the companies and persons to whom and which I have referred.

The Present Proceedings 
Beach, for which Mr J.C. Kelly of Senior Counsel and Mr I.D. Faulkner of
Counsel appeared, has sued the partners, at all material times, of Messrs
Abbott Tout Russell Kennedy, ("ATRK"), for whom Mr T.E.F. Hughes of Queen's
Counsel, Mr M.A. Pembroke of Senior Counsel and Mr J.W.J. Stevenson of Counsel appeared. Beach alleged that ATRK acted as its solicitors between approximately mid-1988 and early 1990, and that there were breaches of fiduciary duty, knowing assistance by ATRK in various breaches of fiduciary duty by a number of directors of Beach, knowing involvement by ATRK in breaches of ss.229(2) and (4) and 230 of the Companies Code, and negligence.
In respect of these alleged breaches Beach seeks to recover damages, equitable compensation, in which it includes moneys it has been unable to recover pursuant to the judgments to which I have referred, and interest.

Whilst the claim is brought against the thirty six solicitors, who were at all relevant times the partners of ATRK, there is no suggestion that any of them, save for Mr Gregory Anthony Thomas Bateman, who was admitted as a solicitor in and became a partner in 1982, and Mr David James Ferguson, who was admitted as a solicitor in 1983 and became a partner in 1987, was in any way involved in or aware of the circumstances giving rise to the various claims.
Any liability of the other partners flows solely from their being partners with Mr Bateman and Mr Ferguson. Mr Brian James Thomas was admitted as a solicitor in 1981 and commenced employment with ATRK in March 1987 as a senior associate solicitor. He became a partner on 1 July 1991 and was, at the time, responsible to, inter alios, Mr Bateman. So also was another senior associate solicitor, Mr Richard Willcock. Each played a role in certain of the transactions, but neither was a partner at the relevant time and, hence, was not a defendant. Messrs Bateman, Ferguson and Thomas gave evidence. A witness statement of Mr Willcock was filed, but it was not read and he did not give evidence. There was no suggestion that he was not available to do so.

It is important to note immediately that Beach has expressly stated that it does not allege that ATRK knew either that the acquisition of the Burbank Oil
Field interests was not an arm's length transaction, or that the price paid by it was inflated "so as to strip Beach of its assets".

ATRK admitted the facts pleaded by Beach as giving rise to the fraud perpetrated on it, but denied, and with one exception the contrary was not suggested, that they were parties to or had any knowledge of the fraud. The concessions made by Beach, together with a further concession that it was not
Beach's case that Mr Bateman "was a fraudster", make it clear that Beach accepted this position. The exception, to which I shall refer in a moment, is difficult to reconcile with the concession that Mr Bateman was not a fraudster. ATRK asserted that they acted on behalf of various companies in the
Group in respect of certain matters, but denied that in doing so there was any conflict of interest by reason of "divided loyalty", (a conflict of interest based on personal interest not being alleged), that they knowingly assisted or were involved in breaches of fiduciary duty or statutory obligations, or that they were negligent.

The allegations of knowing assistance and involvement, it was conceded by
Beach, required it to prove that ATRK had acted "objectively dishonestly".
This allegtion created a tension with the express disavowal by Beach, subject to the exception, that ATRK had participated in or been aware of the fraud. It was a tension, which arose at a factual level. It concerned, essentially, the extent of Mr Bateman's awareness of the status of certain bank accounts at
Rahn & Bodmer to which I shall now refer.

The exception concerned whether either Mr Bateman or Mr Ferguson, although the essential focus was on Mr Bateman, was made aware, as Beach asserted they were and they denied, that moneys, which appeared to be standing to the credit of each of Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic at Rahn & Bodmer, were not in fact available to those companies until IRL and, perhaps, IRAG, repaid Rahn & Bodmer moneys lent to them by Rahn & Bodmer to repay ACC. The acounts in which the moneys stood were termed "fiduciary acounts". The effect of the situation which existed was that they were "blocked", i.e. unavailable to be drawn on until the repayment to Rahn & Bodmer by IRL and, perhaps,
IRAG. For reasons I shall explain I am satisfied that neither Mr Bateman nor
Mr Ferguson was ever aware that the accounts were "blocked", i.e. that there was no money in the accounts on which those companies were entitled to draw. I am satisfied that Mr Bateman thought that there was a problem in obtaining immediate access to the money for a short period because of the nature of the deposit. But this is very different, particularly in the context of this case, from knowledge that there was no money in the accounts, which could be utilised.

The factual case, as originally propounded by Beach and as pursued by it to my observation and understanding until final addresses, was that Mr Bateman had been told that the moneys in those accounts were "blocked", in the way I have described, and would not be available to Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic until repayment by IRL and, perhaps, IRAG. It was also that Mr Bateman had expressly acknowledged this. For reasons which will become clear if Mr Bateman did know that the inevitable conclusion would be that he was aware of and a party to the fraud. I shall describe how this developed during the hearing because it is important, in my opinion, to understand it. I shall state my reasons for concluding that Mr Bateman was never aware of these matters and never acknowledged that he was, and for rejecting completely the suggestion that he was in any way guilty of fraud.

In the end Mr Kelly put the case quite differently, although he did not agree this was a different formulation of it. He wrote:- "The main allegation against Mr Bateman is not that on 22 February 1989 he implicated himself in a conspiracy of silence to withhold from Winby and Glossop his alleged knowledge of the facts that the SEJ deposits at R & B were blocked so as to be unavailable for use. The main allegation against Mr Bateman is that Mr Bateman was aware throughout the material time (from 10 February 1988 to 3 January 1989) (sic) that the banking arrangements at Rahn & Bodmer were such that there were no deposits at the bank in the name of Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic which were available to be freely drawn upon, loaned or otherwise dealt with." (My emphasis.) 
The dates in my opinion should read 10 February 1989 to 3 January 1990, which the evidence supports.

Even this version of Mr Bateman's knowledge, in the circumstances of this case, asserted, or went very close to asserting, that he was guilty of fraud.
Subsequently, Mr Kelly wrote:- "The fundamental flaw in the defendants' submission is the failure to discern between an allegation of actual fraud and one of objective dishonesty for the purposes of the plaintiff's claim for accessory liability." 
In the way in which the case was conducted there must be serious doubt whether this was a "fundamental flaw". In the same written submission Mr Kelly disclaimed it was Beach's case that Mr Bateman was "a fraudster". None-the- less the allegation remained that he was objectively dishonest because, inter alia, he knew of the position at Rahn & Bodmer contended for in the portion of the written submission to which I have just referred and emphasised. I am totally satisfied that none of Mr Bateman, Mr Ferguson or Mr
Thomas was guilty of objective dishonesty and, accordingly, that ATRK were not.

It was conceded by Mr Kelly, after he and Mr Hughes concluded their addresses in chief, that if I found that Mr Bateman was unaware that the moneys were "blocked", in the sense that that word was used, that would "take away chunks of my accessory liability case, but it will not provide a complete answer to it": Tp.1584, 18 November 1997. There was no suggestion, even then, by Mr
Kelly that the submission, which arguably could give rise to fraud, was being modified.

The Material Before Me 
The parties placed before me seventy two lever arch files of documents paginated by reference to the volume and the page number. Thus page 100 in
Volume 26, for example, is numbered 26,100 and when I refer in these reasons to a page it is a reference to a page in one of those volumes. By letter dated November 1997 to my Associate the solicitors for Beach, with the concurrence of the solicitors for ATRK, stated that the only folders which contain material still relevant to the proceedings are Volumes 1, 9, 10, -33, 47-50 and 60-72. The solicitors agreed that all other folders could be uplifted, which occurred. I advised the parties that I would only have regard to the documents in the folders which remained, in so far as I was referred to them specifically.

The parties also agreed that I may adopt such of the following portions of the judgment of von Doussa J in G53, in my reasons for judgment, as I thought appropriate:- .1, 1.6, 1.7 excluding the last sentence, 1.8, 1.10 and 1.11; .1-9.6 and 9.38; .1-10.4, 10.8, 10.11, 10.14-10.21, 10.24, 10.25-10.30 first two sentences, and 10.31; .1-12.10, 12.11 save for the last sentence, 12.12, 12.13 first three sentences, 12.15 and 12.17-12.24.

I shall leave the correspondence recording these agreements with the papers.

I was also provided with many pages of written submissions.

Matters Not In Issue 
I shall now recite a number of matters, which were pleaded in the Further
Amended Statement of Claim and admitted by the defendants. This course will establish many facts, a basic understanding of which will, I hope, lead to an appreciation of the issues.

The Need For Financial Restructuring 
The matters to which I shall now refer are taken from the facts stated in paragraphs 52 to 60 inclusive of the Further Amended Statement of Claim, which were admitted by the defendants.

On 24 April 1987 IRL entered into a Loan Agreement with ACC, whereby it borrowed A$25,888,325, inclusive of fees, to fund the purchase of shares and options in Coronet Resources NL, which was subsequently known as Cortaus
Limited, ("Cortaus"). It was agreed that interest should be paid at the rate of eighteen per centum per annum and that the loan was repayable on 17 July
The repayment date was extended and the loan was not repaid in full until 28 October 1988. Messrs Mallesons Stephen Jaques, ("Mallesons"), acted for ACC, and Mr Cordell acted for IRL in relation to this transaction.

The loan was secured by an equitable mortgage over 8.5 million shares and 6 million options in Coronet Resources NL, which had been acquired by IRL, and over a further 14.46 million shares held by IRL and Consolidated Gold Mining
Areas NL, ("CGMA"), another member of the IRL Group. The Equitable Mortgage
Agreement was executed by Mr Wilson, a partner of Messrs Joelson Wilson, on behalf of IRL, and the market value of the securities, as at 24 April 1987, was approximately A$23,125,000. On 25 September 1987 the security was varied to include 4.518 million shares and 1.235 million options in Moage Limited, ("Moage"). In addition, prior to 30 June 1988 ACC received 6 million shares in
Brush Creek Mining & Development Co Inc as security and, by 30 September , the value of the total security had fallen to A$3,605,300.

The loan was also secured by a Put Option Agreement between Jingellic,
Enterprise, IRL and ACC dated 24 April 1987, which provided that in the event of default by IRL, ACC could require Jingellic and Enterprise jointly and severally to purchase the securities the subject of the Equitable Mortgage
Agreement for a price being the amount that was then due to ACC. The Put
Option Agreement was executed by Mr Wilson on behalf of IRL, Jingellic and
Enterprise. On 24 April 1987 certificates under s.230(8) of the Companies
Code were executed by Jingellic and Enterprise certifying that neither party was prohibited by that section from entering into the Put Option
Agreement. On 23 September 1987 a letter was written to ACC on behalf of
Enterprise and Jingellic confirming that the obligations under that agreement remained as if the amendments to the loan agreement were initially stated in it.

The third method of security was that on 30 July 1987 Enterprise deposited
A$17m with ACC to be held in Mallesons' trust account on its behalf. By letter dated 19 August 1987 to ACC, Enterprise confirmed the terms of the deposit and advised Mallesons that "the deposit was made by us on behalf of ACC and that
ACC is accordingly free to deal with the deposit as it sees fit". This deposit remained with ACC to the order of Enterprise until 28 October 1988. It was reduced to A$12m on or about 9 May 1988, which amount was subsequently set off against the IRL loan. Interest at the rate of 13.75 per centum per annum accrued on that deposit, but was not paid.

On or about 20 August 1987 Jingellic deposited A$4m with ACC, which remained with it to the order of Jingellic until 31 October 1988, subject only to a reduction of A$750,000 on or about 9 May 1988, which amount was subsequently set off against the IRL loan. The Jingellic deposit carried the same rate of interest as the Enterprise deposit and it was not paid.

The Spargos Deposit 
The matters to which I shall now refer are taken from the facts stated in paragraphs 61 to 67 inclusive of the Further Amended Statement of Claim, which were admitted by the defendants.

By a letter dated 11 November 1987 Sir Cecil Burney, on behalf of ACC, confirmed to Mr A.P. Woods of Spargos that ACC would accept a deposit from it for ninety days at an interest rate payable by ACC to Spargos of thirteen per centum per annum. On or about 12 November 1987 Spargos remitted a deposit of
A$6m to ACC's account. That deposit, and interest accrued on it, was rolled over and remained with ACC until 31 October 1988. Neither it nor the accrued interest was repaid by ACC to Spargos.

On 25 September 1987 ACC lent IRL a further A$7.3m to fund the purchase of shares and options in Moage, such that the total moneys lent to IRL by ACC rose to A$33,188,325. This led to the variation of the Equitable Mortgage
Agreement, which was executed by Mr Wilson on behalf of IRL on 24 September
The loan was extended and, on or about 9 May 1988, Enterprise and
Jingellic drew cheques on accounts with the National Australia Bank Limited for A$12m and A$750,000 to the order of IRL to purchase redeemable preference shares in IRL. Immediately thereafter IRL endorsed the cheques in favour of
ACC in partial discharge of the IRL loan. ACC in turn endorsed the cheques in favour of Enterprise and Jingellic in part repayment of those companies' deposits.

In about October 1988 it was necessary for IRL to refinance or further extend its loan for a period of twelve months to ensure that its auditors would certify its accounts for the year ended 30 June 1988. The difficult financial position in which IRL found itself for the year ended 30 June 1988 was that it had assets of $67m, represented by shares in subsidiary and associated companies shown in the financial statements as having a market value of A$56m, whereas their market value was approximately A$15m. It was also shown as having nett equity of A$32m "such that on the basis of the said market value of IRL's assets IRL's stated nett equity as at 30 June 1988 was extinguished".
Creditors and borrowings of A$36m were shown in the financial statements so that, at 30 June 1988, on the basis of the market value of its assets, its liabilities exceeded them.

IRL reported losses for each of the financial periods ended 31 December 1985, June 1987 and 1988, and its subsidiaries also incurred losses in those years. Its principal assets comprised shares in subsidiary and associated companies, which were unlikely to pay any or sufficient dividends to enable it to meet its operating expenses and interest. Accordingly it would inevitably incur further losses and its financial position would continue to deteriorate.

By October 1988 the market value of IRL's shareholdings in its subsidiary and associated companies had deteriorated markedly since at least October 1987, such that it was unlikely that it would be in a position to dispose of them.
Its assets were mainly of a non-current nature, whilst its liabilities were current. In these circumstances the character of its assets, in particular the significant shareholdings in subsidiary and associated companies, meant that it was unlikely to be able to convert sufficient assets to cash to meet any demand which might be made by financiers and, in particular, by ACC. In these circumstances its auditors would not have been able to certify that IRL was "a going concern" unless they could be satisfied that it could repay or refinance the ACC loan. IRL sought to extend the loan, but it could not conclude negotiations with ACC. On 25 April 1988 and 31 May 1988 it made payments of
A$3m and A$2m respectively. However, save to that extent, the principal sum remained outstanding and interest continued to accrue. On 30 September 1988
IRL owed A$22,195,078.21 and A$6,756,753.21 by way of principal and interest respectively.

The "Currency Swap" Transaction 
The following matters are taken from the facts stated in paragraphs 82 to 85, to 93, and 95 to 102 of the plaintiff's Further Amended Statement of Claim, which the defendants admitted.

On 15 January 1988 Petrogulf Resources Limited, ("Petrogulf"), agreed to purchase 19,939,859 shares in 16.2 per cent of Claremont's issued capital from
FAI Insurance Limited, ("FAI"), for a total cost, inclusive of brokerage and stamp duty, of A$14,500,265.46 or 72 cents per share. The market price of
Claremont shares in January 1988 ranged between 23 and 33 cents and the purchase was settled on 21 June 1988.

On 24 December 1987 Claremont announced a one for one non-renounceable rights issue at 25 cents per share and that payment for shares taken up was required by 31 March 1988. The rights due to Petrogulf, as a holder of the interest it was acquiring, were taken up during March 1988 at a cost of A$4,984,964.75, the initial funding for the purchase being, in March 1988, by way of a loan from Rothwells Limited, ("Rothwells"), of A$2,724,974. The remaining $2m was provided from Petrogulf's own funds. The loan from Rothwells was secured over the rights issue shares and guaranteed by IRAG by way of a share mortgage over its holding of 18,917,835 Claremont shares.

In June 1988 A$12.5m was borrowed from Elders Finance & Investment Co
Limited, ("ELFIC"), and secured over Petrogulf's shares in Claremont.
Enterprise provided a guarantee, supported by a first mortgage over 2,499,988 ordinary shares and 15,000 preference shares in Pinecreek Goldfields Limited.
Petrogulf obtained two further loans in June 1988 from Yellowstone Pty Limited in the sum of A$680,000, and from Meridian Oil NL in the sum of A$100,000. (I would add to the admitted facts that the granting of the guarantee by
Enterprise caused severe complaints by members of its shareholders' action group.) 
On 13 May 1988 Mr Cummings, on behalf of IRL and Spargos, instructed Messrs
O'Loughlin Robertson, solicitors of Adelaide, in relation to a joint cash bid for all of the issued shares in Petrogulf not already held by the IRL Group.
On about 18 May 1988 Inspar Pty Limited, ("Inspar"), which was incorporated in the State of South Australia as a shelf company, was acquired and, initially,
IRL held 51 per cent and Spargos held 49 per cent of its issued shares. On 24
August 1988 Spargos resolved to and did acquire two further shares, as a result of which Inspar became a subsidiary of Spargos.

On 21 June 1988 Petrogulf completed the purchase of the shares in Claremont from FAI by means of a draw-down on a bill facility for A$12.5m from ELFIC. By an agreement drafted by Messrs Baker O'Loughlin, the successor solicitors to
Messrs O'Loughlin Robertson and then acting as the solicitors for Inspar, and dated 24 July 1988 Spargos agreed to lend Inspar up to A$5.7m to acquire the shares in Petrogulf and associated expenses. The Part A Statement of Inspar was registered on 22 August 1988, and the initial offer of 20 cents each per share to Petrogulf shareholders was dated that day. On 21 October 1988
Petrogulf's Board accepted the offer of ELFIC to extend the A$12.5m facility to 21 February 1989 and, on 4 January 1989, ELFIC provided a cash advance to
Petrogulf to replace its original borrowing from Rothwells in the sum of
A$3,076,252.88. ATRK were retained by Petrogulf to act for it in the takeover, and for Spargos in relation to advances it proposed to make to Petrogulf to reduce its indebtedness to ELFIC and Inspar to pay acceptors of its bid for
Petrogulf.

The offer period for the takeover by Inspar was extended until 24 April 1989, on which date Inspar notified ASX that it had received acceptances of ,412,629 shares, being 63.47 per cent of Petrogulf's issued capital. The notice also stated that Inspar was entitled to 73.43 per cent of Petrogulf's issued capital. Inspar was obliged, under the terms of its offer, to pay accepting shareholders by 15 May 1989.

Between October 1987 and September 1988 The Australian Gaslight Company, ("AGL"), had acquired beneficial ownership of 51,227,800 fully paid ordinary shares, which represented approximately 19.4 per cent of the issued share capital of Claremont, and, subject to a number of small sales, that shareholding remained at approximately 19 per cent until 1993. In the period from November 1987 to May 1989 AGL was a beneficial owner of 10,000 shares in
Beach. On 5 May 1989 AGL wrote to the directors of Claremont requesting information about its activities in oil and gas, including whether it was committed to expanding its operations in Australia, and whether it had sold or planned to sell any of its oil and gas exploration, production or pipe line interests since 20 June 1988, and as to what other investments Claremont had made in oil and gas assets in Australia and overseas since 30 June 1988. ATRK advised Claremont with regard to these enquiries and replied on its behalf on May 1989 refusing to answer AGL's requests. (The reasons advanced were that
AGL was not entitled to the information, and that as AGL had stated that it may be a vendor of the shares there could be allegations of insider trading if such information was provided.) 
By early May 1989 Petrogulf was in default with regard to both of its facilities from ELFIC and, on or about 9 May 1989, Mr Fuller agreed with Ms
Sonia Ritchie of ELFIC, that Petrogulf's facilities would be reduced by A$5m, and that the remaining facility of approximately A$12m would be extended.
Additionally, Inspar requested a further advance of A$3.8m, which was to be supported by a guarantee from Spargos secured over the Bellevue Mine interests. Rothschild Australia Limited, ("Rothschilds"), already held security over those interests, a condition of which was that they could not be further encumbered without its consent. In May 1989 Beach had a deposit of
A$5m with ELFIC in Sydney.

Burbank Oil Interests 
The following matters are taken from paragraphs 107, 108, 109 and 110 of the plaintiff's Further Amended Statement of Claim, which the defendants admitted.

The Burbank Oil lease was granted in 1950 by the Osage Indians over land in the State of Okalahoma. Prior to 30 June 1988 interests were held by various parties in the North and South Burbank Units and, at all relevant times,
Phillip's Petroleum Limited held approximately 51 per cent of the North
Burbank Unit and 63.7 per cent of the South Burbank Unit. Prior to 31 August McKenzie Management Inc, which was incorporated in Okalahoma, acquired from various companies certain interests in the Burbank Oil Units.

The First Acquisition Of The Burbank Oil Field Interests (Acquisition By BPC And BOG) 
The matters set out hereunder are taken from paragraphs 111 to 123 inclusive of the plaintiff's Further Amended Statement of Claim, which the defendants admitted.

On or about 12 August 1988 BPC entered into an agreement in writing with an
American company to purchase a 2.36 per cent working interest in the North
Burbank Unit and a 6.1 per cent interest in the South Burbank Unit for
US$75,000. On 17 August 1988 a service company on behalf of HKFC, and at the direction of Mr Johnson, remitted US$7,500, which was on-paid to the vendor "as earnest money". On 26 August 1988 the balance was paid and, on 13
September 1988, another small amount was paid in respect of sales taxes.

On 31 August 1988 McKenzie Management Inc entered into an agreement in writing with BPC whereby it agreed to sell its interest for a total consideration of
US$3m. US$150,000 by way of earnest was to be paid on or before the expiration of two weeks from that date, and the balance within six weeks of that date unless the parties otherwise agreed in writing.

On 12 September 1988 Mr Fuller, who was then a director of both Claremont and
IRL, recommended to Claremont that it pay $150,000 to secure "in effect a first option" over the interest of McKenzie Management Inc and, on 13
September 1988, Claremont paid that amount to lawyers acting on behalf of BPC.
On 14 September 1988 BPC resolved that as at 8 September 1988 the whole of its capital of 100 shares be allotted to Mazeley on payment by Mazeley of $100.
From 20 September 1988 Mazeley was incorporated and, on or about that day, it issued one bearer share and became entitled, at a date unknown to Beach, to be the beneficial owner of the whole of the issued share capital of BPC. On a date also unknown to Beach, but prior to 29 June 1989, Firstway obtained possession and control of the Mazeley bearer share.

On 12 October 1988 Claremont caused to be remitted to Messrs Gardner Weller, as solicitors for BPC, US$2.95m, being the balance of the sum due and payable to McKenzie Management Inc and, on 21 December 1988, Prime Petroleum Company entered into an agreement with BPC whereby it agreed to sell a 4.3 per cent working interest in the North Burbank Unit for $US357,190. On or about 21
March 1989 McKenzie Management Inc agreed to acquire a further working interest in the North Burbank Unit, which was apparently acquired on 25 April by BPC's advancing to BOG US$90,000.

The Second Acquisition Of The Burbank Oil Field Interests (From Firstway By Beach Of Legal ownership Of The Interests In The Burbank Oil Field Under A Charge And Option Agreement Dated 30 June 1989) 
The matters set out hereunder are taken from paragraphs 125 and 126, and paragraphs 133, 134, 136, 137, 138, 140, 141, 142 and 143 of the plaintiff's
Further Amended Statement of Claim, which the defendants admitted.

By facsimile transmissions dated 12 and 13 October 1988 Messrs Joelson Wilson were instructed to act as Claremont's solicitors and to prepare the necessary documentation to record the terms of the loan of US$2,990,000 that Claremont had made to BPC, which comprised a charge to secure the repayment of that amount, initially over the assets of BPC, and later over the share capital of
Mazeley and, accordingly, over BPC's working interests in the Burbank Oil
Field, and an option for Claremont to purchase those interests for US$19.5m.

By facsimile transmissions dated 11 May 1989 from Beach, Messrs Joelson Wilson were instructed that at all times Claremont had been acting as a duly appointed and authorised agent for Beach, that Beach had resolved to exercise an option to acquire what was described as a 47 per cent working interest in the Burbank Oil Field, if an appropriate and satisfactory price could be negotiated in the region of US$21m to US$26m, and that they were authorised by
Beach to conduct negotiations as to the price on its behalf.

On or about 27 June 1989 the National Companies and Securities Commission, ("NCSC"), served on Claremont and Beach notices to produce all books and other documents concerning moneys received or applied by them during the period 1
January 1988 to 26 June 1989 in excess of $500,000.

In paragraph 136 it was pleaded:- "At a time unknown to Beach, Fuller, Cummings and Main as directors of Beach and Claremont and Johnson as a deemed director of Beach and Claremont caused Beach and Claremont to enter into the Charge and Option Agreement with Firstway." 
The Charge and Option Agreement provided, inter alia, that in consideration of the advance by Beach to Firstway of US$8,197,564 between 13 September 1988 and April 1989, which was referred to as the option fee, Firstway granted to
Beach a charge over the issued capital of Mazeley and the option to purchase that asset for US$28m less the option fee, to which was to be added interest owing on that fee at the exercise date with a further adjustment for the nett operating income or expenditure owed by or to the oil field operator. The option was able to be exercised during the period ending 31 July 1989 and the agreement was varied by a letter from Beach to Firstway, dated 29 June 1989, as to certain matters concerning title and the payment of the balance of the purchase moneys due on the exercise of the option.

By a Supplemental Agreement dated 28 November 1989 Beach, Claremont and
Firstway agreed to vary the Charge and Option Agreement by, inter alia, confirming that the warranties in relation to the North Burbank Unit and South
Burbank Unit remained in force and effect notwithstanding the completion of the matters referred to in clause 7 of that agreement, and by providing that the Charge and Option Agreement should be read and construed as though the value of the North Burbank Unit was US$22,116,347.30 and the value of the
South Burbank Unit was US$5,883,652.70.

By notice dated 30 June 1989, which was executed by Mr Main under power of attorney, Messrs Fuller, Cummings and Main, as directors of Beach, and Mr
Johnson, as a deemed director of Beach, caused Beach "at a time unknown to" it to exercise the option. The power of attorney was granted by Beach by an undated grant given under its common seal and attested by Mr Cummings and its then company secretary, Ms Deborah Ryan. In paragraph 143 it was pleaded that at all relevant times the only material assets of Mazeley were the shares it held in BPC and BOG, and the only material assets of BPC and BOG were the
Burbank Oil Field interests.

The Syndicated Cash Advance Facility 
The following matters are taken from paragraphs 148, 149 and 150 of the
Further Amended Statement of Claim, which were admitted by the defendant.

On or about 19 October 1989 Messrs Fuller, Cummings and Main, as directors of
Beach, and Mr Johnson as a deemed director of Beach, caused Beach to enter into the SCAFA with Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic. The SCAFA provided, inter alia, that sums equivalent to A$2,096,434.76 with Spargos,
A$7,706,013.27 with Enterprise, and A$4,111,780.18 with Jingellic were "deemed to be advanced upon the terms and conditions of the" SCAFA; that such moneys were advanced for one hundred and eighty days from the draw-down date, (which it was not in issue was 3 July 1989); that Beach was required to execute certain security documents to secure repayment; that Spargos was the agent for the lenders under the agreement; and that Beach was to pay Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic those amounts and interest. (It was not in issue that ATRK acted on behalf of the lenders under the SCAFA. Hence, if Mr Bateman had been aware that Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic were not entitled to the money said to be deposited at Rahn & Bodmer, he would have known that the SCAFA could not operate as a loan to Beach and, accordingly, Beach was not obliged to make repayments pursuant to the SCAFA.) 
On 5 December 1989 Messrs Fuller, Cummings and Main, as directors of Beach, and Mr Johnson, as a deemed director of it, caused it to enter into a mortgage in favour of Spargos, as agent for the lenders under the SCAFA, in which the bearer share in Mazeley was, and remained, security for the repayment of the moneys advanced, and to enter into an equitable charge in favour of Spargos, as agent for the lenders under the SCAFA, in which all of the right, title and interest in Mazeley, BOG and BPC, inter alia, comprised the security for the repayment of moneys advanced; and BPC and BOG to enter into mortgages of their rights under the contract in favour of Spargos, as agent for the lenders under the SCAFA, in which all contracts of BPC and BOG relating to the assets were comprised as security for the repayment of moneys advanced. Pursuant to the alleged obligation to make payments under the SCAFA Messrs Fuller, Cummings and Main, as directors, and Mr Johnson, as a deemed director, of Beach caused it to repay $10,211,922.10.

The Heads Of Agreement 
The following matters are taken from paragraphs 160 to 164 of the Further
Amended Statement of Claim, which were admitted by the defendants.

As and from at least 30 June 1990 moneys purportedly advanced under the SCAFA were due for repayment on demand and, on 8 January 1991, Jingellic, purportedly acting as agent under the SCAFA on behalf of itself and Enterprise delivered a notice to Beach, which purported to be a demand pursuant to s.460 of the Corporations Law for money alleged to be due under the SCAFA. On 18
January 1991, Messrs Fuller, Hibberd and Towner, as directors of Beach, caused it to enter into "Heads of Agreement" with Jingellic, whose directors were
Messrs Fuller, Cummings and Richard Geoffrey Webb, whereby Beach agreed to pay $300,000 on 18 January 1991 and monthly amounts thereafter in repayment of the balance of moneys owing on or before 17 July 1991.

The Breach By Directors Of Beach Of Their Duties To It 
Paragraphs 165 and 166 of the Further Amended Statement of Claim, which the defendants admitted, alleged that Mr Johnson and the directors of Beach owed it common law, statutory and fiduciary duties to exercise a reasonable degree of care and diligence in the exercise of their powers and the discharge of their duties as directors; to act bona fide in its interests; not to use their positions to advantage the interests of IRL, IRAG, Spargos, Enterprise and
Jingellic to its detriment; and to hold and/or apply Beach's assets, including the ELFIC deposit, its money used to repay the SCAFA loan and the moneys paid by it to Firstway under the Charge and Option Agreement in trust for Beach's benefit and purposes. Further, it was asserted, they were under an obligation not to misapply its assets to the extent that their interests and those of the other companies "would or might conflict with the interests of Beach". It was alleged that Messrs Fuller, Cummings, Main and Johnson, in breach of these various duties, transferred Beach's funds for the benefit of IRL, IRAG,
Spargos, Enterprise, Jingellic and Firstway for no consideration and not for
Beach's benefit.

Beach's Case 
Beach's case was, and so much was not in issue, that Messrs Fuller, Cummings,
Main and Mr Johnson acted in breach of their various duties to Beach by causing it to purchase from Firstway the asset, which, effectively, was the
Burbank oilfield interest, for a grossly inflated price and, thereafter, by ensuring that Beach paid the purchase price in various ways, which advantaged them and other companies in the Group, but which afforded no benefit to it. It was also alleged that a currency swap transaction assigned A$5m from Beach to
Spargos, and that Beach did not receive any corresponding benefit from a purported contemporaneous assignment by Spargos to Beach in Switzerland.

Firstly, it was submitted on behalf of Beach that moneys owing by Claremont to it, as recorded in Claremont's accounts, were reduced by the deduction of
US$8,197,564, which had been paid by Claremont on behalf of Beach and which became the option fee payable under the Charge and Option Agreement, and to that extent, Claremont's liability was discharged by crediting it with a payment of A$10,067,638, being the Australian equivalent of US$8,197,564.
Thus, although there was no payment out of Beach's funds, as such, its asset, being part of the debt owing by Claremont, was discharged pro tanto.
Secondly, it was asserted that there was an appropriation in favour of
Firstway of payments made by Beach in discharge of a loan of A$14,525,000 purported to have been made to it by Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic pursuant to the SCAFA. Beach's submission was that these companies had no money to lend it and, therefore, the payments were not in discharge of any loan, and Beach derived no benefit from them, save to the extent of obtaining an asset worth US$3.2m. Thirdly, there was the provision by Firstway of vendor finance of A$6,028,704 in respect of the balance. This amount was never paid and, in itself, was not the subject of an allegation of fraud.

Beach submitted that another fraud was perpetrated on it by the currency swap transaction whereby A$5m on deposit by Beach at ELFIC was, by a resolution passed on 10 May 1989, assigned by Beach to Spargos. This provided Spargos with urgently needed funds. The purported justification for this assignment, which was said to provide value to Beach, was the assignment by Spargos to
Beach of a US Dollar equivalent to that sum, namely US$4,005,924.66, said to be on deposit by Spargos with Rahn & Bodmer. In fact, moneys apparently standing to the credit of Spargos at Rahn & Bodmer were not available to
Spargos.

Beach relied upon ATRK's alleged breach of fiduciary duty to it; their knowing assistance in various breaches of fiduciary duties by a number of its directors; their knowing involvement in breaches of ss.229(2) and (4) and 230 of the Companies Code; and negligence. The principal claim was for breach of fiduciary duty and it was submitted that that arose thus:- 
ATRK, at all material times, carried on practice in the area of corporations law, takeovers, mergers and acquisitions and two of their partners, Messrs Bateman and Ferguson, had particular experience in and held themselves out as experts in that area of practice.

Early in 1989 ATRK accepted instructions to advise the IRL Group in relation to its proposed restructure and refinance, including the structure and funding of the proposed acquisition of Burbank. Members of the Group included IRL, Spargos, Enterprise, Jingellic, Claremont and Beach.

Those companies had a number of common directors and, in particular, Mr
Fuller and Mr Cummings and, when the Burbank acquisition came to be implemented, Mr Main. The Group was effectively controlled by Mr Johnson.

When ATRK entered upon advising the IRL Group, they assumed a relationship of trust and confidence with all of the companies in the Group and Mr Bateman and Mr Ferguson, in particular, became privy to confidential information concerning the financial affairs of the companies and the problems they were facing. They formulated various proposals and gave professional advice in relation to the restructuring and refinancing of the Group, including proposals which addressed the structure and funding of the Burbank acquisition, and they acted in a number of related matters, including the preparation of Deeds of Confidentiality. The advice given was of a nature and in circumstances such that it was to be expected that the companies in the
Group would rely on it in considering their options.

A solicitor advising a group of companies is obliged to treat each member as a separate legal entity and to consult the interests of that member alone, rather than the interests of others, so that a solicitor who advises companies in a group is not in a different position, when it comes to conflicts, from a solicitor who has a number of clients with conflicting interests. A client is entitled to expect that the solicitor will be in a position to approach the matter with nothing in mind but the protection of the client's interests against those of the other party and, in particular, the client is not required to depend upon a solicitor, who has conflicting allegiances and may be tempted, either consciously or unconsciously, to favour another or simply to seek a resolution in a way which is least embarrassing to the solicitor.

A client is entitled to receive the benefit of all of the skill and knowledge of the solicitor, including knowledge of facts which are known to the solicitor and material to be known to the client, and not to suffer a divided loyalty in which his solicitor has a duty to maintain confidentiality in relation to the same information in favour of another client.

In the present case the alleged breaches of fiduciary duty were said to arise in various ways. As I have indicated the starting point was that ATRK were retained to advise the IRL Group, individual companies within which were in severe financial difficulties, as to restructuring and refinancing. It was submitted that companies within the Group included Spargos, Enterprise,
Jingellic, Claremont and Beach. The issues at this level were the extent of
ATRK's retainers, from which companies they were received, and, if they were received from the Group, whether Beach was part of it. It is very difficult, in my opinion, to conclude that Beach was not part of the Group. It was owned as to 65 per cent by Midland, which was a wholly owned subsidiary of Claremont which, in turn, was clearly a member of the Group.

ATRK admitted that they advised IRL in relation to proposals to rationalise cross shareholdings between it and related companies, and from time to time in relation to various proposals for rationalising the structure "of the so- called IRL Group". ATRK denied that they were retained to give advice in respect of the refinancing of the IRL Group, or in regard to the proposed restructuring and refinancing of the IRL Group.

The restructuring was concerned with the reduction in the number of companies within the Group, most if not all of which were publicly listed companies registered on ASX, from fifteen to about two by a series of takeovers, either by existing companies within the Group, or by a new company, ("Newco"), which was to be incorporated. The ability to effect the takeovers depended on borrowing money for the acquisition of shares in the target companies. This gave rise to several problems. Firstly, the financial position of many companies in the Group was not sound, and even if the Group finances were looked at collectively overall they were not in a good position. Accordingly, any potential financier had to be convinced that there was adequate security against which to lend. Secondly, in so far as companies within the Group had assets, any restructuring, which involved the acquisition of shares, had to have regard to the effect, or the potential effect, of s.129 of the Companies
Code. Thirdly, there were ongoing problems in relation to the acquisition by
Petrogulf from FAI of the shareholding of FAI in Claremont, which was alleged to have constituted a takeover without compliance with legal requirements.
This gave rise to problems from shareholders and the NCSC. By 24 April 1989
Inspar had received acceptances of 17,412,629 shares comprising 63.47 per cent of Petrogulf's issued capital and was entitled to 73.43 per cent of that issued capital. It was obliged, under the terms of the offer, to make payments to accepting shareholders by 15 May 1989 and it was having difficulty in raising the necessary finance.

Beach had reasonably substantial assets and there is no doubt that Messrs
Johnson, Fuller, Cummings and Main determined to deprive it of them by the totally fraudulent scheme. Beach's submission was that the undoubted fraud would not have been possible had ATRK, in acting for it, had proper regard to its position. This submission has to be considered against the background of what ATRK were retained by Beach to do and, in so far as they were retained, that ATRK were receiving instructions from those who were perpetrating the fraud, and that ATRK were unaware of the fraud.

The case for Beach was that on at least three signification occasions ATRK acted for various companies in the Group, including Beach, where there were conflicting interests between those companies and Beach. This was said to be done under the general retainer of ATRK to act for the Group in the restructuring and refinancing, because once ATRK became aware that Beach was to acquire, in the manner in which I have described, the Burbank interest, that became, and was recognised as having become, a central part of the restructuring and refinancing. In the end the proposals for takeover did not go forward, but the acquisition by Beach of the share in Mazeley did, and, in this way Beach was deprived of assets and money. For reasons I shall give I do not consider that it is proper to look at all matters being embraced in what was said to be a general retainer. The evidence makes it clear which solicitors were retained and for what purpose in relation to the various transactions: Hill versus Van Erp [(1996-1997) 188 CLR 159.] 
It was submitted by Beach that had ATRK not breached its fiduciary duty to it the existence of the fraud would have been disclosed, or the proper activities of ATRK would have precluded the perpetrators of the fraud from proceeding with it, with the consequence that Beach would not have suffered financial loss. The maintenance of the allegation of breach of fiduciary duty by ATRK was perceived by Beach to be very important, because it was submitted that if there was such a breach it was only necessary for Beach to prove it and that it suffered loss, and that pursuant to relevant principles the Court could not consider whether any matter, other than the breach of the fiduciary duty, led to the loss. The submission was that in those circumstances it was legally quite irrelevant for the Court to have regard to other matters, which could have caused the loss, such as the obvious intention by those perpetrating the fraud to defraud Beach irrespective of what legal advice may have been given.
If this submission is correct the Court could not consider whether the effective cause of the loss was the conduct of the fraudulent directors, rather than the breach of fiduciary duty. It was sufficient, so Beach submitted, that the breach was a cause of the loss.

It is necessary to bear in mind that prior to 28 October 1988 IRL and IRAG owed ACC approximately $24m. ACC was not prepared to continue the loan, which was repaid. The repayment was effected through Rahn & Bodmer. This involved the lending of some money by Rahn & Bodmer to IRL and IRAG and the utilisation of funds, which Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic had on deposit with ACC amounting, in all, to approximately $17.7m. By the use of both escrow and fiduciary bank accounts at Rahn & Bodmer the indebtedness to ACC was satisfied. Relevantly for present purposes the moneys held on deposit at ACC on behalf of Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic were paid to ACC in partial discharge of the indebtedness. That involved the use of fiduciary bank accounts at Rahn & Bodmer, which showed, on their face, that each of
Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic was entitled to the amount of the deposit as being on account with Rahn & Bodmer. But the fiduciary accounts did not operate in that way. They were accounts kept by Rahn & Bodmer to facilitate transactions as between customers and, in the present case, the position was that whilst documents, on their face, showed that Spargos,
Enterprise and Jingellic were entitled to the amounts in their accounts from
Rahn & Bodmer, that concealed that such entitlement would only arise when
IRL and/or IRAG repaid to Rahn & Bodmer the amounts of the deposit of each. Until this occurred none of those companies was entitled to draw against the deposits which, ex facie, stood to their credit with Rahn & Bodmer.
In these circumstances it was said those accounts were "blocked". There is no doubt that those perpetrating the fraud, including Mr Brooke and, I infer, Mr
Main, were well aware of that.

The basic significance of the position at Rahn & Bodmer, which was concealed not only by the fraudsters but also by officers of Rahn &
Bodmer, was that notwithstanding that the moneys could not be used in circumstances to which I shall refer, they were purported to be used as if
Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic were free to draw upon them. I have referred to the nature of the allegations made in relation to Mr Bateman's knowledge on this topic.

By 10 May 1989 Spargos was in desperate need of money because it had undertaken to provide the money to Inspar to enable it to complete the
Petrogulf takeover. Beach had a deposit of $5m at ELFIC. On that day the directors of Beach resolved to assign that deposit to Spargos, which proposed to use it to discharge part of its financial obligations. After the resolution was passed Mr Thomas was approached by Mr Fuller in relation to the first assignment. The stated benefit to Beach was an assignment to it of the same amount of money said to be held in Spargos' account with Rahn & Bodmer.
There is no doubt that Mr Thomas acted for Spargos and played a role in having letters written by Beach and Spargos drafted and typed. It was denied on the pleadings that ATRK acted for Beach in this transaction. The letters were then delivered by ATRK to ELFIC, which enabled the Beach deposit to be held for
Spargos and dealt with by ELFIC in accordance with its instructions. Mr Thomas asserted that his role was no more than acting in an administrative or secretarial way for Spargos to assist in the implementation of the transaction, which was effectuated by the resolution of 10 May 1989. He denied he was acting as the solicitor for Beach, notwithstanding that he prepared a letter on Beach letterhead, which had been pre-signed by Mr Cummings, after consultation with an officer of ELFIC with a view to seeking to avoid some stamp duty problems; notwithstanding that after the letters were approved by
Mr Fuller he arranged to have them delivered to ELFIC; and notwithstanding that on 16 May 1989 he prepared letters, including one to Beach, which were signed by Mr Bateman, and which reported on the completion of the transaction.
The letter to Mr Worthington at Beach indicated that if there were any questions about the matter ATRK should be consulted and, within a matter of minutes after receiving it, Mr Worthington communicated with Mr Bateman to ask whether the assignment in Switzerland was "hedged". Mr Bateman referred Mr
Worthington to Mr Fuller.

Beach's case was that in this transaction ATRK were acting on its behalf for the various reasons to which I have referred and, at the very least, owed it a duty to ensure that it received value for the assignment in the form of valuable consideration in Switzerland. The problem with the latter part of this submission was that there was no evidence that ATRK was retained to act in respect of the assignment in Switzerland. It was submitted that there was a clear conflict of interest between Beach and Spargos in the sense that the asset of Beach was being paid to Spargos and a proper consideration of the position of Beach necessitated ATRK's being satisfied that Spargos gave value to Beach for that assignment. It was submitted that had there not been a breach of the fiduciary duty it would have been ascertained that there was no money available to Spargos in Switzerland to enable it to make the assignment to Beach and, put shortly, that the rest of the scheme, which involved the utilisation of the funds of Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic in Switzerland, would not have been implemented. However, even if all those consequences did not flow, it was submitted that the breach of fiduciary duty caused $5m of
Beach's funds to be paid away without Beach's receiving value. ATRK submitted that it was only instructed to act for Spargos in assisting in the implementation of the assignment; that it was not instructed to act for Beach; that in so far as letters were prepared on Beach's letterhead that was done with the express concurrence of Mr Fuller, who ATRK understood to be acting for Beach; that in so far as any representation was made about the payment of stamp duty that was done for the benefit of Spargos, which was the party obliged to pay it; and that they were never instructed to act in respect of the assignment in Switzerland.

The next transaction was the Charge and Option Agreement, which was prepared on behalf of Claremont and Beach by Mr Cordell, who acted for them in the transaction. The drafting commenced in October 1988. In that transaction
Messrs Gardner Weller acted for Firstway. Although it was clear from what transpired at a meeting on 2 May 1989 that Mr Bateman was aware that Beach intended to enter into the Burbank transaction and advised Messrs Johnston,
Fuller, Cummings and Main, inter alia, that there would be no breach of s.129, there is no evidence that at that time he had anything to do with the preparation of the Charge and Option Agreement or that ATRK acted for Beach in relation to it. The evidence established that at the meeting of 2 May 1989 it was made clear that the acquisition of Burbank would proceed irrespective of the takeover proposals being considered. The reason for this, no doubt, was that the fraudulent directors were determined to deprive Beach of its assets, a matter of which Mr Bateman was not aware.

Beach's case at this point is that at the meeting of 2 May 1989 the focus was not on what Beach was acquiring or whether it was obtaining value for money, but upon other aspects of the transaction, mainly funding, which paid little, if any, regard to the position of Beach. It was submitted that in these circumstances there was an obligation on ATRK to advise Beach fully in relation to the proposed acquisition. Alternatively, it was submitted that had
Mr Bateman made himself aware of the nature of the transaction he must have advised that, in the interests of Beach, it could not go ahead. This gave rise to a difficult point, to which I have adverted, in relation to the breaches, if indeed there were breaches, of fiduciary duty. It was submitted by Mr Kelly that had Mr Bateman become aware of all relevant facts in relation to the
Burbank transaction and advised Beach on them, and if the directors had simply refused to accept that advice and ceased to instruct Mr Bateman, that would be beside the point because the fact that the directors would have perpetrated the fraudulent scheme, irrespective of any advice given by Mr Bateman, does not exculpate him from liability for any breach of fiduciary duty. Put this way the submission went beyond a causation point to asserting, in effect, absolute liability. This submission acquires particular significance in the present case because I am satisfied that the proper inference to be drawn is that irrespective of any legal advice Mr Bateman gave or may have given, the directors would have pursued the proposed fraudulent course to ensure that moneys were removed from Beach and used for purposes they had in mind. The position is also complicated, at least as at 2 May 1989, by the fact that Mr
Bateman was not only not involved in the preparation of the Charge and Option
Agreement and was not acting on behalf of any party in relation to it, but two other firms of solicitors in England were. However, it was said that does not assist Mr Bateman, because the law establishes that one does not, when considering the consequences of a breach of fiduciary duty, have regard to causation, but rather to whether there was a breach of the duty and loss.

There is a further complication. The evidence suggested that if it came to the notice of Mr Bateman that the directors were not acting in the best interests of Beach there was an obligation on him to inform "Beach", i.e. by writing to all the directors of Beach and also to the company secretary and/or the chief executive officer. However, it appears this obligation would only have arisen if Mr Bateman had reason to believe that the directors were not acting in
Beach's best interests. The evidence does not satisfy me that he ever became aware of that. In this regard ATRK also relied on the assumptions said to flow in its favour from s.68A of the Companies Code.

The position in relation to the Charge and Option Agreement, it was submitted, changed on or about 21 July 1989. It will be remembered that it was entered into on 29 June 1989, and that the option was exercised on 30 June 1989. By 21
July 1989 the agreement had been placed before Mr Bateman and it is clear from a facsimile transmission sent by Mr Cummings to Mr Cordell and Mr Main on 24
July 1989, that Mr Cummings had received extensive legal advice from Mr
Bateman about amendments, which he considered should be made to the Agreement.
Mr Cummings communicated these amendments to Mr Cordell and they were, essentially, incorporated in the Agreement. It is clear that the amendments related to and affected the position of Beach and, in particular, brought about a situation whereby the 90 per cent interest Beach was intended to take was converted into a 100 per cent interest, Claremont, which had held the other 10 per cent interest holding it as agent for Beach. ATRK's response to this was that they were retained to act for the lenders under the SCAFA and not retained to act for Beach, and that, in those circumstances, it was totally appropriate for them to suggest amendments to the transfer document to ensure that the lenders were protected. The expert evidence of Mr B.H.
Davidson, a solicitor called on behalf of Beach, confirmed this.

On 11 July 1989 Mr Willcock received instructions from Mr Cummings that s.12 notices, issued by the NCSC in mid-July 1989, were to be attacked, inter alia, on the basis that there should not be a disclosure of the uncompleted Burbank transaction. As one of the notices was directed to Beach it raised immediately the question as to the nature of the Burbank acquisition transaction and, on July 1989, Mr Bateman conferred with Mr Cummings during the course of which, according to the evidence of Mr Bateman, Mr Cummings put before him a number of ways in which various companies in the Group could justify the actions that had been taken. Mr Kelly submitted that I should infer that Mr
Bateman was in fact suggesting such methods to Mr Cummings and recording them.
Mr Bateman's evidence was that Mr Cummings, over a considerable period, told him of these justifications, which he noted, but he said that it was not a matter of concern to him. I am satisfied that Mr Bateman was noting suggested explanations proffered by Mr Cummings, which he considered were relevant to some activity in which he was involved as a solicitor. In the end Mr Kelly submitted it did not matter whether Mr Bateman was advising Mr Cummings, or, as I am satisfied, Mr Cummings was telling Mr Bateman about these purported justifications. It will, of course, be remembered that Mr Cummings was, to the knowledge of Mr Bateman, a commercial lawyer as well as an experienced company director and there is, therefore, nothing surprising in his ability to tell Mr
Bateman of suggested justifications for what had transpired.

Mr Kelly submitted that had Mr Bateman not advised, on 2 May 1989, that there were no problems with s.129 the Burbank acquisition transaction would not have gone ahead. One basis for this submission was that the Burbank acquisition transaction was an integral part of the restructuring and refinancing and there was no way in which the refinancing for the internal takeovers could be prejudiced by the possibility of a breach of s.129, particularly as Messrs
Clayton Utz, who were acting on behalf of ELFIC, were asking questions as to whether there was likely to be any breach of that section. This has to be weighed against the statement that the Burbank acquisition transaction would have gone ahead in any event which, for reasons to which I have referred, I believe to be undoubted. This points up the importance of Beach's establishing not only breaches of fiduciary duties, but the consequences of such breaches.

The final relevant step related to the entry into the SCAFA. This was prepared by Mr Thomas, who said, and I accept his evidence, that he made it clear to Mr
Cummings that he would not act on behalf of Beach, because he was not prepared to act for the lenders and the borrower. I also accept his evidence that Mr
Cummings told him that arrangements would be made for someone else to act for
Beach. Mr Cordell was identified as the solicitor to do so, and the evidence makes it clear that he did.

The Defendants And Those For Which They Acted 
In paragraphs 47 and 47A of the Further Amended Statement of Claim the composition of ATRK was pleaded and, in response, the Defence asserted that from 1 January 1988 to 31 December 1990 the members of the firm, which was then known as Abbott Tout Creer & Wilkinson, were as set out in Annexure "B" to the Defence, and that the firm practised from offices at Level 50, MLC
Centre, 19-29 Martin Place, Sydney. It was admitted that from 1 January 1988 to 31 December 1990 Mr Thomas was employed by ATRK and was responsible to, amongst others, Mr Bateman. It was denied that Mr Bateman was the "partner responsible" in all of the matters referred to in the Further Amended
Statement of Claim, and that ATRK acted as solicitors in relation to all such matters.

In paragraph 48 of the Further Amended Statement of Claim it was pleaded that from at least January 1988 to December 1990 ATRK acted for the companies, which were specified, and comprised companies in the IRL Group, including
Beach, and it was admitted, in paragraph 24 of the Defence, that during the period 1 January 1988 to 31 December 1990 ATRK received instructions from and performed work for various companies, including Beach. It was denied that ATRK acted "generally" for those parties and otherwise the allegations were denied.

In paragraph 49 it was pleaded that from at least January 1988 to December ATRK acted in the manner to which I shall refer. Firstly, it was pleaded that ATRK acted for Beach and Spargos on the currency swap as pleaded in paragraphs 82 to 110. As I have noted ATRK admitted paragraphs 82 to 85, 87 to , 99 to 100, 102 and 107 to 110. In paragraph 25(a) ATRK pleaded to paragraph 49 that:- "Otherwise than as set out in paragraph 63 of this Defence, deny that Abbott Tout Russell Kennedy acted for Spargos in effecting the `currency swap transaction'." 
Paragraph 63, which is in answer to paragraphs 103, 104 and 105, pleaded:- 
That on 11 May 1989 ATRK were instructed by Fuller on behalf of Spargos that on 10 May 1989 a deposit of A$5 million held by Beach with ELFIC, which was described as `the Assigned Deposit', had been assigned by Beach to
Spargos; 
That on 11 May 1989 Mr Fuller, on behalf of Spargos, gave ATRK the letter referred to in paragraph 104.2.3 of the claim and a letter on a typed Spargos letterhead which, on 11 or 12 May 1989, Mr Fuller instructed ATRK to re- engross on printed Spargos letterhead, thereby creating the document referred to in paragraph 104.2.4 of the claim; 
That Mr Fuller, on behalf of Spargos, instructed ATRK not to deliver the letters referred to in the preceding paragraph to ELFIC until ELFIC had advanced the A$3.8 million referred to in paragraph 61(a); 
That on 12 May 1989 ATRK were instructed by Mr Cummings, on behalf of
Spargos, that the consent of Rothschilds to the granting of security by
Spargos over the Bellevue Mine interests would not be forthcoming in sufficient time to enable the proposed ELFIC advance of A$3.8 million to
Inspar to proceed within acceptable time limits; and accordingly, Spargos proposed to utilise A$2 million of the Assigned Deposit by lending that sum to
Inspar to enable it to pay the acceptors, who were insisting on timely payment and to utilise the balance of A$3 million of the Assigned Deposit by lending that sum to Petrogulf to enable it to repay part of the moneys owed by it to
ELFIC; 
That on 15 May 1989 Mr Fuller, on behalf of Spargos, instructed ATRK to prepare the letters referred to sub-paragraphs 104.2.5 and 104.2.6 of the
Claim, and to deliver those letters and the letters referred to in sub- paragraph (b) to ELFIC; 
That ATRK complied with those instructions by utilising pre-signed printed letterhead Mr Fuller had left with him for that purpose, and seeking and obtaining his approval to the content of such letters; 
That on 16 May 1989 ATRK wrote a letter to Beach and reference is made to the terms of that letter.

ATRK denied having acted for Spargos, otherwise than as pleaded, and denied having acted for Beach in effecting the currency swap transaction. They also denied having acted for Beach in relation to any aspect of any of the transactions referred to in paragraph 63, and having prepared the documents referred to in paragraphs 104.2.1., 104.2.2 or 104.2.3 of the claim.

It was nextly alleged by Beach, paragraph 49.2 of the Further Amended
Statement of Claim, that ATRK acted for Beach, Spargos, Enterprise and
Jingellic in relation to the second acquisition of the Burbank Oil Field interests and the SCAFA, as alleged in paragraphs 129 to 163. ATRK admitted paragraphs 133, 134, 136 to 138, 140 to 143, 148 to 150, 158 and 160 to 163, and, in paragraph 25(b) of the Defence, that they acted on behalf of Spargos,
Enterprise and Jingellic in relation to the preparation of documents concerning the SCAFA. They denied, in paragraph 25(c), that they acted on behalf of Beach in relation to the currency swap transaction, the acquisition of the Burbank oilfield interests or the SCAFA.

It was pleaded in paragraph 49.3 that ATRK acted on behalf of the IRL Group on the proposed restructuring and refinancing of it as pleaded in paragraphs 80 to 81 of the Further Amended Statement of Claim, which paragraphs were not admitted, and, in paragraph 25(d), ATRK admitted that it advised IRL in relation to proposals to rationalise cross-shareholdings between IRL and related companies.

It was pleaded, in paragraph 49.4 of the Further Amended Statement of Claim, that ATRK acted on behalf of Petrogulf and as agent of the solicitors for
Inspar, Messrs Baker O'Loughlin, as alleged in paragraphs 85 to 98 of the
Further Amended Statement of Claim, in relation to the Inspar takeover of
Petrogulf. Paragraphs 85, 87 to 93 and 95 to 98 were admitted. In paragraph (e) of the Defence ATRK admitted that it acted on behalf of Petrogulf in relation to the preparation of a Part B Statement in response to an offer made by Inspar on 8 August 1988, and asserted, in paragraph 25(f), that Messrs
Baker O'Loughlin were retained by Inspar to act for it in relation to the offer and that ATRK acted as their agents for the purpose of lodging documents with the Corporate Affairs Commission of New South Wales in respect of that offer. ATRK admitted, in paragraph 25(g), that they acted for Petrogulf in respect of an NCSC inquiry into the purchase by it of Claremont shares (being,
I interpolate, the purchase from FAI).

It was pleaded, in paragraph 49.6 of the Further Amended Statement of Claim, that ATRK acted for Claremont in respect of complaints by AGL with regard to the management of Claremont and, in paragraph 25(h), ATRK admitted that they acted for Claremont in relation to proceedings brought and questions raised by
AGL against it during 1989.

It was pleaded, in paragraph 49.7 of the Further Amended Statement of Claim, that ATRK acted for Claremont and Beach in relation to Section 12 Notices issued by the NCSC and, in paragraph 25(i), ATRK admitted that they advised
Claremont and Beach in relation to those notices.

In paragraphs 50 and 51 of the Further Amended Statement of Claim it was pleaded that by reason of the matters pleaded in paragraphs 48 and 49 ATRK owed duties to Beach in respect of the currency swap transaction, the Second
Acquisition of the Burbank Oil interests and the SCAFA and, by reason thereof,
ATRK owed duties to IRL and IRAG, and separate duties to Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic, both of which sets of duties were irreconcilable as against each other and against the duties owed to Beach. These allegations were denied.

I have noted the admission of paragraphs 53 to 67 inclusive. Paragraph 68 of the Further Amended Statement of Claim is under the heading "The Rahn &
Bodmer Arrangements". These were pleaded in great detail and, in paragraph 79, it was asserted that the consequence of them was that if, which was denied,
Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic had deposits at Rahn & Bodmer, they were either not at call or not available to those companies unless IRL and IRAG repaid "the purported fiduciary loans" to Rahn & Bodmer "in its capacity as agent for and on behalf of Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic".
 von Doussa J, 115 ALR at p.427 described those transactions in circumstances which I gratefully and respectfully adopt:- "1.16 On 28 October 1988, ACC was demanding repayment. The IRL loans were refinanced through Rahn & Bodmer. This refinancing was achieved by a series of transactions at Rahn & Bodmer conducted through an account opened by Mr Brooke who had been appointed by IRL, ACC, and SEJ to act as an escrow agent. The balance of the IRL loan included A$6,799,964.94 accrued interest, on the payment of which IRL was required to pay $677,996.49 Australian withholding tax. Accordingly, the balance due to ACC to extinguish the IRL loan was $21,540,293.45. On repayment of this sum, ACC agreed to release securities held by it, and to transfer the deposits of SEJ to Rahn & Bodmer. In accordance with instructions given by the parties to Mr Brooke, the following transactions were intended to occur through the escrow account: 
In accordance with the intended entries in the escrow account, the only funds actually transferred between the banks were A$3,836,750.64 sent by Rahn & Bodmer to ACC." 
Although the parties did not agree that I was entitled to adopt this passage there was evidence, which justifies my making these findings.

The significance of this transaction, for present purposes, arises from the allegation as to the awareness of Mr Bateman and Mr Ferguson of the status and effect of these accounts. I have referred to the way the case was presented and the nature of the allegations made.

I have no doubt that Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic had no moneys to their credit at Rahn & Bodmer, which could have been lent to Beach and, accordingly, that Beach was under no obligation to repay those companies.
Equally, I have no doubt that Messrs Johnson, Fuller, Cummings, Main, Brooke and Cordell were aware of this at all material times.

As I have said, Beach's case, as presented in final submissions, raised an essential question as to the state of ATRK's awareness of this situation and, accordingly, whether Mr Bateman and, perhaps to a lesser extent, Mr Ferguson, were objectively dishonest. This matter was referred to further in paragraphs and 81 of the Further Amended Statement of Claim. In paragraph 80 it was alleged that during the latter part of 1988 and in 1989 ATRK, through Mr
Bateman, were retained by, inter alia, Petrogulf, Claremont, CGMA, Jingellic,
Southern Goldfields, Enterprise, Moage, Beach, Spargos, Cortaus Investments and IRL to advise on the restructuring of the IRL Group, which advice was to include rationalising the structure of the IRL Group and refinancing of it.

In paragraph 45 of their Defence ATRK, in response to paragraph 80, admitted they gave advice to IRL from time to time in relation to various proposals for rationalising the structure "of the so-called `IRL Group' "; admitted that during the period referred to in the Further Amended Statement of Claim they acted for those companies in regard to a proposed Deed of Confidentiality with
Standard Chartered Australia Limited; admitted that from time to time they gave advice to various members of "the so-called `IRL Group' " in respect of individual refinancing transactions; denied that they were retained to give advice in respect of the "refinancing of the IRL Group"; and "otherwise deny the allegations made".

In paragraph 81 of the Further Amended Statement of Claim it was pleaded that a number of meetings took place at the offices of ATRK in Sydney during
February and March 1989 when the proposed restructuring and refinancing of the
IRL Group was discussed in detail. The particulars alleged meetings held during the latter part of February and in early March 1989, during which "at least" Messrs Bateman, Fuller, Cummings, Cordell, Johnson and Main were present. Paragraph 81.1 continued:- "On more than one occasion it was explained to a meeting in the presence of Bateman by either one or all of Cordell, Johnson and Main that it was not possible to release the Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic A$ deposits at R & B without repayment of the IRL loans. At one of the meetings in late February or early March 1989 Bateman wrote on a white board a list of problems in the IRL Group and proposed solutions. Included in the list of problems were words to the effect: `R & B deposits - blocked.'" 
The further particular furnished was a memorandum of professional fees from
ATRK addressed to Cambridge Mining Services Pty Limited, ("CMS"), which carried out secretarial and accounting services to companies in the Group, dated 5 April 1989 for the period 1 February to 29 March 1989.

In paragraph 46 of the Defence, which is in answer to paragraph 81 of the
Further Amended Statement of Claim, ATRK admitted that a number of meetings took place at their offices during February and March 1989; that some of
Messrs Bateman, Cummings, Fuller, Cordell, Main and Johnson were present at such meetings or parts of them; and that during such meetings the proposed restructuring of the IRL Group and its refinancing were discussed. ATRK denied being retained in regard to the "proposed restructuring and refinancing of the
IRL Group; that at any of the meetings it was ever said in the presence of Mr
Bateman that it was not possible to release the Spargos, Enterprise and
Jingellic A$ deposits at Rahn & Bodmer without payment of the IRL loan; and that at any one of the meetings Mr Bateman wrote on a white board, or was present when there was written on a white board, any words to the effect:- "R & B deposits - blocked." 
As I have said I will deal with the evidence on this aspect in detail, but I do not accept that Mr Bateman, or anyone else at ATRK, was ever made aware that the deposits standing in the names of Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic were "blocked", or were not available to be lent to Beach at least until the
IRL or IRAG indebtedness to Rahn & Bodmer was discharged. The main contentions in support of the proposition by Beach were:- 
That in the memorandum of 10 February 1989, which was signed by Mr Winby, and prepared by Messrs Winby and Glossop, it was stated:- "IRL is critical because interest is running at $10,000 per day and the company has no income. In addition the companies which have deposits with R & B are earning taxable income whilst having no access to the use of those funds." 
That Mr Main, and perhaps Mr Johnson, told Mr Bateman at the meeting on 22
February 1989 that the moneys were not available and that Mr Winby, Mr Glossop and other executives of companies in the Group should not be made aware of this as it may cause them to make complaints and leave the employment of the companies.

That Mr Bateman was told at the meeting, in addition to that statement, that the moneys were "blocked" or otherwise not available.

That Mr Bateman, or perhaps someone else at the meeting, wrote the words "R & B deposits - blocked".

At subsequent meetings Mr Bateman wrote on the white board "on a number of occasions" words to the effect that the Rahn & Bodmer deposits were blocked.

At a meeting, which Mr Main attended, Mr Bateman said there was a need to resolve the position of Rahn & Bodmer as the Spargos, Enterprise and
Jingellic deposits were "back to back" with IRL and IRAG loans from Rahn &
Bodmer.

The short reasons why I reject each of these contentions are:- 
It is totally improbable that Messrs Winby and Glossop, who had deliberately not been told by the directors that the moneys were not available to Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic, and had not, according to the evidence, been told by anyone else, would be able to state in the memorandum of 10
February 1989 that the moneys were not available to the extent to which Beach alleged, i.e. to set forth a situation about which they were unaware.

At that time Messrs Winby and Glossop were uncertain whether the moneys were lodged for a fixed term, which they thought was the more probable, or at call. In these circumstances the memorandum of 10 February 1989 acknowledged, contrary to what Beach submitted I should infer from the passage I have quoted, that those companies had deposits with Rahn & Bodmer, and that those deposits were earning taxable income for them. Those statements are inconsistent with an absence of entitlement to the moneys. The statement that that was occurring whilst those companies had "no access to the use of those funds" is consistent with the moneys being on some form of fixed deposit. I appreciate that fixed deposits can be broken, usually subject to penalties, but a fair reading of the passage upon which Beach placed so much reliance does not support the conclusion for which it contended.

The only evidence that the statements were made at the meeting of 22
February 1989 is that of Mr Main. I shall review his evidence in detail, but I have come to the conclusion that, for a number of reasons, he is a totally discredited witness, whose evidence should only be accepted when it is corroborated by other evidence I accept, or when it is contrary to his interests. I do not accept that Mr Main said or heard it said that there was any impediment to dealing with the deposits at Rahn & Bodmer.

I accept Mr Bateman's evidence that no such thing was said.

I accept Mr Ferguson's evidence that in so far as he was at the meeting no such thing was said.

None of the other persons present at the meeting of 22 February 1989 was called, save for Mr Glossop, who denied that any such thing was said. The reasons that Messrs Johnson, Fuller and Cummings were not called can be appreciated, and I think the proper approach is to proceed on the basis that the sole evidence in support of the allegation made by Beach as to what happened at the meeting in relation to this matter is that of Mr Main.

It is totally improbable, in my opinion, that Mr Johnson, Mr Fuller, Mr
Cummings and Mr Main would have revealed to Mr Bateman that the moneys were subject to any such impediment. Mr Cordell was not called and the proper inference from the evidence is that he was prepared to do what Mr Johnson required. In saying that I must bear in mind that as he was not called he has not had the opportunity of putting his version of events. However, the evidence before me leads, in my view, inevitably to the conclusion that Mr
Cordell would not have said anything to Mr Bateman, which would have alerted him to the possibility that some improper scheme was being implemented. The same observation must be made in relation to Messrs Johnson, Fuller, Cummings and Main.

Mr Bateman was cross-examined for almost four days before me. I had the opportunity to observe him closely and I am satisfied that he would not have been party to any arrangement, which can only be described as fraudulent, if he had been made aware of its existence or of facts which could give rise to such an arrangement. I am equally satisfied that Mr Bateman would not be, and was not, a party to conduct which could give rise to a finding of objective dishonesty, particularly in the way that was presented in this case. In my opinion, it is wholly improbable, that Messrs Johnson, Fuller, Cummings, Main and Cordell would have taken the risk of jeopardising their arrangements by telling Mr Bateman. It must be remembered that Messrs Fuller, Cummings and
Cordell had been or were legal practitioners and would have been fully aware of the great risk in disclosing any such scheme to Mr Bateman.

The writing on the white board does not carry the matter, in my opinion, any further. Beach relied upon the deduction from indebtedness of three amounts including, as the third figure, the total of the deposits said to have been at Rahn & Bodmer. Mr Bateman denied that he gleaned from the deduction of the deposits from indebtedness that the deposits were not assets.
I accept that denial.

The conclusions to which I have come are completely reinforced by the efforts taken by Rahn & Bodmer, Mr Main and Mr Brooke to ensure that the position of the Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic deposits was never disclosed. Although executive officers of the companies made every effort to ascertain it they were thwarted, and these activities are, in my opinion, completely consistent with it being totally improbable that Mr Bateman would have been made privy to the fraudulent activities.

In paragraph 101 of the Further Amended Statement of Claim it was pleaded that on 10 May 1989 ATRK accepted a retainer from Spargos to act for it with regard to the ELFIC transactions referred to in paragraph 99, in which paragraph it was alleged that by early May 1989 Petrogulf was in default with regard to both of its facilities from ELFIC and, on about 9 May 1989, Mr Fuller agreed with Ms Ritchie of ELFIC that Petrogulf's facilities would be reduced by A$5m, and the remaining debt of approximately A$12m would be extended. Additionally,
Inspar requested a further advance of A$3.8m, which was to be supported by a guarantee from Spargos secured over the Bellevue Mine interests. The particulars relied on were the preparation by Mr Ferguson of a Matters
Registration/Amendment Form dated 10 May 1989 in name of Spargos and headed "Re: ELFIC - Inspar".

It was pleaded, and this was admitted, that in May 1989 Beach had a deposit of
A$5m with ELFIC in Sydney and, in paragraph 103, that on 12 May 1989 ATRK received instructions from Mr Fuller that he was unable to obtain the consent of Rothschilds with the regard to the security required for the A$3.8m to
Inspar, and instructed ATRK that he wished to advise ELFIC that Beach would assign its deposit to Spargos, and Spargos would use $2m of that to satisfy acceptors of Inspar's Petrogulf bid, being acceptors not connected with the controllers of IRL. In paragraph 104 of the Further Amended Statement of Claim it was pleaded that from 12 May 1989 ATRK acted for Beach and Spargos in effecting what became known as the "Currency Swap transaction". The particulars alleged that on 12 May 1989 Mr Bateman was instructed by Mr Fuller "on behalf of Spargos and Beach", and that following those instructions ATRK acted for Beach and Spargos in effecting the transfer of the deposit of Beach at ELFIC to Spargos "by preparing the following letters and documents on behalf of Beach and Spargos".

The particulars asserted that the first document was "a circular resolution of a meeting of directors of Spargos held on 10 May 1989, which resolved to assign to Beach the US Dollar equivalent of A$5m "at to-day's rate", standing to the credit of Spargos at Rahn & Bodmer:- "In consideration of the contemporaneous assignment by Beach Petroleum for the sum of A$5m standing to the credt (sic) of Beach Petroleum NL with ELFIC"; to give notice to ELFIC accordingly; and to authorise and instruct it to apply such moneys in reduction of outstanding facilities granted to Petrogulf in consideration of ELFIC's extending the term of the balance of the facility for a further period to be agreed between ELFIC, Petrogulf and Spargos.

The second document particularised was a resolution of a meeting of directors of Beach held on 10 May 1989 in which it was resolved to assign to Spargos
A$5m standing to the credit of Beach with ELFIC in consideration of the contemporaneous assignment to Beach by Spargos of the equivalent in US Dollars "at to-day's rate" at the bankers of Spargos, Zurich Switzerland, and to give written notice to ELFIC accordingly.

The third document particularised was a letter dated 11 May 1989 on Beach letterhead to ELFIC, for the attention of Ms Ritchie, signed by Mr Fuller and advising that Beach's ELFIC deposit had been assigned to Spargos as at 10 May .

The fourth document was a letter of the same date on Spargos letterhead to
ELFIC, for the attention of Ms Ritchie and signed by Mr Fuller, advising that
A$5m had been assigned by Beach to Spargos as of 10 May 1989, and that A$3m could be and should be used to reduce Petrogulf's facilities.

The fifth document was a letter dated 15 May 1989 on Beach letterhead to
ELFIC, for the attention of Ms Scholes and signed by Mr Fuller, authorising the payment of Beach's ELFIC deposit as directed by Spargos.

The sixth document was a letter of the same date on Spargos letterhead to
ELFIC, for the attention of Ms Scholes and signed by Mr Fuller, directing the payment of Beach's ELFIC deposit as to A$3m to partially repay Petrogulf's
A$3,078,000 deposit advanced on 4 January 1989, and as to A$2m to pay Inspar.

The particulars alleged that on behalf of Beach and Spargos, ATRK caused the letters dated 11 May 1989 and 15 May 1989 to be sent to ELFIC on 15 May 1989, and that on 16 May 1989, ATRK, by letter dated that day, reported to Beach's directors, for the attention of its chief executive officer, Mr Worthington, that its ELFIC deposit had been withdrawn, and enclosed the original directors' resolution purporting to authorise the transaction.

In paragraph 105 it was asserted that the letters on Beach and Spargos letterhead were typed at Mr Thomas' direction onto blank signed letterhead, which Mr Fuller had given to Mr Thomas at a time unknown to the plaintiff and that, in the case of the letters dated 11 May 1989, they were typed and dated after that date.

In paragraph 106 it was pleaded that when ATRK prepared "the so-called"
Spargos circular resolution, Mr Bateman knew, or ought to have known, that
Spargos did not have a US$ deposit at Rahn & Bodmer, and knew, or ought to have known, that Spargos did not have an assignable deposit of any denomination at Rahn & Bodmer on and after 12 May 1989, as alleged in paragraph 81 of the Further Amended Statement of Claim. This raised again the issue of ATRK's knowledge of the fraudulent nature of the transaction.

ATRK denied they prepared the resolutions referred to in paragraphs 104.2.1 and, .2 and the letter dated 11 May 1998 referred to in paragraph 104.2.3. Mr
Kelly acknowledged that the allegation that ATRK prepared the resolutions could not be maintained, which concession took much of the force out of the thrust of the allegation.

The evidence in relation to the other documents depends upon my acceptance of the evidence of Mr Thomas as to what he did and what he was instructed to do.
I had the opportunity of observing Mr Thomas give his evidence. He satisfied me as being a witness of truth, upon whom I could place reliance, and whose evidence was inherently probable. He gave, to my impression, a particularly powerful answer, Tp.927, when it was put to him that he was being untruthful.
He said:- "I am not going to risk my professional reputation for anyone, particularly when I'm not a party to the proceedings. I find it offensive that this is being put to me." 
That was a piece of evidence I accept entirely. It will be necessary to consider the consequences of what was done in the light of my general acceptance of his evidence.

In paragraph 124 of the Further Amended Statement of Claim it was alleged that between 13 September 1988 and 19 April 1989 Claremont paid to Firstway or
Mazeley or BPC or companies associated with them, or either of them,
US$8,197,494, which included amounts referred to in paragraphs 117, 121 and of that document. Those three paragraphs were admitted by the defendants and, as to paragraph 124, they pleaded that they did not know and could not admit those allegations.

Under the heading:- "The Second Acquisition of the Burbank Oil Field Interests (from Firstway by Beach of legal ownership of the interests in the Burbank oil field under a Charge and Option Agreement dated 30 June 1989)" it was pleaded, in paragraph 127, that the decision that Beach would become the purchaser of the Burbank oil interests, rather than Claremont, coincided with the Currency Swap, and, in paragraph 128, that Messrs Joelson, Wilson produced successive drafts of loan agreements and the Charge and Option
Agreement from the period beginning 12 October 1988 until at least 29 June , the final document "apparently" being a Charge and Option Agreement dated 29 June 1989. In paragraph 129 it was pleaded that the exercise price of
US$28m was determined by Messrs Fuller, Cummings, Main and Johnson for the purposes of accounting for the Garaweh transaction and the purported transfer of the purported Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic deposits at Rahn &
Bodmer, and to effect further payments of Beach funds to Firstway and other entities controlled by Mr Johnson. The excessive price had nothing to do with the value of what was being acquired, but was equated to the amount sought to be taken from Beach.

In paragraph 130 it was pleaded that during at least June and July 1989 Mr
Bateman advised Mr Cummings, in his capacity as a director of Beach, on the structuring of the Burbank transaction, including how the Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic deposits could be used by those companies and Beach in ways that did not appear to breach the Companies Code and ASX Listing Rules, and on the terms of the Charge and Option Agreement. The particulars of that paragraph asserted a facsimile transmission dated 9 June 1989 from Mr Cummings to Mr
Bateman, which detailed that on 8 June 1989 Mr Bateman discussed with Mr
Fuller and Mr Cummings potential s.129 problems with the proposed Jingellic and Enterprise loans to Spargos, and Mr Cummings sought further advice as to a proposal which could involve Jingellic, Enterprise, Spargos and Beach jointly purchasing the Burbank oil field interests. The particulars referred to a file note of Mr Bateman dated 12 July 1989 in which he recorded a conference with
Mr Cummings where he was instructed that Beach had acquired the Burbank oil field interests, and where he advised Mr Cummings on the questions "of why"
Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic were lending to Beach to purchase them; and a facsimile from Mr Cummings to Mr Cordell dated 24 July 1989 in which Mr
Cummings advised Mr Cordell of his discussions with Mr Bateman concerning the
Charge and Option Agreement and accompanying documents and of matters that should be reflected in the final documents.

In paragraph 131 it was pleaded that ATRK, despite being advised that Beach had acquired the Burbank oil field interests, failed to advise it that the
Charge and Option Agreement was required by the ASX Listing Rules in force at the time to be notified to the ASX and, in paragraph 132, that ATRK, despite being advised that Beach had acquired the Burbank oil field interests, failed to advise it that the acquisition of them was required by the ASX Listing
Rules in force at the time to be notified to the ASX.

By their Defence ATRK stated that they did not know and could not admit the allegations made in paragraphs 127 to 129 and, in answer to paragraph 130, they denied that Mr Bateman received the facsimile transmission of 9 June 1989 from Mr Cummings; that Mr Bateman gave advice to Mr Cummings in respect of the matters referred to in it; that in June and July 1989 Mr Bateman gave advice to Mr Cummings, in his capacity as a director of Beach, concerning the restructuring of the Burbank transaction; and asserted that on 12 July 1989 Mr
Cummings, in his capacity as director of Spargos, conferred with Mr Bateman and informed him that Beach had acquired the total issued capital of Mazeley and provided Mr Bateman with information concerning that transaction. ATRK referred to the terms of Mr Bateman's file note of 12 July 1989.

The response to paragraphs 131 and 132 of the Further Amended Statement of
Claim ATRK, in paragraph 70 of the Defence, denied that ATRK acted for Beach in relation to the Burbank oil field interests and the Charge and Option
Agreement; said that they did not advise Beach that those matters were required by the ASX Listing Rules in force at the time to be notified to it; denied that ATRK were under any obligation to do so; and otherwise denied the allegations made.

In paragraph 150 of the Further Amended Statement of Claim it was pleaded, and admitted by ATRK, that on 5 December 1989 Messrs Fuller, Cummings and Main, as directors of Beach, and Mr Johnson, as a deemed director of it, caused Beach,
Mazeley, BPC and BOG to enter into various securities in favour of Spargos as agent for the lenders under the SCAFA.

In paragraph 151 it was pleaded that pursuant to the security documents the
Mazeley bearer share and the share certificates in respect of the issued capital of BPC were lodged and held by ATRK, solicitors of Canberra in the
Australian Capital Territory, for and on behalf of Spargos, as agent for itself, Jingellic and Enterprise. In paragraph 152 it was pleaded that the
SCAFA and all of the security documents were each executed on behalf of Beach,
Spargos, Jingellic and Enterprise by their attorney, Mr John Astley Buxton, "a partner of ATRK practising in their Canberra office"; and, in paragraph 153, that ATRK received instructions with regard to the preparation of the SCAFA as early as 12 July 1989, although the documentation was not finalised and executed until after the arrangements at Rahn & Bodmer had been settled as described in paragraph 146.

Paragraph 146 pleaded a meeting attended by Messrs Fuller, Johnson and Main at
Rahn & Bodmer on 13 and 14 September 1989 "where plans were effected to put in place arrangements disguising the illegal scheme". It was pleaded that following that meeting documents were prepared, which purported to effect the currency swap as at 10 May 1989; to calculate credit balances for Spargos,
Enterprise and Jingellic as at that date; to provide credit balances as at 30
June 1989; and to effect a transfer to Firstway of those deposits as at 1 July
The effect was pleaded as being that A$18,847,759.44 was then held by
Firstway in two tranches of A$9,822,690.32, although twice this amount is more than the first mentioned figure, in fiduciary accounts 106 and 107 as against
IRL's fiduciary loans in loan account numbers 106 and 107 so that Spargos,
Enterprise and Jingellic purported to lend to Beach their deposits at Rahn & Bodmer "thus fully disguising the illegal scheme entered into at" Rahn & Bodmer "in October 1988 and allowing them to receive from Beach repayments of those purported loans and in the case of Spargos, disguise its misappropriation of Beach's ELFIC deposit". Thus the currency swap transaction was "concluded" by the disguising of the misappropriation.

In paragraph 147 of the Further Amended Statement of Claim it was pleaded that between July 1989 and 19 January 1990, "as a further part of the consideration to the exercise of the option Fuller, Cummings and Main as directors of Beach and Claremont and Johnson as a deemed director of Beach caused Beach" to pay
Firstway US$4,743,800.

In paragraph 154 it was pleaded that in taking instructions from Mr Cummings with regard to the SCAFA, ATRK were aware that he was a director of Beach,
Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic and owed fiduciary duties to each, but they did not differentiate between his positions as a director of those companies in taking instructions with regard to the SCAFA, nor did they advise any of those companies that the SCAFA should be notified to the ASX in accordance with its Listing Rules operative at the time: paragraph 155.

In paragraph 156 of the Further Amended Statement of Claim it was pleaded that
ATRK were aware that no solicitors were instructed by Mr Cummings to protect the interests of Beach "other than Joelson Wilson to provide a certificate as to the corporate records of Mazeley and its shareholdings in BPC and BOG and
Herrick Lidstone of BRFT to provide advice with regard to the title to the
Burbank Oilfields, details of loans made by Beach to BPC and BOG and the registration of charges in Okalahoma". In paragraph 157 it was pleaded that when ATRK drafted the SCAFA and security documents they were aware that
Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic were unable to lend any funds or, in the alternative, any unsecured funds to Beach. It was further pleaded that, by virtue of the retainer to advise Beach on the purchase of the Burbank oil field interests, the proposed reconstruction and refinancing of the IRL Group and the currency swap, ATRK owed duties to Beach, which were in conflict with duties owed to Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic, and that they should have, but did not, reconcile their conflicts of duty in respect to the SCAFA.

As to paragraphs 146 and 147 ATRK pleaded that they did not know and could not admit the allegations and, in response to paragraph 151, they pleaded, in paragraph 81 of the Defence, that the Mazeley bearer share and the share certificates in respect of the issued capital of BPC and BOG "were held by the firm then known as Abbott Tout Russell Kennedy, solicitors of Canberra in the
Australian Capital Territory" and that none of the defendants were members of that partnership. As to paragraph 152 ATRK admitted that the SCAFA and the security documents were executed under power of attorney by Mr Buxton, and asserted that he was a partner of Abbott Tout Russell Kennedy, Canberra, and not a member of the partnership ATRK of which the defendants were members.
These assertions as to the partnership position are not in issue.

As to paragraph 153 ATRK stated that they received instructions to prepare the
SCAFA in or about July 1989, and that it was executed and dated 19 October
The evidence established that it was executed in Canberra for the purpose of saving stamp duty by Mr Buxton on 25 October 1989, pursuant to a power of attorney, but was not dated. It was returned to Sydney and Mr Thomas, who also held a power of attorney but asserted that he was acting pursuant to instructions received from the directors of Beach and Spargos in dating it, dated it 19 October 1989.

In response to paragraphs 154 and 155 of the Further Amended Statement of
Claim, ATRK admitted that when they took instructions in regards to the SCAFA from Mr Cummings they were aware that he was a director of Beach, Spargos,
Enterprise and Jingellic and owed fiduciary duties to each. They asserted that
ATRK did not act on behalf of Beach in relation to the SCAFA and they denied the allegations in paragraphs 156 and 157.

Knowing Assistance 
At paragraph 167 the Further Amended Statement of Claim commenced to deal with claims against ATRK for knowing assistance and, in paragraph 167, it was asserted that ATRK knowingly assisted Messrs Fuller, Cummings, Main and
Johnson in their breaches of trust and fiduciary duty with regard to the currency swap, the SCAFA and the second acquisition of the Burbank oilfield interests. These allegations were denied.

In paragraph 168 it was pleaded that ATRK knew, or ought to have known, that
Messrs Fuller, Cummings, Main and Johnson were only entitled to deal with
Beach's assets for the benefit of Beach, which was admitted.

In paragraph 169 it was pleaded that ATRK knew, or ought to have known, that
Spargos did not have a US$ deposit at Rahn & Bodmer, and that it was unable to assign to Beach any deposit, or alternatively any unencumbered deposit, at Rahn & Bodmer and, in paragraph 170, that ATRK knew or ought to have known that Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic did not have deposits or, alternatively, unencumbered deposits at Rahn & Bodmer, which they were able to assign to Beach. Once again it will be seen that the pleading was different from the way in which, save perhaps as to objective dishonesty, the case was ultimately put.

In paragraph 171 it was pleaded that ATRK knew, or ought to have known, that part of the proposal for the purchase of the Burbank oil field interests involved the utilisation "in some way" of the Spargos, Enterprise and
Jingellic purported deposits at Rahn & Bodmer; that Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic were unable to assign to Beach any deposit, or alternatively any unencumbered deposit at Rahn & Bodmer; and that the Second Acquisition of the Burbank Oilfield Interests "could not be a legitimate transaction".

In paragraph 172 it was pleaded that in the knowledge that the directors of
Beach were breaching their fiduciary duties to it, ATRK participated in that breach by advising Beach with regard to the Charge and Option Agreement and the way in which the Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic purported deposits should be used in the purchase of the Burbank oil field interests and "enabled the breach of trust to happen". ATRK denied the allegations in paragraphs 169 to 172.

The Evidence Of Mr Christopher Paul McDonald Main 
Mr Main swore an affidavit on 30 July 1997. He was born on 16 July 1961 and commenced working for a business acquaintance in 1982, after obtaining a
Bachelor of Commerce Degree. In about October 1986 Mr Johnson asked Mr Main to become involved in business with him and, in late 1986, he became a non- executive director of Claremont (UK) plc and Pennant Pacific Resources.

In February 1988 Mr Max Greenham offered Mr Main a position as a consultant to the IRL Group to assist Mr Johnson in restructuring and refinancing it. Mr
Main appeared to have a reasonable knowledge of the Group and of the commercial activities in which it engaged.

He did not remember whether he first met Mr Bateman on a visit to Australia in late 1988, although he said it was "certainly possible". He met Mr Bateman a number of times from February 1989 onwards, and he also met Mr David Ferguson.
These meetings were in their professional capacities and "on business related to the IRL Group".

Mr Main was aware that Mr Brooke performed legal work for Mr Johnson and, on the instructions of Mr Greenham, for the IRL Group. He said another solicitor who did work for companies associated with Mr Johnson was Mr Raskin of Brenman
Raskin Friedlob & Tennenbaum. Mr Herrick Lidstone was an assistant of Mr
Raskin and Mr Main first met him when he was acting for Mr Johnson in relation to some West Virginia oil properties in the mid 1980's.

Mr Main was an alternate director of Beach for Sir Cecil Burney from 2 May to 6 June 1989, and a director of Beach from 6 June 1989 to 23 March
During the same period he was a director of Claremont, and he was a director of Enterprise and Spargos from 29 May 1989 to 23 March 1990. I believe there is an uncorrected error in paragraph 9 of his affidavit in relation to his directorship of Spargos in that the date "23/3/89" should read "23/3/90". This is consistent with the penultimate sentence of that paragraph.

Between July 1988 and October 1989 Mr Main acted as Mr Johnson's assistant and as a director of Beach and other IRL Group companies in the acquisition of an interest in the Burbank Oil Field for Mazeley and the on-sale of that interest to Beach. While this was being arranged there were attempts to restructure the
IRL Group, which, during most of 1988 and 1989, was under investigation by the
NCSC. Mr Main was also aware that the IRL Group was subject to considerable shareholder criticism, adverse media comment and extreme financial pressure.
He was present, during 1988, at many discussions between Sir Cecil and Mr
Johnson concerning the repayment of loans made by AAC to IRL and other companies associated with Mr Johnson, and he was made aware that AAC was not prepared to refinance the debt and required its repayment.

On 26 October 1988 Mr Main sent a facsimile transmission to Mr Cordell from the premises of Rahn & Bodmer, which is Exhibit "CPM2" to his affidavit and part of Exhibit D. This made it clear that the deposits by the IRL Group of A$17.7m were "blocked", in the sense that they were not available to be used by Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic. Mr Main attended Rahn &
Bodmer's offices on 28 October 1988 and observed that certain transactions were documented by Mr Brooke and Mr Cordell. I have set out the effect of these transactions.

Mr Main thought the refinancing arrangement effected in October 1988 at Rahn & Bodmer was only ever intended as a temporary one. Late in 1988, in an attempt to advance the restructuring proposals, he, Mr Johnson and another person visited the Far East and Australia and, after visiting Singapore, he and Mr Johnson travelled to Perth on 2 December 1988. There were discussions with Mr Greenham, and then they travelled to Melbourne to meet Mr Peter
Hawkins, the managing director of Roach Tilley Grice, a stockbroking firm in which the Elders IXL Group was said to have an interest. Discussions related to the IRL Group restructuring. Mr Main remembered meeting Ms Ritchie from
ELFIC. He recalled general discussions and that ELFIC was to consider lending money secured upon the IRL Group's oil and gold productions. He also remembered discussion concerning the loan ELFIC had made to the IRL Group for the purchase by Petrogulf of the Claremont shares from FAI.

Mr Johnson and Mr Main travelled to Sydney, and Mr Johnson requested Mr Trevor
Bailey to travel to Australia to give a presentation of the Burbank Oil Field to Claremont personnel. Mr Bailey did so, and at that meeting Mr Johnson and
Mr Fuller arranged for Mr Dene Rogers to be sent to Okalahoma to look at the
Burbank Oil Field.

Mr Johnson, Mr Cordell and Mr Main again travelled to Australia in early 1989, arriving in Sydney in the early morning of 22 February 1989. They remained in
Australia until 17 March 1989. There were a number of meetings with Mr Bateman in the Boardroom of ATRK and also in another room in the MLC Building, the first of which was on 22 February 1989. Mr Bateman appeared to Mr Main to be a highly competent solicitor, and to have a great familiarity with Mr Fuller and
Mr Cummings as well as with the affairs of the IRL Group. At all times during meetings he was present with Mr Johnson, Mr Cummings, Mr Fuller and Mr
Cordell, and Mr Bateman was also present for most of the time. At other times
Mr Ferguson, Mr Glossop and Mr Winby were present.

In paragraph 25 Mr Main stated there was a meeting, which lasted all day, in the Boardroom of ATRK on 22 February 1989. After Mr Johnson, Mr Cordell and he arrived in Sydney and visited their hotel briefly, they went to the offices of
ATRK. Mr Cummings arrived at some time and, apparently, independently. Mr
Glossop and Mr Winby were also present at various times. Mr Main said, in paragraph 25, that Mr Fuller said words to the effect:- "We should be careful as to what we say in the presence of Winby and Glossop. I am particularly concerned that Glossop and Winby be encouraged to continue to sort out the financial crisis at the Perth office and they must not be told of the arrangements at R & B by which the deposits are `blocked'. I do not want us to reveal too much of the IRL Group's problems to them. If they knew all of the problems then Winby and Glossop might leave, putting me in the invidious position of having no one to sort out the day to day administrative and cash flow problems. There is also a risk that they would, if questioned, give details of the arrangements to the NCSC." 
He said the response from all present was to the effect:- "OK." 
He asserted that Mr Bateman was present during this conversation. The conversation is of particular importance because if it be accepted that it took place in those terms Mr Bateman was, or should have been, aware that there was a financial crisis at the Perth office and that the deposits at Rahn & Bodmer were "blocked", which would lead to the inference that they could not be used in overcoming the financial difficulties in which the IRL Group was. In these circumstances they could not be used as a loan to Beach to enable it to obtain an interest in the Burbank oilfield interests and, obviously enough, Beach would not come under the obligations to make repayments under the SCAFA. Further, the conversation referred to the possibility of two senior executives of the Group giving details of arrangements to the NCSC, which would indicate that all was not well with the companies or the arrangements.

In paragraph 110 of his witness statement of 9 September 1997, Mr Bateman said:- "At no time during the meeting on 22 February 1989, or at any other time, did I hear any person say that any deposits with Rahn & Bodmer were `blocked', mortgaged in favour of some other entity, or not beneficially owned by the relevant depositor company. Nor did I read any document which told me such a thing. Nor did I write on the white board the word `blocked' or see any other person write such a thing." 
Issue on a crucial factual matter was thereby joined.

In paragraph 111 he said he was not present during the meeting "all the time".

In paragraph 13 of his supplementary statement, dated 3 October 1997, Mr
Bateman responded to paragraph 25 of Mr Main's affidavit in the following terms:- "I deny participating in a conversation to the effect set forth in that paragraph. At no time did I hear Fuller, or anyone else, say anything to the effect to the words attributed to Fuller in that paragraph." 
Mr Main produced the various white board print outs, which came into existence on that day. He said, in paragraph 27, that Mr Bateman directed the meeting on February 1989 and that early in the meeting he said words to the effect of:- "ELFIC has agreed that it will fund a joint bid for Claremont by Moage, IRL and Inspar acting as a consortium and we need to consider: 
Funding requirements for the bids and other needs.

The proposed settlement of the NCSC inquiry as to whether the law had been broken by Petrogulf's acquisition in Claremont.

What is required for Newco (a company to be controlled by MKJ and Fuller) to bid for Moage and IRL to enable Newco to have control of the whole Group." 
In paragraphs 16, 17 and 18 of his statement of 3 October 1997 Mr Bateman denied that he "directed the meeting". He said that after Mr Ferguson and he had led the meeting through the material, which he had recorded on the white board before the meeting started, the meeting was not in the hands of either
Mr Ferguson or him. He said he did not believe that he made any reference to "the proposed settlement of the NCSC inquiry", and he denied saying anything to the effect that "Newco" was to be a company controlled by Messrs Johnson and Fuller. He said that was never suggested to him and he did not believe that "Newco" would be "controlled" by Mr Johnson, or that he would be either a shareholder in or a director of it.

In paragraph 30 of his affidavit, Mr Main said that Mr Johnson put numbers on the white board showing that the then debt of the Group was $135.5m, which appears on the fourth page of the white board print outs, and that in the discussion that followed he went to the white board and pointed to the
Petrogulf $17m, the Moage $8.5m and the deposits of $17.7m. He continued:- "I explained to the meeting that these items affected the debt position in words to the following effect: `The 17.7 deposits cannot be accessed and are linked to the loan to IRL. They should not be included in available cash for cash flow projections and therefore should be deducted'.
 `The debts outlined by MKJ were in addition to the monies to be borrowed for the first three bids (i.e. $101 million) and thus to count the Moage and Petrogulf debts that would be repaid out of the $101 million was to double count and these should be deducted from the total debt'." 
He said Mr Johnson said words to the effect:- "They should be deducted" and that he, Mr Main, then wrote:- "Less 17; 8.5 & 17.7 equals A$92.3." 
He said Mr Bateman was present when this occurred and he was careful not to use the words "back to back" or "blocked" in the presence of Mr Glossop and Mr
Winby.

In response to paragraph 30, Mr Bateman said in paragraphs 20 and 21 of his statement of 3 October 1997 that he denied outlining "the value of the assets owned in the after-bid structure". He asserted that he wrote down figures as participants at the meeting discussed them and conveyed to him an agreed figure, and that he had no personal knowledge of the basis of the calculation of the figures. He denied hearing Mr Main say anything to the effect that the deposits "cannot be accessed", or that they were "linked to the loan to IRL", or otherwise to the effect of the words set forth in paragraph 30(a) of Mr
Main's affidavit.

Mr Ferguson, in paragraph 36 of his witness statement of 8 September 1997, said he read a copy of Mr Main's affidavit dated 30 July 1997, that he was present for part of the meeting on 22 February 1989, and:- "Neither whilst I was at the meeting nor on any other occasion did I hear anyone say anything to the effect that any `deposits' at Rahn & Bodmer were `blocked' nor did I see Bateman or anyone else write anything to the effect `R & B deposits - blocked' on a white board or anywhere else. I had heard that Spargos Mining NL, Enterprise Gold Mines NL, Jingellic Minerals NL had moneys on deposit with a Swiss bank called Rahn & Bodmer. I was not aware of any encumbrance or restriction in respect of those deposits." 
In paragraph 34 Mr Main said that during the February and March meetings with
Mr Bateman he observed and heard him speaking with Mr Johnson, Mr Cummings and
Mr Cordell on a number of occasions. He said discussions were about the continued attempts to settle matters with the NCSC with regard to the IRL
Group acquisition of control of Claremont and, on a number of occasions, he observed Mr Bateman write on a white board lists of problems and proposed solutions. He continued:- "Included in these lists were words written by him to the effect of: `R & B deposits - blocked'." 
He said the contents of the white board could be printed off and that on some, but not all, occasions this was done and each person present received a copy of the print out.

In paragraph 22 of his witness statement of 3 October 1997, Mr Bateman said there was only one occasion on which he met Messrs Johnson, Fuller, Cummings and Cordell together, which was on 22 February 1989; and in paragraph 23 he denied that he wrote on a white board, or anywhere else, any words to the effect: "R & B deposits - blocked". He said that at no time did he say or write anything to that effect, or to the effect that the deposits were mortgaged in favour of some other entity or not beneficially owned by the relevant depositor company. He continued that at no time prior to the start of the Federal Court proceedings G53 did he hear, read or have any belief or knowledge to that effect.

In paragraph 35 of his affidavit Mr Main said that Mr Cordell attended the meetings at ATRK in February 1989 and took part in discussions "about the blocked accounts at R & B". He said he recalled Mr Cordell saying, when the pressing need to find cash was being discussed:- "I established the Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic deposits and the IRL and IRAG loans" and also "the Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic deposits cannot be released without repayment of the IRL and IRAG loans." 
Mr Main continued:- "This was said by him on a number of occasions during the February meeting in the presence of Bateman." 
In paragraph 24 of his witness statement of 3 October 1997 Mr Bateman said he attended only three meetings at which both Mr Cordell and Mr Main were present and he never heard Mr Cordell say words to the effect attributed to him in paragraph 35.

In paragraph 37 of his affidavit Mr Main deposed to a meeting on 23 February where Mr Johnson, Mr Fuller, Mr Cummings, Mr Cordell and he "continued to work in the ATRK Boardroom and Bateman spent some time but not the whole day in the discussions". During the day they moved to the Claremont office suite in the MLC Building, which was on a different floor from, but in the same building as, the ATRK Boardroom. In response to this Mr Bateman said, in paragraph 25, that his time sheet for 23 February 1989 recorded conferences for thirty minutes and forty five minutes on a file relating to the IRL Group; that he had no file notes of those conferences; that the rest of the day was devoted to work for other clients; and that he had no recollection of the others working in the ATRK Board room. He denied visiting any Claremont office on that day.

In paragraph 38 of his affidavit Mr Main referred to the ELFIC draft Deed, which Mr Bateman said was negotiated between 8 December 1988 and 31 January , on which date the NCSC confirmed that its terms were agreed and that it would be signed subject to finance. On 2 February 1989 Mr Ferguson sent to the
NCSC execution copies of the Deed and it was executed by Mr Fuller, IRL and
Petrogulf. On 9 and 23 February 1989 amendments to the Media Release were negotiated with the NCSC and, on 1 March 1989, the executed Deed was sent to it under cover of a letter from Mr Ferguson.

In paragraph 41 Mr Main said that as a result of discussions with Mr Fuller and Sir Cecil Burney he sent a facsimile to the latter dated 27 February 1989 requesting that 110,000 Sterling be advanced to Claremont as an unsecured ninety day facility. He said Mr Fuller instructed him to do this and told him the loan "would be booked by Claremont as a further advance as part of the refundable deposit paid on the option to purchase interest in the Burbank Oil
Field".

In paragraph 42 Mr Main said that at 3 pm on 2 March 1989 Messrs Johnson,
Cordell and Fuller and he paid a short visit to Mr Bateman, at which meeting
Mr Johnson said to Mr Bateman words to the effect:- "ELFIC will go ahead on the basis that ELFIC will have a put option by which the shares of the IRL Group in Claremont can be put to Elders Resources." 
In paragraph 31 of his witness statement of 3 October 1997 Mr Bateman said that neither Mr Johnson nor Mr Fuller was present at that meeting, those present being Messrs Main, Cordell and Fleming. He denied a conversation in the terms deposed to by Mr Main and any discussion about ELFIC or shares in
Claremont.

In paragraph 44 Mr Main said that his diary disclosed that on 13 March 1989 he returned to Sydney with Messrs Johnson, Fuller and Cummings, and, on 14 March , they met in the ATRK Boardroom. In paragraph 32 of his witness statement of 3 October 1997 Mr Bateman said he had no recollection of Mr Johnson's being present at that meeting and that his memorandum of fees of 5 April 1989 identified those present as being Messrs Fuller, Cummings and Main. He said that on that morning he had a lengthy conference with Mr Cummings, at the end of which he and Mr Cummings were joined by Mr Fuller and Mr Main.

In paragraph 45 Mr Main said that when Mr Johnson, Mr Fuller, Mr Cummings and he arrived at the Boardroom, Mr Bateman had already put material on the white board, which showed that Cambridge Resources "should become the controlling company". Paragraph 45 continued:- "In the discussion that followed, Fuller said words to the effect: `ELFIC is pressing for the reduction of the Petrogulf facility by $5 million'. MKJ said `I will call Hawkins and `I will call off the dogs' on the basis that a restructure is being prepared by which the facility would be repaid'." 
Mr Main continued, in paragraph 46:- "At this meeting Bateman summarised the critical problems of the IRL Group in words to this effect: `(1) The need for a takeover bid for all the shares in Claremont; 
The need to refinance the ELFIC loan to Petrogulf which is insufficiently secured by Petrogulf although guaranteed by Enterprise; 
The need to resolve the IRL preference share issue which the NCSC is focussing on and criticising; 
The need to resolve the situation of R & B where Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic "deposits" are "back to back" with IRL and IRAG loans from R & B; and 
The need to obtain a further loan to refinance the IRL Group's borrowings and to solve the Group's cash crisis'." 
In paragraph 36 of his witness statement of 3 October 1997 Mr Bateman responded thus:- "Neither at the meeting on the afternoon of 14 March 1989 nor on any other occasion did I say anything to the effect set forth in that paragraph. At no time was I aware either of `the need to resolve the situation at R & B' or that the Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic deposits at Rahn & Bodmer were `back to back' with any IRL or IRAG loans from Rahn & Bodmer." 
In paragraph 47 Mr Main asserted that Mr Bateman drew attention to the problem arising from the IRL preference shares and:- "Bateman's scheme that had been placed on the white board over a number of pages was designed, he said, `To wash away the principal problems highlighted by the NCSC'. It was remarked during the meeting by Bateman (and also others) words to the effect: `That the preference shares had been issued to avoid the effects of s.230 of the Companies Code'. 
Bateman said `The NCSC is focussing on this question in their inquiries into the Group as well as the issue of taking control of Claremont without a takeover bid'." 
In paragraph 37 Mr Bateman denied saying these words. He said the redemption shares issued by IRL were covered by the NCSC Settlement Deed. He referred to paragraphs 26 to 30, which made reference to that, and, in paragraph 38, he said that he had said:- "I have examined the question of how Spargos might become the head listed company of both the gold arm and the oil arm. It involves buying and converting the IRL preference shares, rather than redeeming them. Cambridge Resources would take the key position in Spargos in this alternative form of restructuring." 
Mr Main referred to certain white board print outs and, in paragraph 49, he set out a conversation by Mr Bateman in which Mr Bateman said:- "Cambridge would acquire convertible preference shares in IRL from Jingellic and Enterprise, Cambridge would then sell those preference shares to Spargos in exchange for the issue of shares in Spargos to Cambridge and thereby Cambridge would take control of Spargos. Spargos in turn would exercise the conversion rights on the preference shares to convert them into ordinary shares and take control of IRL. The next step would be that Spargos would make a takeover bid for Enterprise resulting in a structure by which Cambridge would control Spargos and Spargos would control Enterprise. All these steps are a second stage in the rationalisation of the IRL Group after the first stage which is the takeover bid for Claremont by the consortium of Moage, Inspar and IRAG. If Enterprise becomes a subsidiary of Spargos it becomes more justifiable for Enterprise to provide a guarantee of the debt of Petrogulf, another subsidiary of Spargos." 
Mr Bateman said the white board print outs dated 13 March 1989 were as a consequence of an eight hour file review he carried out on that day and he gave copies of them to Mr Cummings on the morning of 14 March 1989. In paragraph 40 he said he did not say "anything to the effect of the last sentence attributed to me" in paragraph 49.

In paragraph 51 Mr Main said discussions continued on 14 March 1989 and he produced some white board print outs. He said one of the topics discussed on that day was the implication of the CGMA debt to Enterprise, that attention was drawn to this debt in Mr Bateman's diagram and that Mr Bateman said words to the effect:- "The objective is to put both the debtor and the creditor side of the debt into the 100% ownership of Spargos." 
Mr Bateman denied, in paragraph 41 of his witness statement of 3 October 1997, that there was a continuation of discussions on "the next day". He said the meeting that Mr Main attended was on the afternoon of 14 March 1989. He agreed that the fact of a debt owed by CGMA to Enterprise was mentioned "as were the other debts", but he denied there was any discussion about these debts and that he was asked to give any advice about them. He said he did not say the words attributed to him. He continued that the arrow pointing to "CGMA" on page 3 "was not placed on the document by me and was not on the document discovered by the plaintiff".

In paragraph 63 Mr Main referred to four white board print out sheets dated 2
May 1989, and identified the handwriting on the first three as that of Mr
Bateman, and that on the fourth undated sheet as his, save for some writing of
Mr Johnson. He said the sheets were produced at the offices of ATRK and were the subject of discussion during which Mr Johnson, Mr Bateman and he "together possibly with Fuller and/or Cummings" were present. He said one of the topics discussed was the Burbank transaction which by then "was to go ahead in any event". "It had to be done to solve the problems earlier referred to".

In paragraph 44 of his witness statement of 3 October 1997, Mr Bateman said that a reference on the notes to "real Swiss accs" was not "a reference to real Swiss bank accounts as distinct from blocked accounts". He denied there was a discussion about "blocked accounts" or that he had any knowledge of any.
He said that prior to writing the words "real Swiss accs. For Ent, Spargos,
Claremont, Beach vendor" on the white board, he had said words to the effect set out in paragraph 117 of his statement of 9 September 1997 namely:- "Enterprise, Spargos, Claremont, Beach and the vendor will need to have a bank account in Switzerland, whether at Rahn & Bodmer or another bank, so that the flow of the funds from one bank account into another can be clearly recorded. This is in contrast to the notion of book entries arising from an assignment of a debt or chose in action such as can occur under s.12 of the Conveyancing Act." 
In the next paragraph he said he recorded that comment and other matters on page 3 of the white board sheet dated 2 May 1989 and, in paragraph 119, he stated that on a copy of page 3 Mr Ferguson had recorded at the foot:- "$5 million on dep by Beach with ELFIC." 
Mr Bateman said that after making the statement in paragraph 117, to which I have referred, he continued with words to the following effect:- "It would be unsatisfactory in my view to have a position where, for example, the money that Spargos holds is declared, by the operation of assignments equivalent to s.12 of the Conveyancing Act, to be held for the benefit of Claremont and then in turn for Beach, and so on. Instead, it is preferable that you be able to clearly see, with each company in the chain having its own bank account, the loan from Jingellic to Enterprise and then, separately, the loan from Enterprise to Spargos and then, separately again, the loan from Spargos to Claremont, separately again the loan from Claremont to Beach and lastly the payment by Beach to the vendor." 
He continued, in paragraph 45, that to summarise those matters he wrote on the white board:- "Real Swiss accs for Ent, Spargos, Claremont, Beach + vendor." 
He said:- "Those accounts need not be at Rahn & Bodmer but could be at any other bank", whereupon he wrote on the white board `R & B +?'. The sign and punctuation mark "+?" after "R & B" was to signify "that the separate accounts I was recommending could be at Rahn & Bodmer or any other bank".

In paragraph 67 Mr Main said that a major element of the need for funds of the
IRL Group was the requirement that Inspar pay out the acceptors of its takeover offer for Petrogulf. In paragraph 48 of his witness statement of 3
October 1997, Mr Bateman disagreed that this was seen as a major element of the need for funds or that it was recognised in the meeting on 22 February
He observed that the eight pages of white board print outs in respect of that meeting recorded that Inspar would need $2.6m for the Petrogulf bid in
April. He said the amount was listed as item 13 in the priority cash requirements totalling $113.5m, that he had no personal knowledge of the basis of the calculation of those figures, and that he did not recall there being any discussion about the money that Inspar would need to pay acceptors.

In paragraph 69 Mr Main said that on 10 May 1989 Mr Fuller said to Mr Johnson and him words to the effect:- "We are finished unless we pay ELFIC the $5m on deposit".

He continued that Mr Fuller seemed "unusually agitated and depressed about this", and said words to the effect:- "Unless the A$5m Beach has on deposit is paid to ELFIC immediately they will not pay the Petrogulf loan." 
Mr Fuller asked how that could be done and either he or Mr Johnson said:- "We have a blocked deposit at Rahn & Bodmer in the name of Spargos. We are doing the Burbank transaction. We will book it as part of the Burbank purchase price by swapping Beach's A$5m at ELFIC with A$5m of Spargos's blocked account at Rahn & Bodmer." 
Mr Main continued that Mr Fuller said:- "The justification could be that Beach needs US Dollars for its impending purchase in that currency and thus it would be a `currency swap'. However, the blocked accounts at R & B are in Australian Dollars." 
He said that Mr Johnson stated that he could fix that with Mr Kaiser at Rahn & Bodmer.

Mr Main referred to what appeared to be a Beach Board resolution dated 10 May , whereby Beach was to assign to Spargos A$5m standing to its credit with
ELFIC "in consideration of a simultaneous assignment to the company by Spargos of the equivalent sum in US Dollars at that day's exchange rate at the bank" at Rahn & Bodmer. Thus the plan to have the currency swap transaction was devised on 10 May 1989.

In paragraph 73 Mr Main said that on 11 May 1989 Mr Johnson, Mr Fuller and he had a meeting on the topic of setting a price for the Burbank interests. Mr
Johnson said that the price had to include the Spargos, Enterprise and
Jingellic deposits at Rahn & Bodmer and moneys paid by Beach. Mr Johnson and Mr Fuller excused themselves from the meeting and "together worked out the parameters to make up the final price". He continued:- "They had a piece of paper on which they set out all of the amounts needed to finalise `problem transaction' of the IRL Group and it was from that exercise that the purchase price to be paid by Beach was determined." 
He said that elements in the calculation of the "so-called price" were the moneys paid to purchase Burbank; the advances to the "Burbank companies"; the blocked deposits of Spargos, Enterprise, Jingellic and Beach at Rahn &
Bodmer of A$17.7m; and "the Rothwells receivable owned by Claremont worth approximately A$3m". The advances to the Burbank companies were the sum of
A$5m to a company called Garaweh Pty Limited; a fee of A$100,000 for FAI; and the 110,000.

Mr Johnson and Mr Fuller, in Mr Main's presence, telephoned Mr Cordell and Mr
Fuller said:- "The purchase price will be in the order of US$26m and Beach not Claremont will be the purchaser." 
Mr Main continued:- "This price was for the same interests that had been purchased for approximately US$3m. There was no regard to the value of what Beach would get in the calculation of the purchase price but Beach was to pay Firstway." 
At the conclusion of his affidavit Mr Main referred to the fact that in 1993
Beach obtained judgment against him for A$44,450,000 and, in November 1993, he agreed with Beach that he would give it assistance, including giving evidence on its behalf in any civil proceedings commenced by it, in return for which
Beach agreed to release him from any claims it had or may have against him.
The agreement to give evidence included the giving of evidence even though it had a tendency to incriminate him.

The cross-examination of Mr Main by Mr Hughes commenced at Tp.362. He was asked, firstly, about his understanding of the expression "sanitise" if used in relation to business files. He said he understood it to mean that certain information would be removed from them, and agreed it was an expression used by Mr Fuller to him in September or October 1989. Mr Fuller told him he wanted him to sanitise his Burbank files, which he understood to mean that Mr Fuller wanted him to remove from the files and destroy any documents that had a tendency to incriminate either Mr Fuller or Mr Main or anyone else in relation to the Burbank transaction. Mr Main agreed there were incriminating documents in relation to that transaction, which he destroyed by shredding and throwing away the pieces, and he said he spoke to Mr Cordell and told him that Mr
Fuller had told him to sanitise his Burbank files, and that Mr Fuller wanted
Mr Cordell to sanitise his, Mr Cordell's, Burbank files. Mr Main agreed it was an improper and dishonest enterprise in which he willingly participated. He described the incriminating material as "many different variations to the documentation", and he said Mr Fuller "only wanted the files to contain the correspondence that related to the final set of documents that were shown to the auditors as being the completed transaction": Tp.364.

Mr Main agreed the auditors were not shown the full set of file documents. He said Mr Fuller's instruction included a direction that he should destroy as much as possible of the correspondence between the Australian officers and "Scorpio House". He also said he passed the instruction on to Mr Ringrose of
Messrs Gardner Weller, who said he would sanitise his files. He said Mr
Cordell was "similarly willing to do that task".

The carrying out of this instruction by Mr Main, which involved activities he acknowledged to be improper and dishonest, does no credit to him at all. It is clear, not only from the evidence contained in his witness statement, but from his willingness to "sanitise" the files, that he was aware of the improper and, perhaps, unlawful nature of the transaction, and that he was not only prepared to destroy incriminating evidence, but also to pass on instructions or requests to others to do likewise. This shows that he was prepared to participate in and procure the participation in dishonest and discreditable conduct.

He was next asked about a Spaniard, Mr Balmaseda. He said he had dealings with him in connection with the Burbank transaction. These arose because Mr Fuller was concerned that the identity of Firstway needed to be explained to the auditors and others, who would be looking at it. Mr Fuller, therefore, wanted a person to be able to say that Firstway was an off-shore company that was ultimately owned by that person's family interests or off-shore trust interests: Tp.367. Mr Main said Mr Balmaseda is from a wealthy Spanish family, and Mr Fuller asked Mr Main to talk to him and propose:- ".. that he say that Firstway was a company associated with him and his family interests, thereby showing that Firstway had a person behind it who was not close to the management of the IRL Group." 
Mr Main agreed that he procured Mr Balmaseda to tell a lie, and that he acted in this way because he was trying to complete the Burbank transaction as he was directed. He continued:- "No one, including myself, was happy with the position that the companies were in and there wasn't time to feel shame or anything else; it was a question of survival, an attempt to continue to keep the Group alive." 
He said that later he felt ashamed about this.

The concession by Mr Main that he procured Mr Balmaseda to tell a lie, although in the end the matter was not proceeded with, tells heavily against his credit. Once again he was a participant in a totally dishonest act. Mr
Main acknowledged that both Mr Brooke and Mr Cordell were aware of the lying pretence.

At Tp.369 Mr Main identified a discretionary trust, the Morena Trust, as established by a Guernsey trust company for the benefit of his family, and he said it owned two companies, Dunedin Investments Limited and Timaru
Investments Limited.

He agreed that he knew that $5m "left" Claremont in March 1987, but he denied he was a participant in the transfer of that money. He said, however, that he participated in its transfer once it had arrived at Messrs Gardner Weller's account in London, whereupon it was remitted back to a private company in
Australia. He also knew that the activities in which he participated on the instructions of Messrs Fuller and Cummings in relation to that $5m "were thoroughly dishonest". He described the transaction, which involved money going overseas from Claremont, passing through various accounts and then returning to other companies in the Group, which were run "out of Perth". The reason for these manoeuvres was because of their cash crisis and the necessity to conceal the money by a series of transfers as Claremont could not lend money to them. It was facilitated by the use of his trust structure and his numbered Swiss bank account.

He agreed he knew that the transaction to which he lent his aid was one which involved the theft of Claremont's shareholders' funds. He said he felt no shame about that at the time, which he explained because the transaction was one that seemed to be necessary to try to solve the financial problems of the
Independent Resources Group. However, when those problems were not solved he experienced shame. He agreed he was assisting with full knowledge of the illegality. This is a third transaction, which was totally discreditable. In relation to it he agreed, Tp.373, that he allowed his numbered Swiss bank account to be used as a vehicle for "this fraud", and that he knew that the money went to Garaweh Pty Limited, which company he knew to be owned by Mr
Fuller and Mr Cummings.

At Tp.375 Mr Main was asked whether he took steps, in relation to the Burbank transaction, to keep people "in the dark about the true nature of what had happened at Rahn & Bodmer in October 1988". He said he had the instructions of Messrs Fuller and Cummings "that only the selected management team and advisers would know the truth of the blocked deposits at Rahn &
Bodmer". He was the person through whom enquiries were to be directed to Rahn & Bodmer, and it is obvious that he was not telling people, such as Mr
Glossop and Mr Winby, what the position was there. Nor were Rahn & Bodmer.
He agreed a message to Rahn & Bodmer, which he sent, was designed to ensure, so far as he could, that Rahn & Bodmer kept quiet about any encumbrance affecting the Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic deposits. The relevant encumbrances were those arranged in the course of meetings to which he was a party in October 1988. His complicity in this deception is another matter, which bears most unfavourably on his credit.

Mr Main agreed, Tp.378, that the Burbank transaction by 30 June 1989 was nowhere near completed, and that "the so-called completion of the transaction in July was just a sham" in which he participated willingly. He said that the transaction was completed "in the region of very late in 1989" although, meanwhile, money had been paid under the uncompleted transaction. He agreed that was a disgraceful state of affairs in which he willingly participated and he said he understood it was criminal. This is a further instance, which throws the gravest doubt on his credibility.

Mr Main said that from February 1989 he was aware that the Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic deposits were not available to be lent to Beach, because the
Group needed the money "and it was obvious that they couldn't draw down those deposits": Tp.387. By 30 June 1989, at the request of Mr Fuller, Mr Main had transferred those moneys as part of the Burbank purchase and from that time "according to the documentation" the money belonged to Firstway.

At Tp.388 Mr Main agreed that in September 1989 he took part in discussions with Rahn & Bodmer, which led to their issuing, in relation to each of the three companies, letters saying that as at 30 June 1989 the deposits were not encumbered. He agreed that queries from Rahn & Bodmer were, on the instructions of Messrs Cummings and Fuller, directed to him and:- "Q. That was all part of the plan, was it, to keep as far as possible the truth from emerging as regards the status of these deposits? 
A. Yes. The Burbank transaction included the amounts of these deposits so as to once and for all remove the difficulty of them securing the IRL and IRAG loans." 
Mr Main was asked about an explanation for Rahn & Bodmer, which he drafted. He said, ultimately, that it was more likely to obfuscate rather than clarify the true situation and, I have no doubt, that he was a willing participant in that: Tp.392. Once again this conduct does not create any confidence in any of his evidence.

At Tp.394 Mr Main agreed he was present at meetings at Rahn & Bodmer on 14
September 1989 when "a plot was hatched" to provide certification by Rahn & Bodmer stating that the Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic deposits were unencumbered as at 30 June 1989. He said Rahn & Bodmer re-characterised the deposits from fiduciary deposits to normal interest bearing deposits. In so far as there was to be that certification Mr Main agreed it was contrary to the truth, and that it was not true to say that the deposits were unencumbered as at 30 June 1989. He explained that the paper trail showed them as being independent deposits, whereas, in fact, they were to support the loans made to
IRL and IRAG by Rahn & Bodmer, so that although there was a re- characterisation, there was no essential difference in fact as to how the money was held. The consequence was that in September 1989 there was no money for Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic to lend to Beach. Mr Main was actively involved in ensuring that this dishonesty and deception occurred.

Mr Main agreed, Tp.396, that at the time the SCAFA was brought into existence there was no cash to advance, and that he knew that Rahn & Bodmer were not going to release any moneys unless the IRL and IRAG loans were repaid. He further agreed that in so far as moneys, apparently held by Spargos,
Enterprise and Jingellic, were suggested as being lent, the deposits at Rahn & Bodmer were not available to be drawn down.

Mr Main agreed that the price paid to Firstway was not an arm's length commercial price, and was certainly significantly above what was paid by
Firstway. He was not prepared to say it was either "fraudulent" or "dishonest", but he did not resile from his agreement that it was not an arm's length transaction to his knowledge. He further agreed that in procuring Mr
Balmaseda to tell a lie he was giving assistance to the effectuation, whether it was successful or not, of a non-arm's length transaction, which activity was dishonest to his knowledge. Mr Main said, Tp.401, that he felt uneasy about the price discrepancy because he did not see the transaction working in the way it was portrayed.

In relation to the final draft of the Charge and Option Agreement Mr Main said that Mr Cordell was receiving his instructions in relation to the terms of that document from Messrs Cummings and Fuller, and that once Mr Cordell had finalised his discussions with them, he would normally send the latest draft to him. Mr Main agreed that the amounts shown in Recital D were not all option payments, although he then said that they were all payments of option fees, as were determined by the agreement, but that they did not all go to Firstway. He said that Mr Fuller wanted the $5m payment "dressed up as an option fee" when it was not that to his, Mr Main's, knowledge.

At Tp.409 Mr Main was asked about the settlement he effected with Beach whereby he agreed, inter alia, to give evidence and not to seek to avoid answering questions on the ground that the answers may tend to incriminate him, and about the value of that agreement to him. He said that it constituted a resolution of an outstanding matter, and that the judgment could have affected his financial position. In re-examination, it emerged that there could not have been a great affectation upon that position because the only asset he has in his own name is a motor vehicle. The consequences of his being made bankrupt were not explored.

Mr Hughes commenced to cross-examine Mr Main at Tp.410 about the meeting of 22
February 1989. He said he recalled "very clearly" it being said, in the presence of Mr Bateman, that the nature of the Rhan & Bodmer deposits must not be disclosed to Mr Winby and Mr Glossop. He could not recall the specific words, but he repeated, generally speaking, what appeared in his statement about that matter. He said the words were not necessarily the first words spoken and that Mr Winby and Mr Glossop were present for parts of the meeting.
He described arriving by air from London and, after going to the hotel and freshening up, proceeding with Messrs Johnson, Fuller and Cordell to ATRK's
Boardroom. He said he could not be specific about Mr Cummings being present, and that he was not sure either "exactly what part of the meeting Cummings was a part of", or specifically whether Mr Cummings was present when the words that he attributed to Mr Fuller about keeping the arrangements about the deposits of Rahn & Bodmer secret from Mr Winby and Mr Glossop were spoken.
He said he could not specifically recall Mr Cummings' being at the meeting when "we first arrived" and that he had always been unsure about that. He read out the first three lines of paragraph 25, which stated that Mr Cummings was present when Mr Fuller said the words, and:- "Q. It follows from your evidence to-day and the last few minutes, that in saying that Cummings was present when those words were spoken you were saying something of which you were unsure, doesn't it? 
A. What I said was I do not know exactly at what point Cummings arrived at the meeting. I don't recall specifically him arriving at the same time as Fuller and the other people I mentioned": Tp.412. 
He said, apparently in an attempt to overcome the problem, that Mr Fuller said those matters on more than one occasion, and that he realised that the words he attributed to Mr Fuller, as having been spoken in the presence and hearing of Mr Bateman, amounted to a very serious allegation against Mr Bateman.

At Tp.414 Mr Hughes asked Mr Main where in his affidavit there was any reference to the words having been spoken more than once and he replied that he believed it was addressed in paragraph 25. He said the only matter about which he was unsure was when Mr Cummings arrived at the meeting, and he denied that his evidence about that incident was "a tissue of falsehood". He repeated the words were spoken on more than one occasion.

Mr Main was cross-examined about the words he used in paragraph 30(a) of his affidavit. He said Mr Bateman definitely heard them, that the whole discussion was how to refinance the Group, and that it was very clear that those deposits were not money, which could be accessed "and everyone there understood that".
That led to some vigorous cross-examination about Mr Main's ability to say what other people understood. Ultimately Mr Main denied that he had just sworn as to what other people understood. He denied that this was nonsense, and he said that he had said that he could not swear on his oath as to what other people understood: Tp.421.

Mr Main said Mr Bateman wrote items on the white board, which included the value of the assets, but not as they were conveyed to him. Mr Main was taken to his assertion that Mr Bateman wrote on the white board words to the effect that the Rahn & Bodmer deposits were blocked. He said that Mr Bateman wrote a number of things, including an understanding that they were to be off- set against the IRL and IRAG loans and were blocked. He said that next to the notation of the Rahn & Bodmer loans at $24m were noted deposits of $17.7m "so if the deposits are listed under liabilities, it's obvious that they are off-setting the loans of $24m": Tp.422. It was put to him that he was drawing a conclusion as to the meaning of the figures, which he denied.

Mr Main also suggested that under the heading "Priority Cash Requirements", on pp. 7 and 8 of the white board print outs, the cash requirements of the Group were shown, and there was no mention at all of using the money at Rahn &
Bodmer. He said the words to the effect that those deposits were blocked were:- "These are the priority cash requirements of the Group, which was the whole purpose of the meeting, and the proposals put forward by Mr Bateman to restructure the Group - he had worked out exactly what was required in cash to keep the things going. You can see all the payment dates he's put down there. Nowhere here at all is he talking about being able to use the $17.7m on deposit at Rahn & Bodmer." 
He continued that the Group's cash crises were being considered, as were the restructuring proposals put forward by Mr Bateman, and continued:- "It's absolutely clear from what was written on page 098 by Johnson that you've got debts of IRL of $24m with deposits in brackets of $17.7m which was clearly discussed and whenever the deposits, as I've said, were talked of, if there was any way to use those, it was made very clear by Johnson, Cordell and myself that there was no way Rahn & Bodmer were going to allow those deposits to be accessed. 
The day then progressed and you can see from these various white things they discuss the cash flows and then it culminated in Bateman putting out what the priority cash requirements are. There were many things discussed other than just - it was a whole day of meetings - other than just eight pages of a white board. Nowhere here can you see Bateman's suggestion that those deposits could be used to deal with the priority cash requirements of the Group." 
Commencing at Tp.426 Mr Main was again cross-examined about what Mr Cordell said about the deposits. He said Mr Cordell confirmed that he had actually gone to Rahn & Bodmer to establish the loans and deposits and that there was no way Rahn & Bodmer would allow them to be accessed by the companies.
He was pressed as to whether Mr Cordell said that he had been to Rahn &
Bodmer and about the fact that there was no reference, at least expressly, to that in his affidavit. Ultimately Mr Main said he did not state "that he was actually there", but he relied upon the use of the word "established". Mr Main insisted that the words "I established .." were clear to him that he, Mr
Cordell, was at Rahn & Bodmer.

At Tp.429 Mr Main said that Mr Bateman did say words to the effect that there was a need to resolve the situation at Rahn & Bodmer "where Spargos,
Enterprise and Jingellic deposits are back to back with IRL and IRAG loans from R & B". He said the topic was addressed at the meeting of 8 March , but it was never a point of contention as "everyone knew that that position had to be resolved".

Mr Main repeated, Tp.430, that Mr Bateman said:- "It was to the effect that the deposits could not secure the loans of IRL and IRAG and the matter of Rahn & Bodmer had to be resolved. It was still an outstanding issue." 
Mr Main was cross-examined as to whether, at the meeting on 22 February 1989,
Mr Bateman said anything to the effect that Newco was to be a company controlled by Mr Fuller and Mr Johnson and he confirmed that he did, and that
Mr Bateman suggested that Newco be a company in which Mr Fuller and Mr Johnson would be the shareholders. He was asked whether he knew that Mr Johnson was not in the habit of being a shareholder in or director of any companies with which he was associated, and he said that Mr Johnson was involved through trusts and that everyone knew that referring to Mr Johnson was referring to his trusts "because he never owned anything in his own name".

At Tpp.431-2 Mr Main was asked whether he agreed that his conduct in relation to the Burbank acquisition was thoroughly discreditable and he said that he was not happy with his actions in that regard, and that his conduct was discreditable.

The Significance Of Mr Main's Evidence 
Mr Main's evidence is of major significance to Beach's case. If it is accepted it disclosed that Mr Bateman was well aware, at least from 22 February 1989, that Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic had no money at Rahn & Bodmer, which could be used in the various transactions, at least until IRL and IRAG repaid their indebtedness to Rahn & Bodmer. Accordingly, any transactions, which were implemented on the basis that those companies were able to utilise those funds before such repayment, were clearly fraudulent and, in relation to
Beach, a fraud on it. Further, if Mr Bateman acted on the basis of such information he was acting dishonestly such as to give rise to the accessory liability for which Beach has contended. Mr Kelly's submissions in relation to the knowledge Mr Bateman had varied during the case. It should be repeated that at an evidentiary level it was put to Mr Bateman clearly that he had knowledge that the Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic funds were not available at all material times, which he denied. Thus, the case propounded against him at that level was involvement in the fraudulent conduct I have identified. It was described, in submissions, as a case being made of subjective fraud. It is difficult to imagine a more devastating allegation against a commercial solicitor.

At Tp.1261 I asked Mr Kelly whether he was submitting that Mr Bateman's understanding was that there was no money at Rahn & Bodmer, but rather a bank entry, or whether he was submitting that Mr Bateman's understanding was that there was money at Rahn & Bodmer to the credit of Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic but it was not "freely available to be utilised". He replied:- "Our case is that he was aware that the banking arrangements at Rahn & Bodmer were such that the so-called deposits were not deposits of money which could be freely drawn upon, loaned, swapped or otherwise dealt with until something else happened." 
He identified the "something else" as "at the very least the effluxion of the period of time" and:- "HIS HONOUR: What else? 
MR KELLY: That IRL and IRAG would need to repay the fiduciary loan accounts.

HIS HONOUR: But he didn't know that? 
MR KELLY: Correct. It's not part of our case that he knew that there were fiduciary loan accounts as such. 
HIS HONOUR: What I am asking you is: what is your case on this, Mr Kelly? I have understood it, I thought, to be that he was aware that the banking arrangements were such that moneys which were actually physically with Rahn & Bodmer to the credit of Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic could not be dealt with `freely' by way of loan or otherwise until the expiration of the period of time because they were fixed for a period of time. That's my understanding of what you say Mr Bateman knew. 
MR KELLY: It goes a little bit further, but not much further. The difference between your Honour's reference to physically there, whenever one deposits money in a bank in the ordinary way a relationship of debtor and creditor arises between the customer and the bank, so that the relevant date, the so-called physically there or money being there, is in the nature of a debtor and creditor relationship in which the debtor is the bank." 
After some discussion of that the following transpired at Tp.1263:- "HIS HONOUR: But in that circumstance, there is money there to meet the debt from the bank. The bank doesn't say - Westpac or whoever the bank is - `just hang on a minute: I'm going down the road to call in a debt I've got with somebody else in order to pay you'. 
MR KELLY: Correct. Our case is that Mr Bateman was aware throughout the material time that the banking arrangements at Rahn & Bodmer were such that there were no deposits at that bank in the name of Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic which were available to be freely drawn upon, loaned or otherwise dealt with. 
HIS HONOUR: For a period? 
MR KELLY: Yes, throughout the relevant period.

HIS HONOUR: What's the relevant period? 
MR KELLY: For example, here is Mr Bateman saying, as at 2 May, that this was his understanding. The currency swap was the first of the transactions which purported to deal with those moneys when they're fixed and not available to be freely drawn upon, loaned or otherwise dealt with. The relevant period is from at least 10 February, or so soon thereafter as he received the memorandum of the 10 February, and continuing up to and including each of the transactions." 
I explored that further with Mr Kelly, who agreed that the end period was 180 days from 3 July 1989, and saying:- "I think that would be right, yes, your Honour." 
These statements made it very clear that Mr Kelly was not then submitting that
Mr Bateman's awareness was that there was no money until such time as IRL and
IRAG repaid the fiduciary loan accounts and that Mr Bateman did not know there were fiduciary loan accounts "as such". The case he was propounding was that
Mr Bateman knew there was some temporal limitation on dealing with the money, which was unconnected with Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic not being entitled to do so when the time elapsed.

At the conclusion of his oral submissions, namely at 12.10 pm on 17 November , Mr Kelly handed up a volume of additional written submissions of the plaintiff in Section 4 of which he dealt with the credit of Mr Bateman, and in
Section 5 of which he dealt with the evidence of Mr Bateman's "scanning" the February memorandum.

On the morning of 18 November 1997 Mr Hughes, who had then had an opportunity to read the submissions, referred to a submission in paragraph 22, under the latter heading, that Mr Main's evidence was that Mr Bateman wrote words to the effect of "R & B deposits - blocked" and, in paragraph 26, that Mr
Bateman never explained the "double counting" and, finally in paragraph 30, that the evidence of Messrs Main and Glossop should be preferred to that of Mr
Bateman, and Mr Hughes submitted that those submissions revived the charge of actual subjective fraud that it was thought had been abandoned. These matters were discussed commencing at Tp.1521 and included a reference to Tp.1491 where, in the course of Mr Hughes' submissions, I said:- "Anyway, I thought Mr Kelly withdrew any allegation of knowledge of fraud" i.e. against Mr Bateman. Mr Hughes said that that was his understanding, "...
although the concluding stages of his submission this morning seemed to bring dishonesty back". This was a reference to submissions in relation to accessory liability. I then noted that Mr Kelly had not sought, at that stage of the address, to correct what either Mr Hughes or I had said.

In an attempt to clarify the situation I said to Mr Kelly, Tp.1523, that I thought:- ".. that there was no continued assertion of subjective fraud or knowledge of matters which would give rise to a conclusion that Mr Bateman was a party to the fraud." 
Mr Kelly replied:- "That is undoubtedly correct, your Honour. It is not and never has been part of our case that Mr Bateman was a party to the fraud. Our case under the knowing assistance heading - paragraph 167 and following - is that is a case under Barnes versus Addy which is accessory liability. 
It is incorrect to say that an allegation of subjective fraud has been withdrawn in the manner that my learned friend suggests because it was never made in the first place. The requisite knowledge for the purposes of the knowing assistance claim, the Barnes versus Addy claim, now for the purposes of analysis appropriately visited in terms of the language commended by Royal Brunei, the knowledge in that regard is effectively conceded by Mr Bateman at p.709.

HIS HONOUR: Mr Kelly do you submit that I should find that a conversation took place in the absence of Mr Winby and Mr Glossop to the effect asserted by Mr Main.

MR KELLY: Yes, your Honour.

HIS HONOUR: That must mean that Mr Bateman was aware that there was no money at all available at Rahn & Bodmer.

MR KELLY: With respect, those two propositions don't follow, your Honour." (My emphasis.) 
At that point I suggested to Mr Kelly that he had said enough, in the sense of elucidating the issues, and I invited Mr Hughes to continue his submissions.

The matter was raised again by Mr Kelly at Tp.1635, when he handed up further written submissions. He submitted that there had been no shift in Beach's position in relation to "subjective fraud", and that one of the factual matters in issue was what was said and done on 22 February 1989. He said the position in relation to that was set out in the original outline of submissions. In paragraph 100 thereof it was stated that Mr Bateman's state of knowledge in relation to the position at Rahn & Bodmer "is hotly contested". After dealing with certain allegations in relation to that, it was stated, at paragraph 108, that Beach would rely on various evidence, much of which involved knowledge on the part of Mr Bateman, that ATRK were aware that
Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic did not "have access" to their moneys at
Rahn & Bodmer. In relation to Accessory Liability it was stated, inter alia, in paragraphs 173 to 177 that "there were no deposits by Spargos,
Enterprise and Jingellic at Rahn & Bodmer which were available to be loaned to Beach by means of the SCAFA"; that Mr Bateman had knowledge of each of those facts and assisted the directors in their breach of fiduciary duty in relation to each of those matters; and that the conduct of ATRK was objectively dishonest in the sense employed in Royal Brunei Airlines Snd Bhd v Philip Tan Kok Ming <case>; [[1995] 2 AC .] 
Mr Kelly said it was an exaggeration to contend that "there was a conspiracy of silence sought to be engendered", rather it was "an additional confidence".
He submitted that it was necessary to have regard to "the quality" of Mr
Bateman's understanding of the position at Rahn & Bodmer in relation to the objective dishonesty required for establishing Accessory Liability. He said that state of knowledge was admitted at Tp.709 in the words:- "We were also aware that there was some problem with those deposits in the form of them being fixed for a period and that there may be some necessity, I think, to obtain bridging finance from ELFIC." 
Mr Kelly said, Tp.1636, that the whole concept of a claim of actual fraud against ATRK was misconceived. The matter went to Accessory Liability, although he said, Tp.1637, that he pressed the allegation that it was explained in the presence of Mr Bateman that it was not possible to release the Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic deposits at Rahn & Bodmer without repayment of the IRL loan.

At the conclusion of the previous day I asked Mr Kelly, Tp.1584, what the position would be if I held that Mr Bateman was unaware that the moneys at
Rahn & Bodmer were "blocked" in the sense that that word was used. He replied that that would take away "chunks" of the Accessory Liability case, but it would not provide a complete answer to it.

Mr Kelly's written submissions, consistently with the stance he took, attacked the evidence of Mr Bateman and went to the extent of asserting that throughout it he "prevaricated". He submitted:- "He rarely answered questions put to him in any direct, succinct way. Instead, he would evade answering the question and would skirt around it by delivering long and irrelevant speeches." 
I pause to observe that Mr Kelly rarely, if at all, objected to matters Mr
Bateman gave in evidence. This may well have been because he discerned a forensic advantage in not doing so.

Mr Kelly submitted that it was Mr Bateman's "practice" "to never completely tell the entire truth" and that he tried to create a certain impression about his involvement "without giving the full context". He elaborated upon these matters under the heading:- "The Following Pages Contain Selected Examples Of Bateman's Evidence And The Reasons That He Should Be Disbelieved." 
I shall return to them when I review Mr Bateman's evidence.

In relation to Mr Main, Mr Kelly submitted that he was "a frank and honest witness, who answered questions directly". He submitted that he did not "shy away from his involvement in any of the matters put to him"; that he came to the Court freely and without immunity; that he had no reason to mislead the
Court in any way; that he was frank in his disclosure of his agreement with the plaintiff to assist by giving information, documentation and evidence; and that the value of the agreement was virtually worthless. The submission concluded that Mr Main should be accepted as a witness of truth and, as I have noted, that the evidence of Mr Main and Mr Glossop should be preferred to that of Mr Bateman.

It was not in issue, as I understood it, that the seriousness of the allegations made against Mr Bateman required that they be proved to a high degree within the balance of probabilities: Briginshaw versus Briginshaw <case>; <case>; [(1965) 112 CLR 517.] For the moment I shall content myself by commenting on the evidence of Mr Main. I do that because the aggregation of the evidence of Mr
Glossop does not give it the support for which I think Mr Kelly contended. I must also have regard to the fact that Mr Main's evidence was not sought to be corroborated by the evidence of Messrs Johnson, Fuller or Cummings. One can well understand why they were not called and I think it inappropriate to seek to draw the inference provided by Jones versus Dunkel <case>; [(1959) 101 CLR 298.] However, even in the absence of that inference, the fact is they were not called and, accordingly, the conflict is between Mr Main, and the probabilities which favour his version of the evidence, and Mr Bateman, and the probabilities which favour his.

It will be necessary for me, in due course, to analyse Mr Bateman's evidence.
My conclusion is that Mr Bateman's evidence, generally speaking, should be accepted. I do not accept that he was prevaricating and I certainly do not accept that Mr Main's evidence should be accepted in preference to his. I do not accept that Mr Bateman was prepared to be party to fraudulent conduct nor that he acted in any way dishonestly. I shall explain why I have come to these conclusions in due course. However, for the moment, I range the evidence of Mr
Main against that of Mr Bateman and it is now necessary for me to state my conclusions as to Mr Main's evidence.

It disclosed that Mr Main lacked commercial morality in that he was prepared to engage in transactions and activities which were, to his knowledge, completely discreditable and dishonest, and to falsify the truth. In my opinion his evidence should be rejected in so far as it is not corroborated by evidence I accept, or is contrary to his interests. Mr Kelly suggested that Mr
Main's evidence should be accepted in part because he admitted his disgraceful conduct quite readily and freely. That, in my view, was the only redeeming feature about it, but it was not such as to cause me to revise the wholly unfavourable view I formed of it. I have stated these conclusions earlier and a detailed consideration of the evidence, which I have now concluded, led to them. I am concerned that he sought to implicate Mr Brooke, Mr Cordell and Mr
Ringrose in certain discreditable conduct. Mr Brooke gave evidence and, to some extent, vindicated Mr Main's evidence about him. Mr Cordell did not give evidence, but I am satisfied that I should draw the inferences in relation to him to which I have referred. Mr Ringrose did not give evidence and I am not so satisfied that I should draw such adverse inferences against him.

In so far as Mr Main has sought to involve Mr Bateman in the fraudulent plan in which Mr Johnson, Mr Fuller, Mr Cummings and he were engaged and to attribute knowledge to Mr Bateman of the position of the Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic deposits, his attempt has failed. Not only do I reject his evidence, but I accept the evidence of Mr Bateman that he had no knowledge of these matters. My conclusions as to Mr Main's total lack of credibility are not only supported by the evidence he gave, but also by my observations as he gave his evidence.

I would add that the evidence of Mr Main, who was clearly Mr Johnson's "right hand man", satisfies me that Mr Main was prepared to do whatever was necessary to ensure that the fraud on Beach, which was being perpetrated in a deliberate and determine way by those involved in it, came to fruition. I have no doubt that the other fraudsters had the same attitude. The dishonest conduct of Mr
Main shows, as clearly as possible, that he was not prepared to leave any dishonest or discredible stone unturned to achieve the end. This view leads me to the conclusion that irrespective of what ATRK had done or said those effectuating the fraud would have ignored their advice and ensured that the fraudulent scheme was effectuated. I am also of the opinion that even if ATRK had drawn matters to the attention of Mr Worthington and/or Mr Glossop the attitude of Mr Main was such, (and, I have no doubt, reflective of the attitude of the other fraudsters), that any queries or doubts raised by those gentlemen would have been answered in an apparently satisfactory but thoroughly dishonest way. This is supported by the way in which Rahn &
Bodmer was influenced to furnish completely wrong and misleading information in answer to questions raised with it. Hence the cause of any loss to Beach was the fraud and not any act or omission on the part of ATRK. This analysis proceeds on the assumption that ATRK were guilty of acts or omissions giving rise to the causes of action pleaded against them, which I do not accept.

The Evidence of Mr Ross Phillip Glossop 
Mr Glossop made two witness statements on 21 July 1997 and 6 October 1997, which are Exhibit G. He joined CMS on 25 June 1987 as Group Accountant. The position included responsibility for the book-keeping and preparation of management and financial accounts for all companies managed by CMS, and certain other duties. In relation to fund movements his role was to account for them historically. The major companies managed by CMS, when Mr Glossop joined it, were IRL, CGMA, Jingellic, Enterprise and Southern Goldfields
Limited. Each was listed on the ASX and had a number of subsidiaries for the accounting of which Mr Glossop was also responsible.

After 30 June 1987 CMS commenced the preparation of the statutory financial statements for all the companies managed by it to that date and, in that context, Mr Glossop learned that IRL had a substantial loan from ACC, the security for which was over part of IRL's shareholding in CGMA, Brush Creek
Mining & Development Co Inc and ACOJE Mining Company. When Mr Glossop joined CMS the IRL Group had significant funds on deposit at 11 am call, the substantial portion being moneys of Enterprise and Jingellic. The moneys had been raised in rights issues in 1987.

Mr Glossop received a memorandum dated 10 May 1988 from Ms Susan Kahl, the secretary of all companies in the IRL Group, instructing him how to record a transaction entered in May 1988, whereby ACC repaid deposits of Enterprise and
Jingellic, which then purchased preference shares in IRL, which in turn repaid part of the loan it had with ACC.

In September 1988 Mr Glossop resigned from CMS, but he returned on 19 December following a plane crash on 16 December 1988, which claimed the lives of a number of senior CMS personnel, including Mr Greenham, Mr Bayley and Ms Kahl.

Mr Glossop had difficulty understanding the situation so far as transactions with Rahn & Bodmer from the records, which were available. Mr Bayley and
Ms Kahl appeared to have had control of the matter prior to that. By late
December 1988 the IRL Group accounts to 30 June 1988 were not completed and, during the first week back at CMS, Mr Glossop tried to "get on top of the outstanding issues essential to the completion of the statutory financial statements".

In January 1989 Mr Glossop spoke to Mr Cordell and Mr Brooke about the Rahn & Bodmer transactions in an attempt to understand what had happened in
October 1988, and he communicated with them in pursuing his enquiries. He learnt that IRL had repaid the debt to ACC and that on 28 October 1988
Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic called down their deposits with ACC and deposited the principal and interest with Rahn & Bodmer. He also learnt that the transfer of the loan from ACC to Rahn & Bodmer was effected by an escrow account, which he did not think was unusual. He believed, from what Mr
Cordell told him, that the effect of the transaction at Rahn & Bodmer was that the deposits and loan were re-established at Rahn & Bodmer. He continued to make enquiries in relation to the deposits at Rahn & Bodmer without any success.

One of the first tasks he undertook upon being re-employed by CMS was to determine what cash commitments the IRL Group had and how they were to be met.
It became readily apparent to him that the Group had serious short term cash problems, and that there were particular financial difficulties in relation to the operations in Indonesia. He travelled to Sydney to meet Mr Fuller, Mr
Cummings and Mr Winby at the end of January 1989 to discuss the financial difficulties concerning him in relation to the IRL Group and, after a meeting on 1 February 1989, a meeting was held with Mr Bateman. He prepared a brief, which came to be known in the proceedings as the memorandum of 10 February , to which was annexed certain financial data for the purposes of a meeting, which was to take place in Sydney on 14 February 1989, but which was subsequently held during the period from 21 to 22 February 1989. At the front of the brief is a memorandum to Messrs Fuller, Cummings and Bateman, which was copied to Mr Johnson and Mr Main. Whilst the three page memorandum was signed by Mr Winby, the financial aspects of it were prepared by him, and the more important details, as he perceived it, in the memorandum were supported by the documents, which followed in the brief. He said that copies of the brief were distributed to each person mentioned in the memorandum and he had a copy and, at the meeting on 22 February 1989, each of the persons to whom the brief was directed were in attendance and had a copy. When he was at the offices of ATRK he was given a dark blue ATRK folder into which he put the memorandum and supporting financial papers, which was tendered and became Exhibit J. Another copy became Exhibit W.

Mr Glossop had some notes of the meeting on 21 February 1989, which indicated that he and Mr Winby had put forth a view that the problems of the Group could be solved by selling off some of the assets and, in particular, the oil and gas assets, which in their view were non-core assets in relation to the basic business of gold exploration and production. He also had notes of the meeting held on 22 February 1989 at which he was present "for some time". He recalled the white board was used, but he said he had no clear recollection of what was discussed, save that the meeting was lengthy and there were detailed discussions about the Group's cash flows and possible restructure.

Mr Winby and Mr Glossop continued to try to ascertain the status of the deposits at Rahn & Bodmer, thinking they were fixed until June 1989, although some documents suggested they may have been at call. Mr Glossop was concerned because he was receiving no information.

In about June 1989 Mr Glossop was being asked where Spargos had obtained $5m to put on deposit with ELFIC.

In his statement of 6 October 1997, Mr Glossop said he had read the statements of Mr Bateman of 9 September 1997, Mr Ferguson of 8 September 1997, Mr Thomas of 8 September 1997 and Mr Willcock of 5 September 1997. A reading of paragraphs 96-99 of Mr Bateman's statement assisted his recollection as to some of the matters that occurred in February 1989. He remembered there was a meeting at ATRK's offices on 14 February 1989, although he said the main meetings at which the memorandum and its attachments were considered were those of 21 and 22 February. Mr Glossop said he did not recall Mr Bateman's leaving his copy of the memorandum and its attachments at the meeting on 14
February 1989 and that its contents were discussed at length by all present.
He said that to the best of his recollection Mr Bateman had a copy of the memorandum and its attachments in front of him at the meeting on 22 February
Mr Bateman denied this.

He said paragraphs 100-104 of Mr Bateman's statement also clarified for him the date of the presentation given by Mr Rogers on Burbank, and that it reminded him that the meeting most likely occurred in the week prior to the meeting of 21 and 22 February 1989.

He said Mr Fuller did not limit the meeting to a consideration of the offers from ELFIC, to receiving an update from Mr Winby and himself on the financial position, and to a consideration of the costs of the proposed bids. He continued that the meeting involved a wide-ranging discussion about the financial problems within the Group and ways in which they could be solved through a restructuring. He confirmed there was a detailed discussion about
IRL cash flows and possible Group restructures. He said, in relation to paragraph 109 of Mr Bateman's statement, that at the meeting on 22 February the subjects of external and internal borrowings and cash flow were central and were discussed in detail by all present, including Mr Bateman, for many hours.

In cross-examination Mr Glossop said there was always some confusion about the nature of the deposits of Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic at Rahn &
Bodmer, but on 23 March 1989 it was his understanding they were fixed until
June 1989. He confirmed that it was not possible to get any information from
Rahn & Bodmer or Mr Main. At Tp.459 he agreed that nothing was said at the meeting of 22 February 1989 to dispel the belief that he had prior to the meeting and until 23 March 1989 that the deposits were term deposits. This evidence was contrary to that of Mr Main on the critical issue about the deposits being blocked, although Mr Main said that in the context of Mr
Glossop and Mr Winby not being present when reference was made to those matters. He said that there was nothing on the print outs from the white board of the meeting to show that the deposits were other than fixed, and that he thought he was present for most of the meeting on 22 February 1989. At Tp.463
Mr Glossop said that at the meeting on 22 February 1989 he did not "actually inspect any documents that Mr Bateman had in his possession". However there was some conflict between Mr Glossop and Mr Bateman as to whether Mr Bateman had the 10 February 1989 memorandum with him at the meeting.

By leave Mr Kelly asked Mr Glossop what happened with the memorandum at the meeting and he said that it was gone through and there was an explanation of the detail, some by him and some by Mr Winby. He said Mr Bateman participated in the meeting as the document was worked through in that manner.

When Mr Bateman was called Mr Hughes asked him whether he read some of the transcript on the computer screen of the evidence given by Mr Glossop on the previous day and whether, having done so, it jogged his memory about a particular event that occurred "between either you and Mr Glossop or you and
Mr Winby on a previous occasion". Mr Bateman said it did and that on seeing the reference that Mr Glossop made to writing a letter to Rahn & Bodmer in either April or May 1989 with a view to asking them to confirm that the deposits of each of Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic were in fact at call, rather than for a fixed term, he recollected a discussion between Mr Winby and
Mr Glossop. At that point, Tp.479, Mr Kelly objected to the conversation, which had not been put to Mr Glossop. Mr Hughes said that he could not have put it to Mr Glossop because he did not know about it when he gave evidence. I accommodated the problem by permitting the evidence to be given and allowing
Mr Glossop to respond by an affidavit. I said that whether Mr Glossop would be required for further cross-examination "might be another matter", and I gave reasons for that.

At Tp.481 Mr Bateman said the conversation, which he believed was in late
April 1989, was to the effect that the documents Mr Winby and Mr Glossop had inspected strongly suggested that the moneys on deposit at Rahn & Bodmer of Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic were for a fixed term, but that there was some doubt about it and that they intended writing to Rahn & Bodmer to see whether they could persuade them "that, in fact, those deposits were at call".
He distinctly recalled Mr Winby saying "we'll give it a try". He said he did not remember whether it was a joint conversation with Mr Winby and Mr Glossop by telephone, or whether it was two separate telephone calls, but he remembered they were informing him of their decision to write to Rahn &
Bodmer for that purpose.

On 27 October 1997 Mr Glossop swore an affidavit in which he stated that he had read pp.479 to 482 of the transcript, and he denied having a conversation in April 1989, or at any other time, in which he told Mr Bateman, or in which
Mr Winby in his presence told Mr Bateman, that the documents strongly suggested that the moneys on deposit at Rahn & Bodmer of each of Spargos,
Enterprise and Jingellic were for a fixed term, and that they would see whether they could persuade Rahn & Bodmer that in fact those deposits were at call.

The affidavit was read without objection and no application was made to cross- examine Mr Glossop on it. In the result it does not seem to me that this conflict is of any particular significance, because Mr Glossop did not suggest an understanding that the funds were "blocked" or in any other way unavailable.

My impression was that Mr Glossop was an honest witness, although, understandably enough, I think he had some difficulty in recalling events of many years ago, and he frankly conceded that his recollection of certain matters was assisted by reading Mr Bateman's statement. It will, however, be necessary to review his evidence in the light of the evidence of Mr Bateman.

The Evidence Of Mr Gregory Anthony Thomas Bateman 
Mr Bateman's principal areas of practice were and are Corporations Law, takeovers, mergers and acquisitions, Stock Exchange compliance, capital raisings and general commercial advice. In addition to being a solicitor he is a Fellow of the Australian Institute of Company Directors, a Fellow of the
Chartered Institute of Company Secretaries in Australia, a member of the New
South Wales State Council of that body, and a member of its Corporate and
Legal Issues Committee. He is a member of the Business Law Section of the Law
Council of Australia and of the Legislative Review Committee of the Commercial
Law Association.

He reviewed all ATRK's available files, which might relate to the facts in issue in these proceedings, and found there were none recording Beach as a client or which recorded work carried out for and charged to it in connection with the currency swap transaction, the Charge and Option Agreement and the
SCAFA. The only account rendered to Beach in connection with those transactions was on 28 September 1989, which related to the SCAFA and was addressed to Spargo as the client, but payable by Beach as the borrower pursuant to the terms of SCAFA, and a ten minute conversation with Mr
Worthington on 16 May 1989. Mr Bateman found a file headed "Claremont
Petroleum NL re Section 12 Notice - CLA 892915", which recorded advice given to Claremont and Beach in relation to such notices and, prior to May 1989, a file opened by ATRK on 22 November 1988, which recorded Beach as a client and related to work done for it by Mr Bateman in relation to his giving advice to
Beach about the election of directors, and his attendance at its Annual
General Meeting on 22 November 1988 for which ATRK rendered fees of $567.

In relation to the currency swap transaction Mr Bateman said that his first involvement was on 12 May 1989, prior to which date he had no knowledge of any proposed transaction involving moneys held on deposit by Beach. On 12 May 1989
Mr Fuller telephoned him and told him he had tried to speak to Mr Thomas, who was unavailable. He asked Mr Bateman to tell Mr Thomas that ELFIC was offering a facility of $3.8m to Inspar to finance the payment to the Petrogulf shareholders, who had accepted the Inspar bid. Mr Fuller said that Mr Furnell of Messrs Clayton Utz, the solicitors for ELFIC, said that the directors must warrant to ELFIC that they had consent for the facility from Rothschilds and that this could not be done until it had been through credit committees, which would probably take a week. Mr Fuller also said that he had agreed to reduce the Petrogulf facility by $5m on the assumption of getting the Inspar facility, that he could not communicate with Ms Ritchie, and that Mr Hawkins had been told that unless the Inspar facility could be obtained it would not be possible to meet the undertaking to reduce the Petrogulf facility by $5m.
Mr Fuller continued that he wanted to advise ELFIC that it must understand that the Inspar facility would proceed when the consent of Rothschilds was obtained and, in the meantime, that Beach would assign its deposit with ELFIC to Spargos and Spargos would use $2.5m to satisfy key people in the Inspar bid, excluding "internals or friendlies". Mr Fuller said that it would not be possible to reduce the Petrogulf facility by $5m "to-day" and that this assumed that ELFIC would not accept the representation that consent from
Rothschilds would be obtained "next week". Mr Bateman asked about the significance of Rothschilds, and Mr Fuller told him that it and the National
Australia Bank had given a syndicated gold loan secured over the Bellevue Mine and that Mr Winby had told him that whilst Rothschilds would not be a problem,
National Australia Bank's consent may take some time as it would have to be referred to its credit committee.

Mr Bateman said he was unfamiliar with many of those matters, although he was aware that Inspar, which was a subsidiary of Spargos, had made a bid for the shares in Petrogulf. He agreed to pass the information on to Mr Thomas. He said he did not recall any subsequent discussion on 12 May 1989 with any of Mr
Thomas, Mr Fuller or Mr Cummings, although his time sheet for that date recorded three attendances. The word "attendance" in his time sheet signified to him a meeting with another partner or employed solicitor of ATRK. His diary also recorded an appointment at 10 am on that day with Mr Cummings, but he said he could not remember what occurred during this appointment or those attendances and he had no further involvement in the currency swap transaction until 16 May 1989, on which date either Mr Thomas or his secretary presented to him for signature two letters to Spargos and a letter to Beach, which he signed. He recalled no discussion with Mr Thomas and he did not become aware of the detail of the transaction. He did not recall what, if anything, was annexed to the letters, or whether he read the annexures. However, when he signed the letters he knew ATRK was acting for Spargos in connection with the refinancing of facilities of ELFIC arising as a result of the takeover bid by
Inspar for Petrogulf, and he considered it to be consistent with good practice to notify Beach in writing of the matters in the letter of 16 May 1989 and to return the original resolution of the directors of Beach authorising the transactions.

On 16 May 1989, after he had signed the letters, Mr Worthington telephoned him. Mr Bateman said he did not understand most of what Mr Worthington said, but towards the end of the conversation Mr Worthington asked whether the
United States Dollar deposit from Spargos was "hedged", and Mr Bateman said he did not know very much about it and suggested Mr Worthington speak to Mr
Fuller. This is the conversation recorded on the file opened for Beach on 22
November 1988 and, Mr Bateman said, the time was later written off and no fees were rendered.

He said that as at 12 and 16 May 1989 he had no knowledge of any connection which the currency swap transactions may possibly have had to an existing proposal, which had been mentioned to him, that Beach acquire an interest in
Oilfields "known as Burbank". This was inherently probable because the scheme had only be devised on 10 May 1989 and was intended to overcome the serious financial problems referable to the indebtedness of Petrogulf and Inspar to which I have referred. It was not until 13 and 14 September 1989 that the transaction was sought to be made relevant to the Burbank acquisition at the meetings at Rahn & Bodmer, to which I have referred.

He dealt nextly with the Section 12 notice issued on 27 June 1989 by the NSCS to Beach, and he said he did not recall being aware of it until 11 July 1989 when he revised a draft letter Mr Willcock had prepared for the consideration of Messrs Fuller and Cummings. He had a conference with them to discuss the draft letter and created a file note recording that either Mr Fuller or Mr
Cummings said that they wanted the letter to state, firstly, that the NCSC was simply fishing, and, secondly, that in the past there had been co-operation when the NCSC have identified areas of concern and this would not change. They wanted to object to notices being used for "fishing" and for the NCSC to identify areas of concern stating there was nothing to hide and there was a desire to remove from the draft letter any references to harassment. I shall refer to evidence which makes it clear that there was compliance with the notice and that it appears that several years later the NCSC had still not analysed the documents produced.

On 12 July 1989 Mr Bateman discussed the draft letter with Mr Willcock and then considered certain correspondence and, on 14 July 1989, he had a telephone conversation with Mr Cummings, in which Mr Cummings told him that the original documents sought by the NCSC would be assembled and sent to
Melbourne.

In paragraph 26 Mr Bateman said that he considered the Charge and Option
Agreement in July 1989, and that prior to its execution on 29 and 30 June 1989 he was never asked to advise Beach and never gave it advice about any aspect of the agreement or the exercise of the option. Between February and June 1989 the proposal that Beach purchase an interest in Burbank had been mentioned to him on several occasions, but he was never asked to do anything or to give any advice, and he would not "have anticipated any such instructions". He had no "expectation" that Beach might "possibly" rely on him to advise it in relation to the purchase, and neither ATRK nor he had expertise in relation to the acquisition of oil and gas assets. He knew Beach had other lawyers and that since at least January 1989 it had been negotiating and implementing a sale of its Victorian Oilfields, which was a major asset, and that ATRK had not been retained in that matter.

He knew since June 1989 that Messrs Joelson Wilson were acting on behalf of
Beach in relation to the possible purchase of Burbank, and that at 24 May 1989 that firm was acting for Moage in relation to the purchase of oil and gas properties in the United States. He was aware Moage was managed from the
Claremont office "by the same persons who managed Beach and Claremont", and he also knew in early June 1989 that Beach had been substituted for Moage as the purchaser of those assets, and that Mr Worthington was proceeding to implement that acquisition for Beach.

Mr Bateman became aware that Beach had acquired an interest in Burbank on 4
July 1989 when Mr Fuller spoke to him, and he did not see the Charge and
Option Agreement dated 29 June 1989 and the Notice of Exercise of Option dated June 1989 or the side letters until 21 July 1989. That occurred when he was instructed to prepare security documentation in relation to the loans made by
Spargos, Jingellic and Enterprise to Beach. It was ATRK's case that those documents were considered and amendments were suggested by them in the context of their acting for the lenders to Beach. Mr Davidson's evidence was that this would accord with usual prudent practice because the lenders may require amendments to the transfer documents. Further, the evidence is clear that in relation to the Charge and Option Agreement Messrs Gardner Weller were acting for Firstway, and Messrs Joelson Wilson were acting for Claremont and Beach.

In relation to the SCAFA Mr Bateman became aware on 28 April, 2 May and 8 June of proposals that Spargos make a loan to Claremont, which Claremont would on-lend to Beach, to enable Beach to acquire Burbank. He said he has been shown the document which purports to be a facsimile dated 9 June 1989 addressed to him from Mr Cummings, which he did not receive nor discuss with him. There are no file notes or time sheets, which refer to it. He has found no copy of it on ATRK's files and, on its face, the document does not bear any indicia of being sent by facsimile transmission. He maintained his denial of the receipt of this facsimile transmission, which denial I accept.

On 15 June 1989 a new file was opened, which recorded the time spent advising
Spargos on 8 June 1989 in relation to the proposed loan to Claremont. At the time of opening the file he did not believe that ATRK was, or would be, acting on the proposed further loan from Claremont to Beach, "let alone on the purchase by Beach of Burbank".

Time is recorded on the file, being a telephone conversation on 22 June 1989, but he did not remember the substance of it or with whom it took place.

On 3 July 1989 Mr Cummings telephoned Mr Bateman and, at the commencement of the conversation, mentioned Burbank and referred to loans. Mr Bateman said he did not understand the transactions to which he was referring and asked what loans he was talking about, to which Mr Cummings replied a loan from
Enterprise to Spargos and from Spargos to Beach. Mr Cummings continued that Mr
Winby was threatening to resign because he was concerned at being involved as a director of Enterprise in a lending to Beach, and that Mr Winby had said that that used all Enterprise's remaining funds and he did not hold an expectation of short term recovery of them. Mr Cummings asked Mr Bateman to give the matter some thought and telephone Mr Winby. Mr Bateman created a file note of the conversation and later, on 3 July 1989, conferred with Messrs
Ferguson, Thomas and Willcock and recorded his attendance on the file note. On July 1989 Mr Fuller telephoned him and said that Mr Cummings and he had resolved that Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic lend money to Beach for the purpose of financing the acquisition of Burbank; that Beach had acquired
Burbank; that Mr Winby thought that if the funds were applied Enterprise and
Spargos may not be able to meet their commitments; that in fact he thought they would be enhanced; and that he was prepared to consider resignation later if Mr Winby's prediction came true. Mr Fuller also said that Mr Winby's resignation would severely prejudice the application to Standard Chartered. Mr
Bateman asked what that was to which Mr Fuller replied that Spargos and
Enterprise were borrowing from Standard Chartered. Later in the conversation
Mr Fuller told Mr Bateman that Mr Cummings and he had resolved to do the business; that Mr Main did the lending under power of attorney over the week- end; that Mr Winby had not authorised the transaction; and that any further directors' meeting was only to ratify what had happened.

Mr Bateman said to Mr Fuller that there may be conflicts of interest between the directors and, if there were, they should obtain independent legal advice.
He said that as ATRK were acting for Spargos, whatever advice was given to one director had to be equally available to all others and, accordingly, the advice ATRK gave to Mr Winby should be equally available to Mr Fuller and any other director. He continued:- "The prime advice is that if the director does not feel that what was done was proper, the director should resign. This is the safest course to avoid personal liability on the part of the director. If the director is not prepared to resign, then he must, at the very least, oppose any resolution passed to ratify what had happened and he should insist on his opposition being recorded in the minutes of the meeting. Having opposed the ratification resolution the director should consider resigning in any event. If the director continued on as a director and did not resign (despite our advice) the director could still trip up and incur personal liability because there are ongoing duties. In relation to those ongoing duties, it may be that the director should advise the CAC of any breaches of law of which he is aware or use his powers under the articles to convene an EGM and propose a resolution such as a vote of no confidence in one or more of the directors or seek to appoint a provisional liquidator to preserve the position of the company or seek a declaration that an unauthorised or improper payment was made." 
Later, on 4 July 1989, Mr Bateman had a meeting with Mr Ferguson and Mr
Willcock and discussed the matter with them. He telephoned Mr Winby and informed him of the advice he had given to Mr Fuller about the duties owed by directors, and received a facsimile from Mr Cummings headed "Board Stability", which suggested that because of the advice no resignations were imminent.

On 10 July 1989 Mr Cummings telephoned Mr Bateman and told him that it was necessary to document the loans made by Enterprise, Jingellic and Spargos to
Beach. He said he would like to discuss with Mr Bateman the question of directors' duties in relation to those loans and that he was thinking of the bona fides of and benefit to each of the lenders. He also said he wanted to discuss the period of repayment and the security to be taken for those loans and wished to have a meeting. This was held on 12 July 1989, during which Mr
Cummings said that he wanted ATRK to act for Spargos on the loan to Beach by the consortium of Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic and to prepare the necessary documentation. He continued:- "The deal has already been done. Sheldon Cordell is acting for Beach. I have not got any documents from him to give you yet. Beach legally and beneficially acquired the total issued capital of Mazeley Limited which in turn owns one hundred per cent of Burbank Petroleum Co which is the beneficial owner of forty seven per cent of the North Burbank Unit and six per cent of the South Burbank Unit." 
Mr Bateman asked what had happened to Meridian, which he thought had an option over Burbank, and Mr Cummings told him that that had expired on 16 June 1989 and that Meridian was not proceeding but was looking at another venture. Mr
Bateman said that the lenders should have security over all parts of the chain, including the shares in Burbank Petroleum and that he needed to know the status of the assets comprising Burbank, to which Mr Cummings replied that he would get all the information from Mr Cordell, identify all the parts of the chain over which the consortium could take security, and that he would like to explain to Mr Bateman the commercial justification for what each of the companies had done. Mr Cummings said that Jingellic could take the view that gold was not a good thing to be in for the next two years; that its
Australian Dollar loan to Rahn & Bodmer was at low interest rates and could be better invested; that interest rates would stay high in Australia for two years; that the Australian Dollar would fall from US75 cents to US70 cents over the coming year; that oil/gas were appreciating assets; and that if
Jingellic lent in US Dollars to Beach payable in two years at twenty two per cent, and did not hedge, and took security over an asset worth more than
US$28m consisting of oil and gas interests in the USA, it had the best of all worlds. Mr Cummings continued that Beach could take the view that it had not been able to borrow externally to acquire Burbank; that this was an opportunity which could not be missed; that it could repay early to get out of high interest rates; and that it could hedge its borrowing. He said that
Enterprise could take the view that its position was the same as Jingellic; and that it wished lend to A$4m short term for 180 days and A$3.9m longer for days. In relation to Spargos he said that it could take the same position as Jingellic; that pursuant to its view about gold, it had already taken a position in Claremont, via Petrogulf, and Meridian on the oil side, and that a balanced asset portfolio had been pursued; and that it would be back to back for its loans from Jingellic and Enterprise. He also said that in relation to
Spargos it was the syndicate head and received $100,000 for itself; that it would, by putting the syndicate together, get a representative on the field management committee so as to further its oil/gas involvement; and that it lent its own A$2.355m short term because it may need the money soon.

Mr Bateman said that during this part of the conversation he said "little or nothing" and that the commercial explanation Mr Cummings gave to him "appeared to be reasonable". Mr Cummings continued that the end result would be that
Jingellic would lend Spargos $4.275m for two years; that Enterprise's loan to
Spargos of $4m was for 180 days, but that its loan to Spargos of a further $3.9m was for two years; that Spargos on-lent to Beach the two sums it borrowed from Enterprise and Jingellic for two years; and that Spargos also lent to Beach for 180 days the $4m Spargos borrowed from Enterprise for that period plus Spargos' own $2.35m.

Mr Cummings told Mr Bateman that Spargos was the mortgagee and set out the terms on which the loans were to be repaid, and the information he had from Mr
Cordell and Mr Main as to loans, purchase price, "and the like", which Mr
Bateman recorded.

On 13 July 1989 Mr Bateman opened a new file entitled "Spargos Mining re
Beach" relating to Mr Cummings' instructions to document the loan by, and the security being given to, "Spargos as agent for it, Enterprise and Jingellic".
On 13 July 1989 he had a telephone conversation with Mr Cummings in which Mr
Cummings said that he was still talking to Mr Cordell and Mr Main about the transaction and the parts of the chain over which security could be taken. Mr
Bateman knew Mr Cordell was from Messrs Joelson Wilson, who were acting on behalf of Beach in relation to the purchase of Burbank, and he believed that firm was acting for Beach on the borrowings.

On 21 July 1989 Mr Bateman received a facsimile transmission from Mr Cordell and reviewed, for the first time, copies of the Charge and Option Agreement, the Notice of Exercise of Option and the two side letters provided to him by
Mr Cummings. These documents were prepared by Messrs Joelson Wilson. He sought to ascertain and identify the legal nature of the property, which had been acquired directly and indirectly by Beach, and whether Beach was in a position to give security to Spargos over it. He required the information so that he could document the loan and obtain appropriate security for Spargos. Later, on July 1989, he had a telephone conversation with Mr Cummings in which he raised certain concerns, which Mr Cummings said he would take up with Mr
Cordell and that there were certain matters he, Mr Cummings, wanted to be taken into account in drawing up the loan documentation. After 21 July 1989 Mr
Cummings undertook no professional work in relation to the documentation of the loan and securities except for the perusal of the documents on 11 August for thirty minutes.

Mr Bateman set forth the extent to which he had undertaken any legal work for companies in the Group, and stressed that he did not regard any of the companies "either collectively or in groups", but "as a single client" whose instructions he assessed separately. He was the principal point of contact at
ATRK, who carried out various legal work for companies in the Group. He said that between 1 January 1988 and 31 December 1990 neither Beach nor Claremont named ATRK as its solicitors in any of its annual reports and, during the same period, ATRK never received a standard audit letter from Beach. Audit letters are normally issued by each public company in Australia at the request of its auditors, to each of the firms of solicitors who provide legal services to it.
He knew Mr Cummings had been a partner of Messrs Baker O'Loughlin and had given advice to one or more of the companies as consultant before becoming a director and that Messrs Baker O'Loughlin, through other partners, continued to advise one or more of the companies in the Group.

Commencing at paragraph 76 of his witness statement of 9 September 1997 Mr
Bateman said that during 1985 and 1986 discussions took place between him, Mr
Fuller and other directors in relation to re-structuring CGMA, Enterprise,
IRL, Jingellic and Southern Gold Mines. In March 1987 Mr Greenham became a director of each of those companies and under his directorship one or more made rights issues, borrowed money and acquired shares in other companies.
ATRK had little or no involvement in those transactions before they were undertaken, an exception being when it acted for IRL in relation to its takeover bid for Cortaus, which closed on 29 October 1989 and resulted in IRL holding seventy seven per cent of the issued share capital of Cortaus.

Prior to June 1988 Moage, Petrogulf and IRAG had acquired shares in Claremont.
ATRK did not act for anyone in relation to any of those proposed acquisitions, and Mr Bateman only became aware of them after they had occurred.

After October 1988 Claremont's position arose from time to time in his consideration of a restructuring of the companies, because it was a proposed target for a bid, being the owner of substantial oil and gas assets, either directly or through its subsidiary Beach. At the end of 1988 there were fifteen companies listed on ASX, which were potentially and logically subject to restructuring. Mr Bateman said that "by restructuring" he meant:- ".. changing the relationship of those companies with a view to having nearly all of them become wholly-owned subsidiaries of just a few of them which would remain listed on the Stock Exchange." 
He received instructions from October 1988 to May 1989 on this topic from
Messrs Fuller and Cummings and he considered two broad proposals of which there were many variations and refinements. The proposals involved restructuring the companies so as to have two listed companies, one of which would hold the shares in each of the companies whose main undertaking was gold mining, and the other of which would hold the shares in each of the companies whose main undertaking was oil and gas exploration and production. The second proposal involved having one listed company which would have, as wholly owned subsidiaries, not only the gold mining companies but also the companies whose main activities were oil and gas exploration and production.

Commencing at paragraph 83 Mr Bateman dealt with the purchase by Petrogulf from FAI on 15 January 1988 of 16.2 per cent of the issued share capital of
Claremont. The purchase price was $14.5m paid by Petrogulf on 22 June 1988.
Between June 1988 and November 1988 the NCSC conducted an inquiry in relation to that acquisition and, on 16 November 1988, advised that it believed there had been contraventions of the Takeovers Code and the Companies Code. On 25
November 1988 Mr Bateman wrote on behalf of Petrogulf explaining that there had been no breach of s.11 of the Takeovers Code, or of the substantial shareholding provisions of the Companies Code and, on 5 December 1988 and 6
January 1989, he had direct negotiations at the office of the NCSC, which resulted in an agreement to settle on terms. No settlement was ultimately concluded and no proceedings were ever commenced by the NCSC. By December 1988 the key elements of the proposed settlement were a bid for Claremont, a bid for Moage, the extension of the current bid by Inspar for Petrogulf and a declaration that it was free of prescribed conditions.

Mr Bateman said each of those elements was consistent with the restructuring he had been considering, because if Inspar acquired one hundred per cent of
Petrogulf, and the bidders for each of Claremont and Moage acquired one hundred per cent of each of those companies, a significant amount of the restructuring would have been effected, and, between November 1988 and May , he considered various methods of restructuring involving a first "wave" of bids, which included the key elements of the proposed NCSC settlement, followed by a second and subsequent "waves" of bids, the objective being to achieve a restructuring which, as well as satisfying the requirements of the proposed NCSC settlement, would result in one entity controlling all, or many of, the companies.

On 16 December 1988 Mr Cummings informed Mr Bateman that Mr Greenham, Mr
Bailey, Ms Kahl and others had died in a plane crash and that, as a result, there was an insufficient number of Australian directors on the Boards of some of the companies. Mr Bateman said that subject to his managing partner agreeing, he would be prepared to be appointed as a director to fill any casual vacancies where there was a lack of a quorum of Australian directors "until things are sorted out" and, on 16 December 1988, he was appointed a director of a number of the companies. He did not recall participating, as a director, in any decision, let alone a decision relating to the substantive operations of those companies, and he was uncertain "about the identity of all of the companies to which I had been appointed". He said he did not think he had been appointed to the Boards of Spargos and Petrogulf, although it is very clear, and so much was admitted, that he was. Mr Bateman remained unclear about his appointment as a director of Spargos. He was never appointed as a director of Beach, Claremont, IRL, Meridian or Moage. On 10 January 1989 he consented to be appointed as a director of Inspar to enable it to execute properly the notice extending the bid for Petrogulf in accordance with the requirements of the proposed NCSC settlement and, on 14 February 1989, he resigned as a director of each of the companies.

In the early part of 1989 he spent a considerable period considering a proposed restructuring of the companies and, on 13 February 1989, he reviewed various material. On the morning of 14 February 1989 he received the memorandum dated 10 February 1989 from Mr Winby, together with a folder of other material. He said that he scanned the memorandum but did not read the other material. The memorandum did not relate to his role as a solicitor and seemed to relate to substantive matters, the responsibility for which lay with the directors. It did not lead him to be concerned about the solvency of any of the companies, but its broad content brought home to him that he had not resigned as a director: paragraph 95. He telephoned Mr Fuller and told him that the material looked like directors' "stuff"; that the directors should decide these things; that he was only appointed to "hold the fort"; and that he thought it was appropriate that he should stand down as a director, which he did. On 14 February 1989 he attended a meeting with Messrs Winby, Glossop,
Fuller and Cummings, during which Mr Winby spoke about the financial position of one or more of the companies, and Mr Fuller said that neither he nor Mr
Glossop had sufficient information about the oil and gas arm to appreciate the benefits arising from successful completion of the bids, particularly the bid for Claremont. Mr Bateman said that at no time during that meeting did he hear any person say that any deposits with Rahn & Bodmer were blocked, mortgaged in favour of some other entity, or not beneficially owned by the relevant depositor company. Nor did he read any document which told him that.
He said that at the conclusion of the meeting he left the folder and its contents, including Mr Winby's memorandum, on the table in the meeting room.
His evidence was that thereafter he did not have access to it or a copy of it.
He did not think that the material was relevant to the work being undertaken by ATRK and, later and following the meeting, he asked Mr Thomas to formalise his resignation from the companies to which he had been appointed "including those about which I was uncertain as to whether I was appointed".

On 15 February 1989 Mr Fuller said to Mr Bateman that there was to be a presentation at the Claremont office about an oil field known as Burbank, which Claremont or Beach was contemplating purchasing, and he suggested Mr
Bateman might be interested in attending. Mr Bateman expressed no interest but he did attend, and Mr Dene Rogers gave an explanation in the course of which he said:- "We estimate the value of the interest being looked at is between $22m and $30m." 
In view of the assessment Mr Rogers had made previously it is somewhat difficult to see how he could possibly have said that, but Mr Bateman was not challenged on this evidence.

On 21 February 1989 Mr Bateman met with Mr Winby and Mr Glossop and Mr Winby said there were four options in relation to restructuring. Firstly, there could be an injection of equity of $30m; secondly, the oil and gas arm could be sold off; thirdly, the Bellevue Gold Mine could be sold off; fourthly, there could be a borrowing of $130m, with $25m being required to service the borrowing and Beach could be sold with the principal being rolled over.

On 22 February 1989 Mr Bateman reviewed with Mr Ferguson the facilities being offered by ELFIC, which consisted of an offer to lend $77.07m to a consortium of Moage, Inspar and IRAG for the proposed bid for Claremont, an offer of $8.5m to Moage to discharge its loan from Westpac, an offer of $5.63m to a proposed new company called, for convenience, "Newco", for its proposed bid for Moage, and an offer of $9.8m to Newco for the proposed bid to IRL. The total proposed borrowing being offered by ELFIC was $101m.

On 22 February 1989, paragraph 107, Mr Bateman attended a meeting with Messrs
Fuller, Cordell, Main, Johnson, Winby, Glossop and Ferguson. He had not previously met Messrs Cordell or Main and had never spoken to Mr Main before.
He had had virtually no contact with Mr Cordell before and he had been introduced to Mr Johnson on one occasion in Perth in 1988. Mr Fuller said the purpose of the meeting was to consider the offers from ELFIC, to receive an update from Mr Winby and Mr Glossop on the financial position, and to consider the costs of the proposed bids. Mr Bateman explained the offers from ELFIC and various takeover bids and used the white board for that purpose. During the meeting, but at a later stage, Mr Main discussed refinancing options and a number of others discussed cash flow considerations. Mr Bateman did not understand some of the matters to which they were referring and did not consider it necessary for him to do so. At one stage he wrote various requirements on a white board as Mr Winby dictated them. At no time during the meeting "or at any other time" did he hear any person say that any deposits with Rahn & Bodmer were "blocked", mortgaged in favour of some other entity, or not beneficially owned by the relevant depositor company. Nor did he read any document which told him such a thing, nor write on the white board the word "blocked" nor see any other person write such a word. He was not present during the meeting "all the time" and nothing was required of him at its conclusion. He received no instructions to enable him to address an appropriate form of restructuring.

On 28 February 1989 he had a telephone conversation with Mr Cummings, who told him about an alternative method of restructuring, which he set forth in paragraph 112 of his statement, and he said that during March and April 1989 he continued to consider various forms of restructuring. On 28 April 1989, paragraph 114, Mr Bateman had a meeting with Mr Ferguson, who said that he, Mr
Ferguson, would like to review the instructions he received "yesterday" while
Mr Bateman was in Adelaide. Mr Ferguson said that Beach and Claremont would buy Mazeley, as to ninety per cent Beach and ten per cent Claremont for $30.3m, of which $11m has been paid by Beach and $16.1m was to be paid by it.
Beach would borrow $18.7m from Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic by way of a loan to Claremont, which would on-lend to Beach. Security would be taken over
Burbank, Jingellic and Enterprise which "will increase their shareholdings in
IRAG to provide commercial justification". Mr Ferguson said that Spargos,
Enterprise and Jingellic had funds held by Rahn & Bodmer, which would be instructed to settle on behalf of Beach to Mazeley. Beach would sell assets and repay $18.7m to Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic. Mr Ferguson also said that Enterprise and Jingellic were borrowing from ELFIC, as bridging finance, a sum equivalent to the moneys held on deposit by each of them at Rahn &
Bodmer "because these deposits cannot be called for forty five days". It is inconceivable, in my view, that Mr Bateman could have allowed this conversation to continue if he knew that the funds at Rahn & Bodmer were blocked, unless he was deliberately deceiving his partner. I do not consider he was.

On 2 May 1989 Mr Bateman had a further meeting with Mr Ferguson and created a record of his discussions on the white board and, later, on 2 May 1989, they were joined by Messrs Fuller or Cummings who said that Spargos would enter into an agreement to lend $16m to Claremont "to put itself in a good position in relation to Claremont for the future", and that Claremont would on-lend to
Beach to fund its purchase in Burbank. Mr Bateman said:- "Enterprise, Spargos, Claremont, Beach and the vendor will need to have a bank account in Switzerland, whether at Rahn & Bodmer or another bank, so that the flow of the funds from one bank account into another can be clearly recorded. This is in contrast to the notion of book entries arising from an assignment of a debt or chose in action such as can occur under s.11 of the Conveyancing Act." 
If Mr Bateman had been aware that Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic had no entitlement to money at Rahn & Bodmer, he could not have made this statement unless he was being deliberately misleading which, in my opinion, he was not.

Three print outs of the white board were made and Mr Bateman noted that Mr
Ferguson recorded at the foot of page 3:- "$5m on dep by Beach with ELFIC." 
Mr Bateman noted that that had not been recorded on the white board, and he said that he did not know the circumstances in which it was made. Nor could Mr
Ferguson remember.

In paragraph 122 Mr Bateman said that from May to October 1989, when acting in the manner which I have described in connection with the currency swap transactions, the Charge and Option Agreement and the SCAFA he believed that
Messrs Fuller, Cummings and Main were exercising their responsibilities as directors of Beach honestly and with reasonable care and diligence; that the management of Beach, and in particular Messrs Worthington, Hilton and Yue, were fully aware of the transactions and assisted in their implementation; that the management of Beach had satisfied themselves that those transactions were in the commercial interests of Beach; that the directors and management of Beach, including Beach's in-house counsel, were not relying on ATRK to provide advice concerning the transactions and had no reasonable expectation that ATRK would do so; that the transactions involved no fraud or questionable practice; and that the deposits at Rahn & Bodmer existed and were available to be used where appropriate.

In considering the evidence of Mr Main I have set forth most of the evidence in response to the allegations made by him. A further supplementary statement of Mr Bateman was filed on 21 October 1997, in which he said that prior to and during the period December 1988 to May 1989 he was involved in giving advice about possible ways of restructuring the relationships of a number of companies listed on ASX; that he considered various ways of doing that and, in particular, two proposals; viz that the proposed financier for the first wave of bids was to be ELFIC; and that as he understood it his advice about restructuring was being provided at the level "of theoretical planning". He said that so far as he was aware he was "merely considering and discussing various potential proposals and combinations of possible events", and that he considered the client to be the management company, CMS, to which all memoranda of fees were rendered. He said it was necessary to consider the position of the various companies and the overall changes in shareholding relationships but, so far as he was concerned, actual representation of any particular entity would fall for consideration "only if and when any particular transaction was likely to be implemented".

He said he heard of Burbank on three occasions prior to 21 April 1989, namely on 15 February 1989 when Mr Rogers made his presentation; on 22 February 1989 during the meeting when Burbank was described as an asset worth $50m and as contributing $12m per annum to the oil and gas cash flow; and on 2 March 1989 when he was instructed by Mr David Fleming, the managing director of Meridian,
Mr Main, a director of Meridian, and Mr Cordell, the solicitor for Meridian, to advise on a number of matters in relation to it, including aspects of a transaction recorded in an unexecuted document called Option Agreement between it and Firstway. That document suggested Meridian had paid $4.5m to acquire an option to purchase a 19.6 per cent interest in Firstway.

He said the possible acquisition of Burbank was mentioned to him on 21 April , when he was given instructions by Mr Cummings, in the presence of Mr
Main and Mr Johnson, to include Burbank as an asset and source of income available for security to FAI when providing the proposed Put Option to ELFIC.
At that meeting he was told of the proposed sale of the assets of Claremont and Beach as an element in the arrangement proposed between ELFIC, FAI and the consortium and, on 28 April 1989, Mr Ferguson gave him instructions, which he,
Mr Ferguson, had received on 27 April 1989.

On 2 May 1989 Mr Bateman discussed with Mr Ferguson whether it would be appropriate for Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic to lend to Beach in relation to the acquisition of Burbank, and Mr Ferguson told him that ATRK's instructions were that the acquisition of Burbank would improve Beach's assets.

At the meeting on 2 May 1989 with Messrs Ferguson, Fuller and Cummings, Mr
Bateman decided there were reasons for saying to Messrs Clayton Utz that there would be no contravention of s.129 of the Companies Code in consequence of the proposed lending by Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic via Claremont to Beach to acquire Burbank; the proposal that Burbank be offered as security to
Spargos, which was the holding company of Inspar; the proposal that Burbank also be offered as security to ELFIC or FAI for any loan ELFIC made to the consortium; or any use that might be made of proceeds of sale of other assets of Beach to repay any loan from ELFIC. He said that after the meeting on 2 May he had no idea whether Beach would proceed with the acquisition of
Burbank, and he did not hear about the matter again until 8 June 1989 when he had a one hour conference with Mr Cummings during which Mr Cummings told him that Jingellic and Enterprise were proposing to lend money to Spargos in connection with the proposed acquisition by Beach of Burbank. Mr Cummings also said Mr Cordell was acting for Beach in relation to the Burbank acquisition.

He did not hear again of the Burbank transaction "until possibly on 22 June and then not until 3 July 1989 and 4 July 1989" when he was told "the deal had been done over the week-end". He said Mr Cummings told him on 12 July that ATRK would be requested to prepare the documentation for the loans.

On 21 June 1989 he received a facsimile transmission from Mr Cummings and, some time after that, he spoke to him and told him he had not found any facsimile transmission of 9 June 1989 and asked whether Mr Cummings was sure he had sent it. Mr Cummings told him not to worry if he had not received it.

In paragraph 19 Mr Bateman said he did not know or believe that Mr Johnson was a shadow director of, or exercised any control over, IRL or any other company listed on ASX. He said that some time prior to the meeting on 22 February 1989
Mr Fuller had asked him to put aside some time for discussions on the restructuring on 22 and 23 February 1989 as Mr Johnson, Mr Cordell and Mr Main were coming from London and may be able to assist with overseas financing and placement of shares or financing and restructuring.

In November 1990 Mr Bateman had a conversation with Mr Cummings about fees when Mr Cummings suggested that some $17,000 should be passed on to Beach. Mr
Bateman told him that was "stretching it" and that he could not see how any fees were payable by Beach as the account was in respect of restructuring work and work on bids "particularly the bid by the consortium for Claremont". There was some discussion about a division of the fees between various companies.

Mr Bateman's oral evidence commenced at Tp.477. He gave oral evidence in chief of a discussion with Mr Winby and Mr Glossop. I have referred to this and to
Mr Glossop's affidavit in reply, which denied the substance of the conversation, a denial which was not challenged.

Cross-examination commenced at Tp.482. Mr Bateman was taken to a file opened for Beach on 22 November 1988, which was concerned with certain events on 22
November 1988, including advice given by Mr Bateman before the Annual General
Meeting of Beach and his attendance at that meeting. He was told that the meeting was about to occur, that Mr Lobban and Mr Kolm were due to retire as directors, and that Mr Fuller was of the view that they should not be re- elected. He said he gave advice in relation to the wording of the Articles in respect of directors not being re-elected and, subsequently, those gentlemen did not stand for re-election. Prior to receiving that advice he had been told that Mr Lobban and Mr Kolm were putting forward the view that they should stay on the Board "to protect the interests of minority shareholders" as the justification for doing so. Mr Bateman denied that the gravamen of his instructions was to assist Mr Fuller to ensure that they were not re-elected, but rather he said he gave advice to Mr Fuller as to the interpretation of the
Articles, although he would not agree that his function was to assist Mr
Fuller to ensure that Mr Lobban and Mr Kolm, who, he was told, were asserting that they wished to protect the interests of the minority shareholders of
Beach, were not re-elected. He did not recall Mr Fuller saying to him, although a note to this effect is included in his diary note, that Mr Lobban and Mr Kolm were contemplating releasing a statement saying that IRL "will rape, pillage and plunder" Beach.

He agreed the diary note was wrongly dated 22 October 1988 and he agreed it recorded the words "their usefulness has expired" in reference to Mr Lobban and Mr Kolm. He had also recorded that they wished to stay "to protect interests of minority shareholders" and "they intend to release a statement saying IRL will rape, pillage and plunder". He said Mr Fuller said that these matters were being put forward to justify their re-election. Mr Bateman agreed
Mr Fuller said that he did not want Mr Lobban and Mr Kolm re-elected to the
Board of Beach, but he denied it was because they were seeking to protect the interests of the minority shareholders, but rather that this statement was made in the context of their justification for not being replaced.

Mr Bateman agreed he perused the Articles of Association of Beach for forty five minutes to prepare himself to attend its Annual General Meeting on the same day. He understood he was attending "on behalf of Beach" in relation to meeting procedures, and he gave the advice to ensure that the correct procedures were adopted. He agreed he gave advice in the context of Mr
Fuller's not wishing to have Mr Lobban and Mr Kolm re-elected, and he expected
Mr Fuller to be chairman of the meeting when the vote for the re-election of
Mr Lobban arose, and he said he was advising Beach, in the guise of Mr Fuller, as the proposed chairman for that part of the meeting on procedures.

At Tp.491 he said it had not been his experience during 1988 that IRL had "been plundering other companies in the IRL Group", although he said it was his understanding that those words were being used by them to justify their re-election. At Tp.493 Mr Bateman was asked, in very clear terms, what he understood the words "rape, pillage and plunder" to mean, and he said it was unclear to him, which seemed a strange answer, and then he said he understood them, in a company context, to mean there may be situations where people were accused of misusing the company's assets and there may be elements of oppression of minority, and it could even be worse than that. He agreed there had been complaints of oppression of minorities in Enterprise in late 1988 relating to a preference share issue made by IRL and taken up as to some $12m by Enterprise. That provoked criticism and complaint of oppression by the minority shareholders in Enterprise, the gravamen of which was that the money was paid to IRL, so that it might reduce its then indebtedness to ACC. Mr
Bateman did not connect any issue arising out of the IRL preference shares with the concept of "plunder". He denied that he had recently invented the argument of advising Beach in relation to company procedures.

At Tp.495 he was asked whether during 1988 the IRL Group "was in a lot of strife", and he said that was not a fair description of each company's position, some being in a good position and others not. His impression was that Enterprise was in a good position, and he did not believe it was under investigation by the NCSC.

He said he believed that in 1988 Enterprise gave a guarantee to ELFIC in relation to the finance facility that it provided to Petrogulf to assist in the acquisition by Petrogulf of a parcel of shares in Claremont. He also agreed that during 1988 and 1989 he was acting in relation to attempts being made to settle with the NCSC enquiries they were conducting in relation to the acquisition of shares from FAI in Claremont in January 1988. The settlement was negotiated, initially, by Mr A.H. Goldberg of Queen's Counsel and, thereafter, Mr Bateman entered into the negotiations in about December 1988.
He was not able to recall any problem with any guarantee given by Enterprise to ELFIC in relation to the purchase of the FAI parcel of shares in 1988, although his recollection was that a matter came up at the Annual General
Meeting of Enterprise, which was held in December 1988, pursuant to a shareholders' letter, which had been circulated prior to it. His recollection was that the complaint was that the guarantee should not have been given, but that it had not been called on, so that to that extent the use of the word "plunder" did not accord with his memory because there was only a contingent liability. He said the complaint was that there was insufficient benefit for
Enterprise, notwithstanding some sort of fee it was paid, for giving that guarantee, that ATRK amended the Articles to enable the preference share issue, and that from IRL's point of view he thought its purpose was to raise money for IRL to repay ACC.

At Tp.499 Mr Bateman said Mr Thomas was an employed solicitor of ATRK working under the supervision of several partners, including himself, that he was a senior practitioner and had been a partner in another firm before joining
ATRK. Mr Thomas worked with Mr Bateman from time to time in the corporate section, which considered primarily takeovers, company meetings, and commercial advice. He said Mr David Ferguson was the firm's mergers and acquisition expert together with him.

At Tp.500 Mr Bateman agreed that the IRL Group was an important group of clients to ATRK and represented his biggest client during 1988 and into 1989.
They were clients he wished to keep until late 1989, and he and Mr Ferguson worked closely together on their matters during 1988 and the first half of .

Mr Bateman agreed Mr Thomas was acting in relation to the issue by IRL of the preference shares and that it was possible he was told during 1988 that the purpose was to raise approximately $40m for IRL. He said it was quite likely, but he could not recall, that he was told during 1988 that capital raised in that manner was for the retirement of the ACC debt. He said a major issue was the failure to have a meeting of shareholders of Enterprise to approve its taking up $12m worth of preference shares, which led to its suspension on 1
June 1989.

He said he became a director of Enterprise on 16 December 1988, and he was asked whether he became a director of Spargos on the same date and he said he believed so "but I was unclear on that question about Spargos". The fact he became a director was admitted on the pleadings. He became a director of
Jingellic, Asia Oil and Minerals, CGMA, Cortaus and Southern Goldfields on the same date and, on 10 January 1989, of Inspar. He agreed that at that date
Inspar was proceeding with the takeover of Petrogulf and that he resigned from
Spargos by notice dated 14 February 1989.

Mr Bateman was asked about signing resolutions of the Board of Directors of
Spargos as a director and he said he may have, but he did not recollect. He was then shown a number of copy circular resolutions, i.e. resolutions forwarded to various directors for signing in lieu of a meeting and, in respect of one, he said it appeared to be his signature, in respect of another he said he thought it was his signature, and in respect of a third he said he had serious doubts that he had signed it. He said the subject matter of the last mentioned document purporting to bear his signature was "foreign" to him, and that there were few occasions on which, as far as he could recall, he was ever asked to undertake a directorial decision in the form of a resolution being signed or a meeting being held. He said he took his role as a director seriously and, so far as he could recall, there were very few occasions on which he was called upon to exercise those duties by having matters brought to his attention, or to make decisions. He did not familiarise himself with the affairs of the companies, although he said he was "generally familiar" with the content of some annual reports of companies which had just held Annual
General Meetings and, in other cases, he had "an understanding that matters were as yet unclear as to the financial position of those companies and that information was being prepared".

He was shown further copy resolutions and, in respect of one, he said he remembered signing it and then, in relation to certain documents, he said he believed the signature was not his essentially because the material in the resolutions was foreign to him and he did not recall being involved in it. He said, Tp.507, that the signatures looked like his, but he was unaware how they were placed on the documents, and then he said he believed that all of them "have been placed on the document without my authority by some means. I do not know how". He added he could not recall signing a certain document.

Mr Bateman, after being shown a number of copy documents, said that he was unaware how his signature, which he seemed to accept the signature was, came to be on the circular resolutions, and:- "But I did not sign the original of those documents of which these purport to be copies. That's my belief." 
He added that it may be his signature which, by some method of transposition, was placed on the document. He said that it went further than saying that where he could not recall the transaction he concluded it was not his signature, and continued that he believed that he could not have signed the documents as the topics "are completely foreign to me and, therefore, it is not possible": Tp.509. He made an exception in relation to the appointment of
Ms O'Halloran as company secretary in December 1988. This evidence had some ring of unreality about it, particularly when, in relation to Spargos, there was a note that it was only necessary for three directors to sign. It became more unusual when the originals of the documents were produced, to which I shall refer.

Mr Bateman became a director of Inspar on 10 January 1989, on which date he was aware there was an outstanding takeover offer that Inspar had made for
Petrogulf in 1988. He knew the terms of the offer and he said that in 1988, when it first started, he was familiar with it. He was asked whether he recalled, when he was appointed a director of Inspar, that the source of consideration to meet acceptances was $6m said to be on deposit at call by
Spargos with ACC and he replied, Tp.511, that he did not recall what he knew or believed as at that date. He said he was not very familiar with the Part A
Statement in the second half of 1988, and although he participated in the preparation of the Part B Statement there were other solicitors who were doing "the bulk of the work".

He knew the NCSC required the extension of the offer as part of the settlement which had been negotiated and he said he believed Inspar had arranged for money to be available to meet acceptances, but he did not turn his mind to exactly how that was to happen when he became a director. He denied that he knew there was no money at ACC in the name of Spargos to provide that funding.

Mr Bateman was then shown a letter dated 11 January 1989 from ATRK signed by
Mr Ferguson, which was addressed to Petrogulf and marked for his attention. It enclosed a document entitled "Notice of Variation of Offer" dated 10 January , which he had signed. He said, Tp.514, he did not think it related to the
Part A Statement, but to the offer, although he was then referred to its being a modification to the Part A Statement. He said he took his duties seriously, that he knew the offer had been running for a long time and that the takeover documentation was being handled by others within ATRK on behalf of Petrogulf.
He had a general understanding of the bid and he once again denied that he knew there was no longer any money at ACC to fund acceptances. However, when asked about his belief as to the source of funds for the takeover, he said it was that Inspar "would have made provision in some form as to funding for the bid, otherwise it would never have launched the bid". He was pressed as to the source of his understanding and he said the offeror must produce evidence, usually on a confidential basis, to the Corporate Affairs Commission as to the funding.

Mr Bateman was shown a copy of a letter dated 6 February 1989 addressed to Mr
Ferguson to which was annexed a document headed "Notice of Variation of Offer by Inspar" signed by him and Mr Cummings. He agreed he signed the document, but he said he did not think it was correct that it was not proposed to comply with s.27(11) of the Companies Code "come what may" even though that letter said so. He denied he was involved in giving any such instructions to Messrs
Baker O'Loughlin from whom the letter emanated, but he assumed the resolution to extend the offer was made in consultation with him. He did not "particularly" recall it and he saw no reason to doubt that it was appropriate. He denied he was privy to a decision not to comply with s.27(11) "under any circumstances", and that he knew the $6m was no longer available to be used and, at Tp.517, he repeated he had doubts as to whether he was a director of Spargos. He denied it was in deep financial difficulty in January , although he said he was familiar "to some degree" with the financial position of some of the companies whose annual reports he had seen, but in the case of others, where such reports had not been finalised, financial information was not available.

He said, Tp.517, that in mid January 1989 he was involved in considerations of restructuring but that the word "refinance" was not "compatible with" his understanding of what he was doing, and that it was "humanly possible" to consider restructuring without at the same time considering refinance of a group of companies. He said the financial considerations to which he had regard were the amount of money that would be required to fund takeover bids by a number of companies or by Newco, which was the name given to a company to be formed. That was his primary area of financial consideration and other issues were the ability to repay the proposed borrowing by means particularly of discharge of any indebtedness. He gave as an example that if a large sum was to be offered by ELFIC to a proposed bidder and the bid were to be made, then the target shareholders would receive the consideration offered in the bid. He said that if, having received that consideration, those companies were able by means of discharge of pre-existing debt to repay other companies, which were then indebted to ELFIC, that would obviously be of relevance in his considerations. In that way money could be moved from one company to another and back to ELFIC, although he said that that was not his understanding of "refinance". He said refinancing was taking existing financial facilities and discharging them by means of a new financial facility: Tp.519. The financial re-arrangements of which he was speaking he described as "restructuring".

The aim of the restructuring was to take fifteen companies listed on ASX and reduce that number to as few as possible by a series of takeovers, the benefit of the process being that there would be more focus given to one listed company, which would be more attractive from an investment point of view, as distinct from fifteen separate entities listed on ASX. There would also be considerable savings in costs and fees and the capacity to borrow money in a more effective manner. He denied that it was germane to the restructuring analysis to ensure that control of the new structure was to remain in the hands of Mr Johnson and he was then asked what he meant in a diagram he prepared headed "Overseas Controllers - Seventy Per Cent". He said that was one "scenario", but the overseas controllers "did not exist", which he explained by adding "in the sense that they were formalised as to who was going to be in that position".

He said that when his notes were typed up they were furnished to ELFIC because "we were having" discussions with it concerning the proposal. Messrs Clayton
Utz were the solicitors acting for ELFIC and had contributed "similar ideas" in relation to the restructuring. He also said that possibly Messrs Fuller and
Cummings received a copy, and that the purpose of the overseas controller was "just the structure to demonstrate tax effectiveness. It didn't serve any particular purpose beyond that": Tp.522.

Mr Bateman agreed that he knew Mr Johnson was coming for a meeting on 22
February 1989, a few days or perhaps a week at the most before that date. He had heard of him before that and remembered meeting him some time in 1988. Mr
Bateman denied that as at 12 January 1989 he was aware the IRL Group was in deep financial difficulty and that it had been under investigation from the
NCSC throughout 1988 and leading up to and including January 1989. He added that to say that the Group was under investigation did not accord with his understanding. He recognised particular enquiries the NCSC had made, including a particular complaint by it in relation to the acquisition from Petrogulf of the shares in Claremont from FAI.

Mr Bateman said his impression, in relation to restructuring, was of benefit "overall" and that "this" was desirable. He envisaged various "waves" of bids, and he said that beyond that the other companies were not in the front line of the wave "so it may not have been important to them". He agreed that the details of the proposed restructuring, as formulated and discussed by him with
ELFIC, were of the highest order of confidentiality so far as the companies in the IRL Group were concerned, but he denied Mr Johnson was coming from England to give instructions in relation to the proposed restructure. He was told the purpose of the visit of Messrs Johnson, Main and Cordell included discussing the proposed restructure of the IRL Group and he agreed, Tp.525, that he welcomed them into the confidence which surrounded the proposed restructure of the Group, but he denied he did so because he knew full well that Mr Johnson was the overseas controller. He said he understood that they may be able to assist on two levels, firstly, in relation to finding finance for the restructuring bids, and secondly, in relation to introducing equity investors.

At Tp.527 Mr Bateman was shown the original signatures on a number of the resolutions he had been shown earlier, and he was asked whether he felt any need to change any of his evidence about them. He said his perception had always been, until he was shown those documents, that he did not embark on any material matters as a director. He said it was also his belief that those transactions were quite foreign to him, and that he did not recollect any of them being discussed. He said it was possible that he signed minutes, but it did not accord with his understanding and came as a great surprise to him that the documents recorded transactions "which are quite foreign to me". He was pressed as to whether the signatures were his original signatures and he said, in respect of one document, that the signature appeared to be his, but that there was confusion in his mind because he did not recall being involved in any such decisions. He said that on the other hand it was clearly an original signature "which looks like mine".

Although Mr Bateman agreed the signature was original writing he said there was a residual doubt as to whether he had signed the document, which "only" arose because the subject matter was foreign to him and it was not consistent with what he believed "until now". His evidence about the signatures struck me as somewhat odd. I have reflected carefully on it. I am of the view that Mr
Bateman gave deep consideration to the matter, but, as he could not recall the subject matter of the minutes, could not rationalise that he had signed them.
I am satisfied that this considered approach does not impinge adversely on his credit. Rather it shows an almost painstaking care. I have dealt with the matter at some length because it provided a basis for an overall attack on Mr
Bateman's credit. Having done so I have come to the conclusion I have just expressed.

At Tp.533 Mr Bateman said that Mr Cummings asked him to send documents to Mr
Cordell in London in September or October 1989, which he did. He was shown a letter dated 24 October 1989 from Mallesons to ATRK marked for the attention of Mr Thomas, Mr Ferguson and himself, and he agreed the documents specified in that letter were sent to Mr Cordell, but denied the purpose was so they would be lost. He was referred to undertakings given by Spargos to Mallesons in a letter dated 24 October 1989 "to hold intact such information as returned to us in accordance with your request", and he said he was aware of that when he caused the documents to be sent to Mr Cordell, which action he took because
Mr Cummings "told you to". He said the purpose of doing so was because he was instructed "they would be received and that I was to send them on to Cordell".
He agreed the documents revealed the proposals that were put to Standard
Chartered, but he denied that proposal named Mr Johnson as the controller of the IRL Group. He said he did not ask why the documents were sent to Mr
Cordell, although he added that Mr Cordell was, to his knowledge, a solicitor acting for IRL, Spargos and other companies. He denied he was aware Mr Cordell was Mr Johnson's solicitor or that Mr Johnson and Mr Main were the overseas controllers of the IRL Group. Prima facie his actions in this regard were strange. It is difficult to understand why he would send documents out of the country in the light of the undertaking which had been given. However, I accept that he did so on instructions, and I do not consider he was a party to any conspiracy to have the documents destroyed or lost if that is what happened to them. As with several matters raised with Mr Bateman the matter was not taken any further. It was not suggested that the documents were lost or destroyed, or that the regulatory authorities called for them but they were not produced, or that Mallesons sought their return unsuccessfully. For all the evidence disclosed they may have been returned to Mallesons. I am not satisfied that any adverse inference should be drawn against Mr Bateman in relation to this matter.

Mr Bateman agreed, Tp.535, that he received a copy of a memorandum signed by
Mr Winby dated 10 February 1989, which document was made the subject of an order for particular discovery, pursuant to which order he made an affidavit.
He denied he considered the document very carefully upon receipt, but he agreed the document MFI 2 appeared to be a copy of what he received, being the document which was exhibited to an affidavit he swore pursuant to the order for particular discovery. It subsequently became Exhibit W. He denied he was aware, upon receipt of that memorandum, that arrangements had been made for financial information to be provided to him about the then financial condition of the companies in the IRL Group and he said he was surprised by the documents. He observed the memorandum was addressed to Mr Fuller, Mr Cummings and himself and that there was a reference of a copy to Messrs Main and
Johnson. He saw the subject was "next Tuesday's meeting". He agreed a large number of documents comprised the memorandum, but he said financial information was not relevant to the instructions he had at the time and the contents of the memorandum did not accord with his understanding of what the meeting of 14 February 1989 was to be about, "which was restructuring". He denied he looked at the memorandum very carefully, but said there was a superficial scanning quite quickly and that the material "was foreign to what
I understood was the purpose of the meeting" and that it was inconsistent with how he viewed himself as a solicitor. He was surprised and telephoned Mr
Fuller and complained that what he had received was "directors' stuff" and that he would be resigning forthwith, which he did. He denied that when he read the document he saw Spargos was in deep financial difficulty. He insisted he only scanned the document and he doubted that he read the words:- "i.e. there is manifestly insufficient global cash flow to sustain present debt." 
He repeated that he saw his role "primarily" as that of a solicitor acting in relation to the restructure and he did not obtain the impression, from a scanning of the memorandum, that the companies in the Group were in danger of being insolvent. Although he said he had read the document in the last couple of weeks he wished to be referred to particular parts before answering questions and he was given the opportunity, by my adjourning, to read it. He availed himself of that and said, Tp.541, that he then understood it, but that he did not derive from the information in it that Spargos was in financial difficulty. He was taken to various portions of the document and made some comments on them.

Mr Bateman denied that he saw in the memorandum, under the heading "Overall
Cash Deficit in the Next Six Months", a reference to "Petrogulf takeover $2.6m" and that he immediately realised there was no $6m on deposit at ACC, which would fund the Petrogulf acceptances. The memorandum, which was produced by Mr Bateman and became Exhibit W, stated in paragraph 3(iv) on page 2:- "IRL is critical because interest is running at $10,000 per day and the company has no income. In addition the companies which have deposits with R & B are earning taxable income whilst having no access to the use of those funds." 
At Tp.546 Mr Bateman said that he scanned the document quickly and that he did not obtain the impression that the companies that he was contemplating restructuring were in deep financial trouble. The impression he received was that the document addressed issues and concerns about operating cash flow and an overall deficit, and that the word "overall" and the treatment of the matter in a summary fashion did not give him information about any particular company.

He was cross-examined about the passage I have just quoted and agreed he knew "R & B" referred to Rahn & Bodmer, although his evidence was that he did not believe he read that paragraph at the time. He was taken to an affidavit he swore on 6 March 1997 in which he referred to the three page memorandum dated 10 February 1989, which he agreed was the memorandum comprised in the first three pages of Exhibit W, to the best of his recollection. In paragraph 2 of that affidavit he said he was not able to say that the content of the memorandum was the same as the one he received, which he sought to explain by saying that he had not seen the document for eight years and, when it was suggested to him that there was some doubt, he agreed.
He said he had been asked by ATRK's legal advisers whether it was the same memorandum as he received and the answer was that after eight years he could not say so, although it looked similar. He added that if the question had not been put to him he would have assumed it was the same document, "but assumptions are, perhaps in this case, dangerous". He also said that the material, which accompanied the document when it was presented, was inconsistent in many regards with what he had received, so far as he could recall, on 14 February 1989, and that whilst the memorandum looked to be the same document "certainly in the case of a lot of the material behind it, it was not the same material that I had received eight years previously".

He said that he did not read the whole of that material at the meeting held on February 1989, but it was clear the document was not "the same in many respects", and that it did not contain "non accounting type documents". He added "the material that I see now in the folder is different from that in many respects".

Mr Bateman said that the meeting proceeded on the basis of Mr Glossop and Mr
Winby identifying and speaking to certain parts of the material, Tp.549, and that he was called upon to explain some of the aspects of the bids. He recalled Mr Fuller being critical of some of the information Mr Glossop had prepared for which Mr Glossop apologised, and that Mr Fuller criticised in a mild way the fact that neither Mr Glossop nor Winby could appreciate the benefits that might flow from the restructuring, which would arise from the first wave of bids and, in particular, that they did not appreciate the cash flows, assets and other benefits for Claremont and Beach. He said the topic of the financial difficulties of companies in the Group was discussed, as were the bids and the question "of priority in relation to the bids versus the financial difficulties of one or more of the companies".

Mr Glossop and Mr Winby were suggesting there were more pressing requirements than the mounting of takeover bids, namely the need for money over the following six months, as opposed to the desire of Mr Fuller that there be a restructuring and an accommodation of the financial requirements.

At Tp.553 Mr Bateman was cross-examined about a spread sheet headed "Inter
Company Loans as at December 31 1988", which appeared behind the third divider on the tab of which was a typed notation "Inter Company Debt". He said there was something like that in the document he received, and that there were references to Rahn & Bodmer, which he thought he knew to be a Swiss bank at that time, although he did not know that the companies of which he was a director had had dealings with them. He would not agree that the spread sheet was the same as that before him in February 1989, and said the question of the various companies' indebtedness was not a matter that was important to him, save to the extent that it may affect any restructuring, as he had resigned as a director. However, he was of the view that financial advice and the resolution of financial affairs was a matter for the directors, not for him.
Mr Bateman said he was explaining the proposed bids so that those present could consider their options, the advice being to explain what the proposals were and what the likely offer of ELFIC facilities would be. He said he was not advising on the merits, but on the contents of the proposal. In this way
Mr Bateman was making very clear the functions that he was performing, which were to advise as to the legal requirements and obligations, and not as to matters of financial restructuring and the commercial viability. I accept that
Mr Bateman understood and maintained this division of functions, and, accordingly, dealt with the matter in the way to which he referred, which was consistent with ATRK's pleaded case.

Commencing at Tp.558 Mr Bateman was cross-examined about the meeting of 22
February 1989. Prior to its commencement he conferred with Mr Ferguson for about one and a quarter hours discussing the content of the ELFIC facilities and placing on the white board certain material so that it could be readily understood. He said the purpose of the meeting was to make a room available for discussion so that the question of what the proposed restructuring involved and what had to be done in relation to the bids having regard to the financial facilities available could be explained. He said this was ordinarily described as giving advice, but what was missing from the way that was put to him was that a major purpose of the meeting, as he was told and as in fact occurred, was to enable those present to discuss, in the light of what he and
Mr Ferguson had said and explained, other aspects that they wished to discuss, which did not really relate to ATRK giving any advice. One of the purposes was so that those present could receive the benefit of his advice in relation to the restructure.

Mr Bateman said that he and Mr Ferguson explained what had been offered by
ELFIC; what had been suggested as being the first wave of bids; the impact that that might have in terms of what the structure would look like; and calculations of the cost of carrying out the bids. He disagreed that he spoke with Messrs Johnson, Cordell, Main and Fuller before Mr Glossop and Mr Winby arrived, and his recollection was that everyone was present until the end of the meeting, but so far as there was a suggestion that Mr Glossop and Mr Winby left and that the meeting continued, that was not so. Mr Bateman recalled Mr
Main writing on the white board, although he did not understand what Mr Main was talking about and he did not need to as it did not relate to any instructions he had received or was likely to receive.

At Tp.564 Mr Bateman said that his involvement was to explain the nature of the bids and the finance facilities, and he denied having the memorandum of 10
February 1989 with him at the meeting. I appreciate there may be thought to be a discrepancy between his evidence and that of Mr Glossop, although Mr Glossop agreed that he did not see what papers Mr Bateman had, and he was concerned with inter-company financial details, with which Mr Bateman was not. In my opinion the matter was one on which either or both could have been mistaken.
If they were it does not reflect adversely on the credit of either. It was, from the point of view of each, a matter of perspective. He explained it was not his function to discuss anything other than the bids, the cost of undertaking them and the facilities ELFIC had offered. He said, Tp.565:- "It was not my understanding of my role, nor was it in fact the case, that I was there to discuss matters beyond that and, in particular, not my function or role to discuss the matters which turned out to be discussed by those others present beyond Abbott Tout personnel, such as the question of debts and cash flow, the value of assets and the refinancing options. They're not matters that I was there to give advice on and are not matters on which I did in fact give any advice on." 
This approach exemplified what I am satisfied Mr Bateman was doing, which was consistent with ATRK's retainer. I accept his evidence as to the extent of the advice offered.

Mr Bateman said it was possible that during January 1989 he became aware that the ACC indebtedness had been refinanced, and that it was equally possible that it could have been February 1989 or "it could be other dates as well. I just can't recall": Tpp.570-571.

At Tp.571 Mr Bateman was referred to a six page white board print out dated 11
January 1989 in his handwriting. He agreed the document made reference to "R & B", which was Rahn & Bodmer, and he was asked about the various notations. He agreed he was aware of the existence of Rahn & Bodmer on that date, but not that the indebtedness to ACC had been refinanced through
Rahn & Bodmer, and he said, once again, that he could not recall when he became aware of the refinancing. He also agreed that certain of the information on the white board print out was suggestive that as at 11 January he perhaps knew of the refinancing by Rahn & Bodmer and that it may be right to say that. He then said he thought it was "quite likely", his only concern being that he did not know whether there was an actual refinancing in the way Mr Kelly described. Mr Bateman denied that he was aware, in January , that Rahn & Bodmer "was Mr Johnson's bank".

The six page print out, which became Exhibit R, was part of the restructuring considerations being undertaken with ELFIC pursuant to an ongoing instruction to develop possible ways for undertaking the bids to reduce the number of listed companies, which instructions came from Mr Fuller and, sometimes, from
Mr Cummings. He said Beach did not "really arise in the restructuring at all", and it just happened to be an asset of one of the companies, namely Claremont, for which a bid was to be made. He denied that he was giving advice to the controllers of Beach to the effect that it would sell its shares in Spargos at a price he nominated. He said that all he was doing was setting out a possible scenario based on the instructions he had received, "and merely doing a mathematical process in some cases to identify what the effect is of making of such theoretical bids .." and, if such bids were made, the impact on the person making the bids. He said the exercise was theoretical to consider proposals, which would assist in the restructuring so as to reduce the number of listed companies from fifteen to a smaller number. Once again this evidence, which I accept, was consistent with the ambit of the retainer I am satisfied ATRK had.

At Tp.584 Mr Bateman said that in giving advice to Mr Cummings before the
Annual General Meeting of Beach in November 1988 he believed he was acting for
Beach to advise the proposed chairman, Mr Fuller, in relation to the meeting procedures that were applicable and might arise in the course of the meeting.

At Tp.586 Mr Kelly returned to the memorandum of 10 February 1989. Mr Bateman agreed there was a check list, which required Mr Glossop to provide certain information. He said it was incorrect to describe that information as the financial condition of the Group companies, and denied that the memorandum contained "precisely" what he had asked for on 2 February 1989. He said there was an overall picture, but not information as to the position of each company. He expected Mr Glossop to confirm that the share scrip was freely available and that he would provide a table which would enable Mr Bateman to identify which companies owed money to the other companies, so that the information might be used to show how money received on a takeover offer could be applied in discharge of debts. He was referred again to the spread sheet and to the statement in his affidavit that he received a document similar to that comprised in Exhibit W, which he could not say, however, was the same, and he agreed that he had an arrangement with Mr Glossop that Mr Glossop would forward to him a table of inter-company Group loans. He said the spread sheet was not what he had requested, that he objected to receiving the material, which he believed was more appropriate to the directors, and that he did not think he was aware there was a table of external loans, when he first received the document.

Mr Bateman was referred to item 16 of a check list appearing on page 2 of the white board print out, which referred to "Table of Intra Group Loans/External
Loans", beside which the word "Ross" was written. Mr Bateman repeated, Tp.591, that he did not have to have regard to the financial position of the companies in the IRL Group in considering a restructuring proposal, and that the consideration he gave was in the context of where the money would be used in accepting a bid to discharge debt. He said the restructuring he was undertaking did not have to involve regard to the financial position of the companies, as the restructuring considerations were theoretical. He agreed there are types of restructuring where one undertakes such financial consideration, for example where a scheme of arrangement is being undertaken, but he said that the type of restructuring he was considering did not involve that, and that during the course of his theoretical restructuring analysis it was completely irrelevant who ended up controlling the Group. This evidence was completely consistent with his instructions and I accept it.

Mr Bateman was referred again to his affidavit of 6 March 1997, in which he made reference to recalling that there were dividers in the folder, although he said that that was his recollection when he swore the affidavit, but he was less clear when giving his evidence. He disagreed he was tailoring his recollection to suit his perception of the case and I do not accept that he was.

Mr Bateman denied that he saw anything improper in sending the documents received from Mallesons to Mr Cordell, or that that was done to remove the documents from this country because they were potentially incriminating. In that regard he said he did not know what was in the documents and he did not recall reviewing them. He denied the documents referred to the position of Mr
Johnson or Mr Silver and, at Tp.599, he said he understood Mr Johnson was one who might be able to introduce finance from overseas and, beyond that, he did not understand his role to be that of a controller. If I were to accept that
Mr Bateman was not being truthful in giving this evidence, I would, subject to an important qualification, have to accept that he was a party to a disgraceful conspiracy to remove documents from the country, in breach of the terms of an undertaking, for the purpose of destroying potentially incriminating evidence. I do not accept that Mr Bateman was prepared to or did engage in any such conduct. The qualification, which does not reflect adversely on Mr Bateman's credit, is the matter to which I have referred, viz the lack of any evidence of the consequences of sending the documents to Mr
Cordell, or of the documents either being needed, called for or not available.

At Tp.609 Mr Bateman said he left the file containing the memorandum of 10
February 1989 on the table when he left the meeting of 14 February 1989, and that subsequently he received from Mr Glossop the type of information he had expected, being a Table of Debt in some form and also some information on what was secured "and the like". The evidence of Mr Glossop that Mr Bateman had the file on 22 February 1989 is at odds with this but, in my opinion for the reasons I have given, that is not a matter of significance.

At Tp.610 Mr Bateman agreed he met with Mr Glossop and Mr Winby on 21 February and received information concerning the financial position of Claremont and Beach. He was told they had $19m in cash between them and Beach had $10m and $2.5m on call, and that Beach's investment in Victorian Oil and Gas would fetch between $8m and $18m. He agreed that on this occasion he was obtaining information about the assets of Beach and Claremont, but he denied he was doing so for the purpose of informing himself about their business and affairs before the meeting with Mr Johnson, which was scheduled to take place on 22
February 1989. However, Mr Bateman said the information was not needed for the restructuring in which he was engaged, but rather that Mr Glossop and Mr Winby "felt they needed to tell me those things in case, presumably, it became relevant". He said they wished to discuss those matters and he was happy to participate in the conversation. He agreed the information was of a highly confidential nature and he referred to what he perceived to be a conflict between the oil and gas arm, on the one hand, and the gold arm, on the other.

At Tp.614 Mr Bateman said he did not see himself as a confidential adviser to
Claremont or Beach, with which he had little relationship.

At Tp.616 I asked Mr Bateman to explain how a lawyer could draw up a working structure of the type to which he was referring without knowing what moneys were or may be available, to which he replied:- "It was my experience that I would - working on other client matters as well as in relation to this matter, that it would be unusual to know about such financial matters. The more usual position was that you would know that somebody wished to make a takeover bid. They usually had some sort of finance lined up or they had had discussions with a financier. It was usually the financier who provided that sort of input on two levels; that is, the financier assessed the group that might emerge as a result of a successful bid. It was the financier who would give advice in relation to structure that often occurred and sometimes there was a crossover on advice about structure with the lawyers.

There was a case where - as has happened with accountants, there was a competing field of activity where the financiers were giving similar advice on structuring as did lawyers, and that is why I referred to the fact that in some cases there was a narrow field for lawyers. All you did was fill out a document virtually. In this case ELFIC were giving the bulk of the advice about financial matters, so far as I was aware.

Q. But you would have to feed that in, surely, to your restructuring concepts, otherwise it might bear no relationship to the financial position? 
A. Not at all. In this situation most of the proposals were theoretical ones without the benefit of understanding what was really in the interests of the financiers or, in many cases, the interests of any external borrowers and the like. It was means whereby, based on what little information I had about intercompany debt, takeovers might be constructed in a sequence with a series of bids, bearing in mind that the financier had indicated that there was a certain amount of money available. Those were the main considerations. I didn't need to understand the particular financial position of any target, let alone an offeror. The financial assessments or attributes of an offeror are irrelevant usually to the lawyer's position in a takeover and were irrelevant here." 
Mr Bateman continued that the financial attributes of the target company were generally irrelevant also, although he said there were exceptions to that.
Whilst at first blush the lack of detailed financial information for the purposes of considering the take-over structure may have seemed strange, Mr
Bateman was a solicitor with experience in this field. He gave detailed reasons why he did not require such information. At the time the evidence was given, and on re-reading it, it seemed inherently credible. In all the circumstances, there is no basis which satisfies me I should not accept it.
Indeed, the matters to which I have referred convince me that I should.

At Tp.619 Mr Bateman was taken to part of the white board print out of the meeting of 22 February 1989 headed "Repayment Schedule". He said that it was his understanding that the people at the meeting expected to receive advice as to the effect of what had been offered on the ELFIC facilities and the effect that the restructuring, as proposed in the first wave of bids, might have in terms of the corporate relationships. His advice was confined to the ELFIC facilities, the terms ELFIC offered, and the effect of the restructuring proposed in the first wave of bids. He said he did not participate "very much" in the bulk of the meeting and, particularly, in relation to discussion of cash flows "and the like", which was beyond his expertise. This gives further support, in my opinion, to the difference between his and Mr Glossop's evidence about the presence of the memorandum of 10 February 1989. It demonstrated that the memorandum and the material annexed to it was of far more concern to Mr Glossop, in the context of that part of the discussion, than to Mr Bateman.

Mr Bateman was asked about discussion at the meeting of 22 February 1989 of the assets of Beach and he was referred to a note on the white board print out showing "Beach $50m" and "debt free". It was suggested to him that that was an important financial detail, which bore on the restructuring proposal that he was discussing at the meeting. He said it did not tie in with the proposal that he was discussing. He agreed there was discussion about Burbank and that it was a transaction which involved the acquisition at some future date of interests in an oil field in Okalahoma. He gained the impression that if it went ahead it would be a large scale transaction, but he did not connect with his proposals any consideration of the structure and funding of the Burbank acquisition. He did not agree that this transaction would need to be taken into account in making any commercial decision in relation to restructure and refinance of the Group. He returned, at Tp.626, to saying that he regarded the meeting as one at which he and Mr Ferguson were imparting information in relation to the ELFIC facilities and the bids.

Mr Bateman was referred to the passage on the white board notes which showed that whilst there were debts of $135.5m in total, three items should be deducted including $17.7m shown as being on deposit at Rahn & Bodmer for
Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic. He denied the deduction was made because there was no access to that money at Rahn & Bodmer, or, Tp.628, that he was aware that Beach was the "cash cow" of the Group. In relation to the lending by ELFIC and the borrowing by the Group of companies, Mr Bateman said that ELFIC had presumably done its own detailed due diligence and had found it viable to lend, and he presumed the directors had determined it was viable to borrow: Tp.630.

Mr Bateman agreed that after 22 February 1989 a number of Put Options were drafted, that in the absence of sufficient good security the proposed ELFIC facility "would go nowhere" and that, in the absence of that facility or any other finance facility from another lender, the restructure would "go nowhere". He disagreed that "absent Burbank, the restructure would go nowhere".

He was referred to a draft Put Option addressed to the directors of FAI dated April 1989, which was prepared by Mr Ferguson. In relation to it he said that Mr Kelly may be right in putting to him that as at 13 April 1989 that part of the proposed security or the proposed ELFIC facility involved Beach, but he could not recall when he became aware of the involvement of Beach, and he was not sure that he understood it as being a commitment made by Beach.

At Tp.632 Mr Bateman was referred to a Put Option that was proposed with FAI, being a draft he prepared on 21 April 1989, and he was asked whether it was fair to say that as drafts were prepared Beach's level of exposure was increased. He said he was not sure that he understood the financial implications for Beach "as to whether the level of exposure was increasing or not", and that paragraph (h) of the document certainly said that FAI was to have access to the assets and income of Burbank "down through a number of roots". He said that the question as to what that meant and how it affected the situation was certainly not clear to him, and he thought the point of the paragraph was that it was not clear to those who were instructing him. He agreed it was quite possible that, at that stage, he was aware that someone in the IRL Group was proposing to take up a 47 per cent interest in the Burbank field held by corporate entities, but that it had not been determined who it was to be. He disagreed that the structure and funding of the Burbank acquisition was vital to the restructure of the Group and what was being drafted was a type of Put Option "that might be made available".

He did not perceive ATRK's role to be in relation to the actual acquisition "if that's what you're referring to". He saw it as the drafting of the information that ATRK were given to assist in obtaining the Put Option, which would assist in the obtaining of finance for the bids. His understanding was that FAI insisted upon having direct access to the assets and income of
Burbank as part of the security for the proposed Put Option. He was asked about the meeting with FAI and he said that a note satisfied him that FAI would not be going ahead with any Put Option unless it received the security of direct access to the assets and income of Burbank, which he incorporated in his draft dated 21 April 1989. He agreed, again, that "absent Burbank, there would be no Put Option acceptable to FAI". He said it was not entirely clear that if there was no such Put Option that there would be no ELFIC facility to finance the restructure, and that the position with FAI was that it was offering a Put Option on certain terms, but it was not clear to him that it would not have given the Put Option if it had not been for Burbank's being offered. He also said that FAI was not the only source of a Put Option that might be available.

At Tp.635 Mr Bateman agreed he had "the clearest recollection that the major topic for discussion at the meeting of 22 February was money", but not how it was that the Group could get out of its "parlous financial position". He said that was not the impression he gained, except from those parts of the meeting where Mr Winby and Mr Glossop were putting their views as to the priority cash requirements over the next six months. The other parts of the meeting he described as "more bullish" and there was discussion of debts and cash flow.
He said he was not strong "on financial matters, and in relation to cash flow" and that he did not understand a great deal of that discussion. He agreed the proposed settlement with the NCSC was very expensive and that Mr Goldberg had described one element of it as blackmail. He was asked whether this matter was discussed at the meeting and he said reference was made to it.

At Tp.637 Mr Bateman said the restructure he proposed on 22 February 1989 involved the first wave of bids and did not encompass the second, third or fourth waves, other than to identify what might happen if they took place, and the total cost of the takeover bids themselves. He said that during that meeting Rahn & Bodmer was mentioned, but he did not recall ACC being mentioned. He said that by that date it was probably right that so far as the
Group was concerned the IRL debt had been refinanced through Rahn &
Bodmer, but he denied emphatically that he was aware that the arrangements at
Rahn & Bodmer involved Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic having a back to back arrangement. He said it was untrue that Mr Main explained, within his earshot, that the effect of certain items on the list, notably Petrogulf $17m,
Moage $8.5m and deposits of $17.7m, was that the $17.7m deposits could not be accessed and were linked to the loan to IRL, or that Mr Main said they should not be included in available cash for cash flow projections and, therefore, should be deducted. Mr Bateman said, Tp.638, that he recalled somebody suggested that there was double counting and identified items that were double counted "and it all made sense of a limited sort to me". He continued:- "Q. You knew full well that one of the items to which you now refer as having been double counted was $17.7m? 
A. Yes, I associated that with the fact that it had not been included in the list of assets on the previous page." 
He said he identified it as being cash that was at the same institution to which IRL owed money, namely Rahn & Bodmer. At Tp.639 his evidence continued:- "Q. Your understanding was that the $17.7m related to three amounts, totalling that sum, of Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic? 
A. I can't recall whether I understood those three particular companies were mentioned. They may have been.

Q. But you understood very clearly, I suggest to you, that no $17.7m deposit at Rahn & Bodmer was available to be used by any company in the IRL Group at Rahn & Bodmer by reason of the indebtedness of IRL? 
A. That's untrue.

Q. You understood that no access was available to Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic to any moneys that those companies might otherwise appear to have had on deposit at Rahn & Bodmer? 
A. Beyond being a deposit for a term, I don't agree with what you've said.

Q. Are you saying to his Honour that, as at 22 February 1989, you had a belief that moneys at Rahn & Bodmer in the name of Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic totalling $17.7m were not available to be used simply by reason of the fact that they were term deposits? 
A. That was my understanding, yes, and that they were assets available and had not been included in the previous page.

Q. So these assets cash at bank $17.7m were not included because they were term deposits? 
A. No, they were not included when the assets that were listed on the previous page, but when it came to consideration of the debts, somebody drew attention to the double counting and drew attention to the fact that there were these assets which had not been included in the list of assets.

Q. Somebody made it perfectly plain to Mr Main that they could not be included because there was no access to that money on deposit at Rahn & Bodmer? 
A. No." 
I found this explanation inherently probable for the reasons I have given. It was only if the money on deposit was available that it should be deducted from debts or included in assets. This cross-examination was clearly directed to seeking to establish not merely that Mr Bateman knew that the money ostensibly standing to the credit of Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic was not immediately accessible because it was on some form of fixed deposit, but further that it was connected directly with the indebtedness of IRL and that there was no access to those funds at all. This line of cross-examination will have to be considered in the light of the statements by Mr Kelly that it was no part of Beach's case that Mr Bateman was guilty of subjective fraud, and what appeared to be inconsistent positions adopted on this issue during the course of the hearing.

Mr Bateman said it was his understanding that the $17.7m could not be accessed because it would mean breaking a term deposit, which arose either from the discussions on 14 February or 21 February 1989 with Messrs Glossop and Winby.

At Tp.640 Mr Bateman said that on 10 February 1989 he went through at the
Claremont office, which he later identified as the Claremont office in George
Street, Sydney, the material in the folder "turning over various pages, and discussion occurred in my presence". He said he received a general impression that the money was on deposit "and was available subject to some restriction that might apply by reason of having to break a term", and that either from the meeting of 14 or 21 February 1989 he had the impression that the money was on deposit but could not be accessed by reason of the fact that it was there for some sort of fixed term. He continued:- "There was no suggestion or any inference that I drew from what had been said that the money was mortgaged, charged, back to back or any such arrangement that I've heard described in recent times." 
Mr Bateman said that when he first learned of Rahn & Bodmer he did not turn his mind to the novelty and potential application of Swiss banking implications in the business and affairs of the IRL Group. He was then taken to the spread sheet in Exhibit W headed "Intercompany Debt", but he said he could not recall whether that was one of the documents in the folder.

At Tp.644 Mr Bateman agreed he received from Mr Glossop, in due course, a table of intercompany loans at which he looked, and he said he received "a variety of such documents over time". He could not recall seeing one which had
Rahn & Bodmer in it, nor did he recall whether it was in a document he saw in February 1989. He said his understanding at that time was that money was on deposit and that it could not be readily accessed because "of some sort of" fixed term, and it was not a matter to which he paid particular attention, because it was not relevant to what he was being asked to do. He repeated he did not participate in the discussion on 14 February 1989, and did not turn his mind to possible complications about having access to moneys on deposit in a Swiss bank.

Although Mr Bateman had said, Tp.481, that he first recalled mention of the nature of the accounts at Rahn & Bodmer in April 1989, it appears, from his subsequent evidence, that it was in January or February 1989. He denied that the double counting, to which reference was made on 22 February 1989, was that money which had been deposited had been on-lent to IRL and IRAG, and he said the explanation given as to the double counting was that the $17.7m was referred to in the context that there was another asset which had not been included in the list written on the previous page, which was on deposit at
Rahn & Bodmer, and therefore the amount had to be deducted from the debt.
He then agreed with the proposition that the nett position, as he understood it, was that the $17.7m said to be on deposit should not be included as an asset "for some reason", but he denied the reason was that it had been lent to
IRL and, when asked the reason, he repeated that it had not been included in the list of assets and, as I understand it, should be deducted from the indebtedness. This, so it seemed to me, was a reasonable explanation in the context that he did not understand that the $17.7m should be deducted from the $24m shown as owing by IRL. He agreed that as at February 1989 the facilities at Rahn & Bodmer had been put in place once the ACC facility had been refinanced in October 1988, and that as at 22 February 1989 he understood that
Inspar would need at least $2.6m in about April 1989 to pay for the acceptances of its takeover offer of Petrogulf.

At Tp.655 Mr Bateman said that the question of the acquisition of Burbank did not impact on the restructuring he was considering until late April 1989, and that the nature of the lawyer's role in takeovers is such that one is restricted, in effect, to the legal framework which a Part A Statement provides and the offer document. He said that in relation to financial advice that generally would not be undertaken by a lawyer but partly by a company's management and, depending on the expertise of that management, with or without a merchant bank. This was consistent with his earlier evidence, which I accept. He had the impression because of the willingness of FAI and ELFIC, even in April 1989, to subscribe $120m of equity as opposed to loan funds, that people had faith in the effect of a restructure that would produce a very strong and important Group in Australia's mining sectors.

At Tpp.682-683 it was put to Mr Bateman that he was endeavouring to assist Mr
Cummings in ensuring that the NCSC would not obtain production of the documents, which had been handed over by Mallesons pursuant to the undertaking, which he denied. I have stated my conclusions in that regard.

At Tp.686 Mr Bateman was asked what he meant by the words "a real Swiss account" and he said, Tp.687, he meant separate accounts for each company so that the movement of money from one account to the other could be identified, as distinct from a series of assignments. He said the words were not used in contra-distinction to a fiduciary account or back to back loan account, but in the sense that each company should have its own account. As it was conceded that Mr Bateman was not aware either that there were fiduciary accounts or that accessibility to the amounts on deposit was dependent on IRL repaying its debt to Rahn & Bodmer the effect of this cross-examination pointed to a somewhat inconsistent approach, on this issue, in the presentation of Beach's case.

At Tp.689 Mr Bateman said he knew in March 1989 that the vendor in relation to the Burbank transaction was Firstway, which he was aware owned an interest in
Burbank through a series of companies, and he identified a drawing showing money moving from Jingellic through to the vendor and back to Rahn &
Bodmer. He said the juxtaposition on the diagram of Rahn & Bodmer with
Jingellic was less clear as to whether there was a movement of money between them "but that may be so", and that by that stage Burbank "was somehow involved in the midst of the bid" he and Mr Ferguson were discussing. He continued that Mr Ferguson was given instructions, which involved the assignment of moneys at Rahn & Bodmer to acquire Burbank, and that that was being considered in the context of the ELFIC facilities, and, Tp.691, that
Mr Fuller had given some instructions as to another possibility that was to be looked at, which was that Claremont and Beach were going to acquire Burbank in the ratio of ten per cent and ninety per cent respectively; that there was funding proposed, which involved Enterprise subscribing for money in IRAG, which was part of the consortium bid; that Spargos was going to also be funding that in some way; and that the purchase price was $30m, or thereabouts, of which $11m, or thereabouts, or $16m had been paid and some amount was yet to be paid. The further funding was going to be by means of money on deposit at Rahn & Bodmer, and Rahn & Bodmer would be instructed to settle on behalf of Beach by assigning or directing that the deposits of Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic be henceforth held for the vendor.

Mr Bateman and Mr Ferguson recognised that the action of the NCSC and
Enterprise's shareholders' action group meant that Enterprise could not be involved directly in the acquisition of Burbank, and that, accordingly,
Enterprise would have to finance indirectly rather than directly. He agreed, again, Tp.695, that Enterprise would not be a direct financier, and that what was involved was the bid for Claremont in the context of Burbank. He continued:- "The two are interacting virtually for the first time, and it is in that context that the question of whether Enterprise can be involved in the bid, not the - I think it's the financing of the bid that's being referred to, but perhaps that's not - I'm not entirely clear on it." 
Mr Bateman also considered that the involvement of Spargos in financing the acquisition of Burbank by Beach was "more commercially justifiable", and he continued that that was a possibility for the purposes of Beach's acquiring
Burbank, which he considered was a good acquisition and would improve Beach's assets.

These deliberations were taking place on the morning of 2 May 1989 between Mr
Bateman and Mr Ferguson prior to a meeting to be held on that day at which the topic of the lending by Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic in relation to the
Burbank acquisition was to be discussed. He denied that the whole purpose of the meeting was to discuss "the structure and funding of the acquisition", and he said there were inter-acting issues, which included the concern that Messrs
Clayton Utz had about the funding by ELFIC for the consortium. The issue was how those two matters "fitted together". This, according to Messrs Clayton
Utz, suggested a likelihood of a breach of s.129: Tp.697. He said Beach "perhaps" would need advice on the ramifications of s.129, that that was not the particular focus that he and Mr Ferguson had, and that he and Mr Ferguson were responding to an issue, which frequently arises in any takeover, of the lender asking how repayments of the facilities would avoid any question of a breach of s.129.

Mr Bateman agreed, Tp.698, that if the Burbank acquisition proceeded it was "clearly" a matter which impacted on any restructuring and refinancing of the
IRL Group and:- "Indeed, the overlap between the ELFIC financing for the bid and the financing for the acquisition of Burbank was - clearly, at this time the overlap was there and the interaction of the two was part of the problem." 
He continued:- "Q. And all of your considerations and discussions about the proposed acquisition of Burbank and its proposed funding and its impact on any restructure of the IRL Group were treated by you in the strictest professional confidence? 
A. Yes." 
From this evidence, in part, Mr Kelly sought to mount the submission that ATRK were acting on behalf of Beach in respect of the Burbank acquisition by dint of that acquisition being an integral part of the arrangements for the take- over. From that point he made the submission that ATRK owed duties to Beach in relation to the other aspects of the acquisition.

He agreed that the information was of a market-sensitive variety and that the confidentiality needed to be maintained. Various deeds of confidentiality were prepared, including one to which a party was Beach and, Tpp.699-700:- "Q. And those companies are the companies with whom you had a relationship of professional confidence at the time you were advising in relation to the restructure of the IRL Group, including the acquisition of Burbank? 
A. I had confidential information in relation to something that might affect Beach, that's true, and I was acting in relation to the restructuring, that's true. That is very common in a takeover, that if you are acting for a bidder, you will know something about the target and have confidential information about the target.

Q. The relationship between you, Abbott Tout and each of the companies in this deed was a relationship of professional trust and confidence, wasn't it? 
A. If by that you mean a duty of confidentiality, yes.

Q. The relationship was one in which you were acting for these companies, the companies listed in this deed of confidentiality, advising them in relation to this restructure? 
A. No, I think it's acting for the companies in preserving their confidences in so far as their confidences or confidential information is given to FAI. That's the matter in which Abbott Tout is acting in relation to this." 
Mr Bateman agreed that as at 28 April 1989 a matter of the highest degree of confidentiality between ATRK, Beach and Claremont, was the intention to proceed to acquire Burbank and, on that day, Mr Ferguson told Mr Bateman that
Beach and Claremont would be proceeding to purchase Burbank, although he said it could well have been another theoretical process and not come to fruition.

At Tpp.701-702 Mr Bateman said that Mr Ferguson told him, on 28 April 1989, that he had received instructions that there were issues to be discussed in the light of Mr Fuller's instructions that the acquisition of Burbank was a "proposal", and he then agreed that Mr Ferguson told him that he had received instructions to the effect that Beach and Claremont were going ahead to purchase Burbank, but, he added, that Mr Ferguson and he "both recognised that this was just another scenario, another matter to be looked at". He said he attended to those instructions in the way in which he would normally attend to professional instructions and took what Mr Ferguson was saying seriously.

At Tp.705 Mr Bateman said that on 2 May 1989, at a meeting at which Mr Johnson and Mr Main were present, advice in relation to the funding of Burbank was given as to whether there were problems with s.129. Mr Bateman agreed that he was aware that Mazeley was the acquisition, which constituted the Burbank acquisition, so that what was being discussed was an agreement to acquire the issued share capital in Mazeley. Mr Bateman gave advice as to the way in which the s.129 problems may be overcome and, as to the purchase agreement, he said he did not think that was discussed beyond discussion about the helpfulness of actually doing an acquisition by Beach, not directly through Beach itself, but through perhaps a wholly owned subsidiary located off-shore; the argument being that possibly it could be said that the subsidiary, being a foreign company, was not subject to the Corporations Law in the same way as Beach was.
He said, Tp.709, that ATRK had already been instructed that the funding was intended to be by means of assignments of the Rahn & Bodmer deposits and that there were some problems with them as they were for a fixed period, so that it was necessary to obtain bridging finance from ELFIC. This gave rise to a submission that Mr Bateman must have been aware that the funds standing to the credit of Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic could not be accessed, and it led to a similar submission to which I have referred in that regard.

At Tpp.709 and 710 Mr Bateman agreed that he did not say at the meeting of 2
May 1989 that ATRK was in a position of conflict and could not give any advice in relation to the structure and funding of the Burbank transaction, and he said that from his point of view what was being discussed was the lending side of the transaction "and that's the advice that we were focussing on". This led to the submission that ATRK was acting for Beach; that it was doing so in the context of its acquisition of Burbank; that it was also acting for the potential lenders to Beach for that acquisition; that it thereby had a conflict of interest; and that they should, in those circumstances, have told
Beach of the conflict of interest and sent Beach to independent solicitors.
This submission presented a number of difficulties. Firstly, the acquisition was seen as going ahead, at that date, irrespective of the take-over.
Secondly, ATRK was not instructed to act for Beach on the acquisition. Mr
Cordell acted for it and Claremont, and Messrs Gardner Weller acted for
Firstway. Thirdly, Messrs Fuller and Cummings were directors of Beach,
Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic. There was no suggestion to Mr Bateman that they were acting in fraud on Beach. It has been expressly conceded by Beach that ATRK was not aware that the sale to Beach was a fraudulent transaction.
Fourthly, ATRK acted for Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic on the SCAFA, and
Mr Cordell acted for Beach.

Mr Bateman regarded the sale of Beach assets as relevant for the purposes of s.129. At Tp.711 he was referred to a note he made:- "Loans, sale of assets by Beach and purchase of Burbank are to occur irrespective of whether there is to be a t/o or when it is to occur." 
He said that was the intention but it was not clear whether it could be achieved or would simply not be achieved as had happened with other proposals.
He added:- "Whether it was achievable or not was a separate matter": Tp.712. 
Towards the end of that day Mr Main was appointed as an alternate director to
Sir Cecil Burney.

At Tp.721 Mr Bateman was referred to a file note of a telephone conversation he had with Mr Worthington on 16 May 1989, when Mr Worthington asked whether the US$5m was hedged, which was a reference to the currency swap transaction upon which he reported to Mr Worthington in his letter of 16 May 1989. Mr
Bateman agreed that it was unlikely he told Mr Worthington that ATRK acted for
Spargos in the transaction and, therefore, was not in a position to answer any question that might be posed on behalf of Beach, and he said he did not say to
Mr Worthington that ATRK had taken no steps at all to protect the position of
Beach in the currency swap, nor, so far as he was aware, that Beach should obtain independent legal advice. He said Beach had participated in the transaction, which had been concluded. Mr Bateman said he did not understand "particularly" what "hedge" meant or what it involved, although he thought it had something to do with currency fluctuations or exchange rates. He said he did not discern that the matter was one of concern to Mr Worthington, and that he was at a disadvantage as he did not know a lot about the transaction and, therefore, he referred Mr Worthington to Mr Fuller.

Mr Bateman said he signed the letter and it did not strike him as curious, on May 1989, that ATRK was writing to both Spargos and Beach as he thought it appropriate to report to Spargos and to return the original minutes to Beach.
In answer to a direct question as to whether he discerned any conflict in
ATRK's position in reporting to both Spargos and Beach in relation to the currency swap transaction, he said he thought it was appropriate to report to
Spargos and to send the letter to Beach. He continued:- "Q. You were giving advice to Beach in relation to the acquisition and funding of the Burbank transaction as recently as 2 May, weren't you? 
A. No, I was advising in relation to the restructuring and the matter of Burbank had come up in the course of that. I didn't perceive myself to be advising Beach in that regard at all": Tp.724. 
Notwithstanding a note made on 2 May 1989, Mr Bateman said that he did not know "full well", as at 16 May 1989, that regardless of ELFIC and Messrs
Clayton Utz the Burbank transaction was going ahead. He said it was a proposition but it was clear, as he had said on several occasions, that no decision was made. I see no reason not to accept this evidence. He said that on 16 May 1989 he was not familiar with currency swaps, as such, and he could not say whether they occurred "commonly" between public companies. He said he was aware it had been handled by Mr Thomas "with or without the support of
David Ferguson", and that he accepted the letters offered for his signature.
They made sense to him and the transaction did not strike him as curious. It is necessary to bear in mind that if ATRK had instructions to act for Beach on the Currency Swap transaction, which will have to be considered, they were limited to the assignment of Beach's deposit at ELFIC to Spargos. They did not extend to the assignment of the deposit by Spargos to Beach in Switzerland.
The question Mr Worthington posed of Mr Bateman was not about the happening of the assignment in Switzerland, as such, but about whether the money, having been assigned to Beach, was hedged, i.e. as I understand it, protected in some way against fluctuations in foreign currencies.

Mr Bateman agreed he was of the belief that the Burbank transaction was to be structured and funded by, inter alia, the assignment of the deposits of
Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic at Rahn & Bodmer and, on 16 May 1989, he saw an assignment of the Spargos deposits at Rahn & Bodmer in favour of
Beach, but he said that was quite a different thing to his mind, because the 2
May discussions were a mixture of assignments of deposits at Rahn &
Bodmer, and also questions of ELFIC's possible funding. Mr Bateman did not see a connection between what had been discussed on that date and the currency swap, which he explained by saying that many proposals had been looked at and he was "a bit jaded about the whole process, but it's quite likely that I was aware of those things, yes". He said the currency swap was a matter beyond his expertise and that he trusted Mr Ferguson and Mr Thomas to have carried it forward. It made sense to him in a limited way "in what I understood".

He said he did not turn his mind to any risk to Beach in the transaction as he was not involved in it, except to take a telephone message and pass it on, and that was all he recalled of it prior to signing the letters. He was asked again about the conversation he had with Mr Worthington, and he repeated that he recommended that Mr Worthington speak to Mr Fuller as a person he understood had some knowledge of the transaction. He did not suggest to Mr
Worthington that independent advice should be obtained, and he did not think he said to Mr Worthington that ATRK had not been acting for Beach in the transaction. He agreed Mr Worthington was saying to him that he, Mr
Worthington, thought Beach had a deposit of US$5m, and Mr Worthington was asking whether it was hedged. The ability for the currency swap to be made was somewhat inconsistent with the evidence that the money was somehow "blocked", and it was certainly inconsistent with the suggestion that Spargos could not access it at all. He was asked whether he gave Mr Worthington any warning about any problem that might arise by reason of his understanding that the deposits at Rahn & Bodmer were fixed and he said he did not as he understood it was a currency swap and:- "As to what that involves, I did not have a clear understanding. John Worthington seemed to know more about the matter than I did. That's what I drew from what he said to me." 
Mr Bateman agreed it was not a normal practice of ATRK to report, as one would to a client, to people who were not clients, after he had been asked why a copy of the Beach resolution in relation to the currency swap transaction had been forwarded to Ms O'Halloran, the secretary of Spargos. He said he did not pay close attention to the letter to the Beach and he "just thought it was appropriate what Brian Thomas had prepared". It seemed appropriate to return the original minutes to Beach. He said he did not understand the commercial purpose of the transaction from Beach's point of view and he had no reason to reject a letter prepared by Mr Thomas, which seemed acceptable on its face, having regard to the fact that Mr Thomas had handled the matter. He said he did not turn his mind to the question of conflict of interest when Mr
Worthington telephoned him on behalf of Beach and sought advice. In any event he did not give any advice and referred Mr Worthington to Mr Fuller.

At Tpp.735-736 Mr Bateman said he thought the currency swap was in connection with ELFIC's financing the Inspar takeover bid for Petrogulf. Mr Bateman insisted that he thought Mr Worthington knew more about the transaction than he did, although he agreed it struck him as odd "in a limited sense" that Mr
Worthington was asking whether the deposit was hedged, and he agreed it seemed a little odd at the time that he was asking that question if, as Mr Bateman was asserting, he seemed to know all about it: Tp.737. This evidence had the further significance that if Mr Bateman knew that the deposits at Rahn &
Bodmer were "blocked", he was being deliberately deceitful in his discussions with Mr Worthington, and he knew ATRK had acted in a wholly inappropriate way.
I do not consider that he was acting in that way, or that he had that knowledge.

At Tp.740 Mr Bateman agreed that the Rahn & Bodmer deposits were proposed to be used, as at 2 May 1989, in connection with the acquisition of Burbank.
Unless this was a blatant lie, which I do not consider it was, it is totally inconsistent with the concept of the deposits being "blocked".

Mr Bateman said that on 8 June 1989 he had a discussion with Mr Fuller and Mr
Cummings, the matter of concern being the appropriateness of Enterprise's being involved in lending and the application of s.229 of the Companies Code from the point of view of Enterprise. The concern was whether it was appropriate to have Enterprise lending money to Spargos, which would then lend it to Claremont, the possible concern about s.229 being that Enterprise was not involved in the oil and gas sector, but rather the gold mining sector. He denied he was discussing whether it was appropriate for any of Spargos,
Enterprise, Jingellic or Beach to be involved in the acquisition of Burbank at all, but he said that it was a matter for them, as directors, to be satisfied.
Mr Bateman said that the problems posed by s.229 were not really matters a lawyer could express a view on "at the end of the day", because the relevant commercial considerations that would affect the decision of a director could not be substituted for by a lawyer giving advice. He said it was a matter of "their business judgment", and that it was not of concern to him nor his province whether they made the loans.

He was then taken to a detailed file note of 12 July 1989 in which the position of a number of companies and propositions which the companies could advance were set forth. He denied Mr Cummings was seeking his advice in relation to the matters he noted, and he said that Mr Cummings was describing to him the position he had arrived at in relation to the position of each of the companies. He said the matters were not discussed, but rather he listed what Mr Cummings was saying and, as the money had already been lent, he thought it appropriate to record what Mr Cummings said. He said the matters did not require answer or comment from him and he noted them because of the particular background against which they had arisen. When one reads the notes carefully I think they are for more consistent with matters Mr Bateman was being told by a director, who was a solicitor, rather than a solicitor's advice to a lawyer. The degree of detail is strongly indicative of the former position and, further, I accept Mr Bateman's evidence as to what occurred. Mr
Kelly queried why Mr Bateman would note these matters. I am satisfied he gave a credible explanation for doing so.

He said, Tp.749, that the acquisition of Burbank was regarded as a very good one and that Burbank was a valuable asset. He denied he was making any suggestions to Mr Cummings, which would deflect criticism of the conduct of the directors by reason of the application of s.229, or that he was giving Mr
Cummings professional advice on the arguments "that might wash in a defence to any complaint under s.229". As I have said I accept his evidence, which is consistent with a fair reading of the notes. It was not, of course, contradicted and in the absence of its being inherently improbable, which in my view it was not, and in view of my general acceptance of Mr Bateman's evidence, I see no reason not to accept it.

At Tp.751 Mr Bateman was referred to a document, at p.27,390, of 12 July 1989, which set forth information Mr Cummings provided to him. This amounted to his being told precisely how the Burbank transaction had been put together, but he denied he needed to know those details for the purpose of giving advice in relation to the possible attack that might be made under s.229. He said the information was given in relation to documenting the loans which had been made, and the security which might be taken. At this stage ATRK had been retained to act for Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic as lenders to Beach.

Mr Bateman said that the meeting was set up to take instructions on the preparation of the SCAFA and he was cross-examined at length to suggest that the file note did not deal with information needed to prepare a loan agreement. He said that the meeting, which took place on 14 July 1989, did not provide all this necessary information. However, there was no doubt ATRK did act in relation to that matter for the lenders.

Mr Bateman said, Tp.755, that he became aware that the NCSC had issued notices under s.12 to Beach and Claremont about 12 July 1989, but he did not "particularly recall" that the basis of the attack was because the directors of the IRL Group, and Mr Cummings in particular, did not want the NCSC looking at the Burbank transaction. Nor did he have a particular recollection that the basis for the NCSC's interest had something to do with s.229 possibly being breached. He agreed that on that date ATRK was acting for both Beach and
Claremont in attacking the two s.12 notices. I should repeat that the significance of this matter, if there ever was any, evaporated when it is remembered that there was no suggestion that the notices were not complied with fully, and several years later the NCSC had still not analysed the documents which were produced.

On 8 June 1989 Mr Bateman was told that Burbank was proceeding with Mr
Cordell, as the solicitor, and it was mentioned thereafter. He said he was certainly aware at 12 July 1989 that there was some issue about s.12 notices in which he became involved, but he did not think there was going to be an attack as it seemed to him that Burbank had been looked at by the management of Beach and that whatever happened was going to be highly scrutinised, and it was going to be not attacked in the sense of successfully attacked. He did not say to Beach, in relation to the s.12 notice, that ATRK was in a position of actual or potential conflict and could not accept instructions from it, nor that independent legal advice should be obtained by Beach in responding to the s.12 notice. He denied he was assisting Mr Cummings in articulating justifications in relation to the Burbank transaction and that the purpose of his recording what Mr Cummings told him was in relation to Mr Cummings' concerns in the way in which he felt that he had satisfied them. These various suggestions, if I may say so with respect, have a rather hollow ring when it is borne in mind that Beach did not suggest that Mr Bateman had any reason to be suspicious of the Burbank acquisition, and that ATRK was not acting for any of the parties in relation to it, save for Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic as lenders.

Mr Bateman said, Tp.762, that the Burbank transaction was not one of the type he had come across before and, in that sense, it was unusual and, as at 2 May , he did not perceive that there was a transaction, which was about to occur and which might involve a conflict of interest between Beach, as an intending purchaser, and Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic, as intending lenders. He said it may, in the future, have arisen if there was an indication that the matter might proceed, but as at 2 May 1989 he did not perceive it as anything more than all the other discussions "in its multifarious combinations, none of which had proceeded". He said that if he had been told it was going to proceed:- ".. I would have expected that each would have been separately represented at that time": Tp.764. 
This is what occurred. However, Mr Kelly submitted that in consequence of the advice given by Mr Bateman on 2 May 1989 that there would be no infringement of s.129, the Burbank acquisition, as an integral part of the proposed take- over, went ahead and, but for that advice, the Burbank transaction would not have gone ahead with the consequence that no loss would have been sustained.
This necessitated the submission that ATRK were acting in breach of its fiduciary duty in giving the advice about s.129 because it had two conflicting parties, viz Beach as the purchaser and borrower, and Spargos, Enterprise and
Jingellic as the lenders, present. The submission confronts several hurdles.
Firstly, there was no direct evidence that the Burbank transaction went ahead because of this advice. It was submitted that I should infer that as Mr Main was present and heard the advice he was induced by it to cause Beach to go ahead. But Mr Main gave no evidence to that effect and in the absence of such evidence I do not consider it appropriate to draw that inference. Indeed the absence of such evidence speaks eloquently against any such inference.
Secondly, the parties told Mr Bateman on 2 May 1989 that the Burbank transaction would go ahead "come what may". Although the reason was unknown to
Mr Bateman, it is now quite clear. The fraudulent directors were determined to proceed so that Beach would pay out its money for the benefit of the other companies in the Group and those directors. Thirdly, s.129 barely, if at all, touched upon the acquisition by Beach of Burbank. Section 129 was being discussed in a far broader context. Fourthly, it could not be said that when the advice about s.129 was given there was then any or any real potential for a conflict of interest, or "real sensible" conflict of interest.

His evidence was that at that stage he thought the matter was "merely another possibility", but that if it did proceed he expected Beach to be separately represented from the lenders, which, of course, happened. He said he gave some advice on 2 May 1989 that assignments of the debts would be an insufficient way to record the movement of money from one account to another, and that separate accounts should be available. He made no reference, so far as he could recall, to conflicts of interest because, he repeated, he thought it was another "theoretical discussion". He continued:- "If something eventuated by way of specific instructions, then the matter might have been dealt with differently." 
He said he did not recall the matter developing in that way. He was shown a number of documents, apparently prepared on 4 May 1989 by him, being a copy of the minutes of a meeting of directors of Claremont held on that day: Exhibit
AA; a Consultancy Agreement dated 4 May 1989 between Claremont and M.J. Fuller
Services Pty Limited: Exhibit AB; a copy of a Consultancy Agreement between
Claremont and Jurisprudence Pty Limited: Exhibit AC; and a Deed of
Confidentiality dated 4 May 1989. He said he was aware that there were Deeds of Confidentiality drawn up in relation to discussions with proposed financiers, which matter Mr Ferguson was handling.

He was then shown a letter of 5 May 1989, which was written by Mr Ferguson to
Mr Kenneth Clemens of Standard Chartered Australia Limited, stating:- "We act for the companies in the Independent Resources Group.

We are instructed that the Bank has agreed to enter into a Deed of Confidentiality to facilitate ongoing discussions with our clients.

Accordingly we herewith enclose Deed of Confidentiality for your approval and if approved execution and return to us.

Please direct all correspondence and inquiries to David Ferguson." 
The Deed of Confidentiality was between Standard Chartered Australia Limited and "each of the companies referred to in the Schedule (`the Group
Companies')", which included Beach.

Mr Bateman said, Tp.769, that his understanding was that ATRK acted for particular companies that had "that label applied to them", namely Independent
Resources Group. He said ATRK did not act "on a collective basis", but in response "to particular instructions". He denied that the companies giving the instructions were those set out in the Schedule to the Deed of Confidentiality and continued:- "It was the case where some of those companies were proposed targets or whose affairs were the subject of a possible bid, either as the direct target or the subsidiary of a target in the case of Beach, and certainly their affairs were just as confidential as the bidder's affairs. It was appropriate to protect them." 
He denied that what was afoot was a restructure of an existing group of companies, which were already under the control of IRL, and he said that in some cases the degree of involvement of IRL "was minuscule from a technical direct shareholding, but even from a practical point of view, the degree of control that might be exercised by a combination of companies in the group of fifteen was not always clear".

He said his understanding and belief about the restructuring was the desire of the financiers to bring about a strong entity, which would be listed on ASX "which had a strong viable group of companies underneath it", and that he only accepted instructions from Mr Cummings or Mr Fuller or a person he recognised as being a director. He could not recall whether Mr Main and Mr Johnson were present at the meeting on 2 May 1989.

Mr Bateman was referred to p.27,321, which is a file note in his handwriting dated 4 July 1989, which stated that Mr Cummings and Mr Fuller had "resolved to do the business" and that Mr Main "did the lending" under power of attorney. He said his understanding was that the lending had been resolved upon and that the acquisition had "presumably proceeded as a consequence". On July 1989 Mr Fuller told Mr Bateman that Mr Winby had a concern in that he had not authorised the transaction. Mr Bateman agreed Mr Winby was very concerned about his position as a director and about the question of s.229 relating to his duties as a director, and that Mr Fuller was putting to him,
Mr Bateman, that Mr Winby had these concerns with which he, Mr Fuller, did not entirely agree. Mr Bateman said that he gave advice to Mr Winby about his duties and what he should do depending on certain circumstances, on the basis that the advice was equally open to any director of Spargos. He said he formed the view that he was advising Spargos and, provided the directors were prepared to accept that that advice should be equally open to all directors, he would continue to advise Spargos: Tp.776. At Tp.776 Mr Bateman said that he thought he first received instructions in relation to the proposed loan by
Spargos on 8 June 1989, which was in advance of any loan being made by any company in the IRL Group in relation to the Burbank transaction.

At Tp.778 Mr Bateman said he recognised two levels of potential conflict, the first being a conflict of interest between the directors in their personal position; and the second a potential conflict in acting for Spargos "as distinct from, for example, Enterprise". He said there was no reference to identifying any conflict between the companies in his witness statement of 9
September 1997. He was shown a file note at p.27,316 and agreed it contained no reference to any conflict about which he had advised.

He agreed, Tp.780, that Mr Winby was concerned about being involved in a lending by Enterprise to Beach, one of his concerns being, as explained to him, that that used all of Enterprise's remaining funds. He identified Mr
Winby's concern as being whether it was appropriate for the loan to take place, as distinct from whether the acquisition of Burbank should take place.

In relation to the SCAFA Mr Bateman said he was receiving instructions from
Spargos, on behalf of the lenders, and the matter was to be handled by Beach through its solicitors, Messrs Joelson Wilson, with or without the help of its in-house counsel or other solicitors: Tp.784.

Mr Bateman was asked about Mr Cordell's role as at 22 February 1989, and he repeated his understanding that he had come to assist in the restructuring and, in particular, in obtaining overseas equity or loan funding.

At Tp.786 Mr Bateman was taken to p.25,197, which is the first of a number of pages of white board notes prepared by him comprising a proposal for the restructure of the IRL Group, which was in response to a request to focus on a particular way of restructuring in March 1989. The focus was on the role of
Spargos and the acquisition of shares in it. There was a note to "leave
Beach's 10.7m Spargos shares for the moment", and that Cambridge would buy a number of Spargos shares from Beach for a stated amount of 12 cents per share.

Mr Bateman agreed Mr Cordell was involved in some discussions in Australia about restructuring, although "it was limited". He knew Mr Cordell was interested in that issue and was to be involved in the raising of funds:
Tp.789. Mr Bateman denied that he knew Mr Cordell "was Johnson's man": Tp.790.
He said he allowed him to attend the meeting on 22 February 1989 because he was told it had been appointed to discuss the restructuring and to identify where matters were in relation to ELFIC, and to provide a venue, as it were, for discussion of matters with a view to assisting in the obtaining of loan or equity finance.

On 21 July 1989 Mr Bateman went through what he now understood to be a particular version of the Charge and Option Agreement and some side letters, and, at p.27,441 he summarised aspects of those documents. He said he was not examining them to advise Mr Cummings but to identify the nature of the assets that might be offered as security for the loan, which he understood had been made. The securities had not been put in place and his exercise was part of an ongoing process to do that. He denied he reviewed the Charge and Option
Agreement to give advice to Beach in relation to its terms and he said that as
Mr Cordell was acting for Beach that was not his role. The evidence of Mr
Davidson was that it would be usual for the lender, or its solicitor, to review the transfer document and to require amendments to meet the requirements of the lender. This, in my opinion, was what Mr Bateman was doing. The totality of the evidence satisfies me that ATRK were not acting for
Beach in relation to the SCAFA. Mr Cordell was.

On 21 July 1989 Mr Bateman spoke to Mr Cummings, at which time he was aware Mr
Cummings was a director of Beach, and he was asked if he was intending to convey for the benefit of Spargos, Enterprise, Jingellic and Beach all of the concerns that he passed on to Mr Cummings, which he said was not what he intended. He said he raised the concerns in the context of a file in which he "clearly understood" that he was acting for Spargos and knew that Mr Cordell was acting for Beach. He continued:- "That was the context in which I understood I was working and that's the file to which I recorded my time": Tp.794. 
He denied that his task in relation to the Burbank transaction was to ensure that what Mr Fuller and Mr Cummings wanted "they got", and that he drew no distinction between any of the companies in the IRL Group. He said at that stage he was involved in securing the repayment of the money, which had already been lent, and that a question to be considered was whether title was available in the form appropriate for security. He repeated that his concern was that money had been lent although the question of security had not been finalised, and he sought instructions so that the security could be put in place. His concerns were that his clients had lent money and received no security or certainty of title, in relation to an underlying transaction with a Liberian company, which had not been completed. He thought it was an unusual way to deal with the matter and that only receiving some of the documents was "very unusual": Tpp.796-797. He did not, so far as he could recall, ask for any documents in relation to the assignment of any moneys at Rahn &
Bodmer, because he had been instructed that the money had been lent and he assumed that the assignment had been put in place. He knew at that time, in addition to the fact that the money had been lent, that the option had been exercised and he denied he was "going through the motions" with the SCAFA.
That suggestion in cross-examination implies, at the very least, that Mr
Bateman had knowledge of what was being done at Rahn & Bodmer and of the state of the accounts at Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic there. I do not consider that Mr Bateman either did have, or should have had if he had complied with his instructions, that knowledge.

He was asked about the steps he took to ascertain where the one bearer share in Mazeley was and he said that the greatest interest of all was security "over Burbank itself", for it would not be of great benefit to take security over Mazeley if security over Burbank was not obtained. He passed the SCAFA issue to Mr Ferguson.

He denied, Tp.801, that he regarded Spargos, Enterprise, Jingellic, Beach and the other companies in the IRL Group as though they were really just one client, and that he did not perceive there to be "the slightest matter for concern in the different positions" between those companies.

Mr Bateman was shown a document, which became part of Exhibit AD, headed "28/10/88", which depicted pictorially a series of transactions. He said he prepared it in late October or November 1990 and he recalled the circumstances by reference to a deterioration in the relationship between himself, on the one hand, and Mr Fuller and Mr Cummings, on the other. He had been asked to do some work in relation to the Annual General Meeting and Extraordinary General
Meeting of Beach and/or Claremont, which he was not prepared to undertake unless money was paid on account. The relationship between him and Mr Fuller and Mr Cummings was "somewhat tense" and he recorded the information in relation to an entity referred to as "Guild". He said that he raised the matter with Mr Cummings, who brushed him off, and that the purpose of the diagram was to record for himself what he saw were some unusual payments, being "a lot of money apparently moving into and out of Guild to start with" and into and out of other companies. He did it because it struck him as odd and it was something he "just wanted to do". He denied that he was making up the circumstances in which the document came into existence: Tp.805, and it was put to him that the figures in it were to be found in the memorandum of 10
February 1989, which he said would surprise him. Mr Kelly put to Mr Bateman that the document was brought into existence early in 1989 when he was preparing to meet with Messrs Johnson, Main and Cordell, which he denied emphatically, and he said he did not take steps to refresh his recollection as to what the financial position was of any of the companies in the IRL Group before that meeting. He said the financial analysis he undertook before the meeting of 22 February 1989 was restricted to the brief he understood ATRK had, which was to look at the ELFIC facilities from the point of view of their legal interpretation; that the financial investigation was a matter for the directors and their financial advisers and not their legal advisers; and that such limited financial involvement as he had was in relation to calculating the costs of bids. He continued that if there were some debts between companies that might be utilised to discharge obligations if bids were accepted that "might also be of relevance": Tp.807. He then agreed that two years later, when no meeting was scheduled and there were no instructions and he was not prepared to work unless he had money on account, he performed this analysis, although he said it did not "involve a lot", and he denied that in preparing the document he had regard to the memorandum of 10 February 1989. I see no reason to doubt the explanation given by Mr Bateman. He put what he did in a context, which was in no way improbable, and his denial of the matters put to him by Mr Kelly impressed me as truthful.

Mr Bateman said he understood Guild to be a company owned directly or indirectly by Mr Greenham and Mr Bailey, the financial records of which he received in 1989 in relation to a scheme of arrangement. He was asked, Tp.810, where the original document in the files of ATRK, being Exhibit AD, was, and he said it was in a folder in which he had other diagrams, which showed shareholding relationships of one company to another, which folder was given to "the clients" some years ago and was "produced back on discovery by the plaintiff. The plaintiff had the folder". He said it appeared that Guild was heavily involved in whatever transactions took place on 28 October 1988 as both the payer and recipient of money.

At Tp.813 Mr Bateman was shown page 25,236. He agreed he prepared the document on or about 14 March 1989 showing the present indebtedness of the various companies in the IRL Group with amounts in excess of $1m, and he assumed the amounts had been rounded off to the nearest million dollars. This diagram showed the involvement of Guild in certain financial transactions. He said he did not recall "particularly" when he received the figures, but that figures "like this" were given to him from time to time either orally or sometimes in the form of "one of those grid tables". He denied he had a copy of the memorandum of 10 February 1989, together with its accompanying documents, when he performed this financial analysis. It was put to him that there was a coincidence between the figures on Exhibit AD and he was referred to the memorandum of 10 February 1989, the accompanying documents and to various indebtedness set forth therein.

The reasonable inference from the coincidence of the figures, including an entry which was originally $741,388, which had been crossed out and for which the figure of $3,531,219 had been substituted, is that whatever the figures were that Mr Bateman had before him when he prepared Exhibit AD, they closely correlated with figures, which also found themselves in the attachments to
Exhibit W. There is no doubt that there were movements of money on 28 October , which were recorded in various places. The evidence establishes that they were recorded in the attachments to Exhibit W, but that does not necessarily mean they were not recorded in other places. As he said figures of that type were made available to him from time to time. However, it is clear that Mr Bateman had before him, as at 14 March 1989, these figures and that he was recording the various movements of money at that date: Tp.820. He conceded that and that the work was undertaken in connection with the consideration of the take-over bids. I consider that Mr Bateman's evidence in this regard was inherently credible and accorded with the probabilities.

At Tp.820 Mr Bateman said he made a mistake in stating that Exhibit AD came from the plaintiff, and he agreed that it was part of a number of documents sent, on Mr Fuller's instructions, to his brother, who is a solicitor at
Messrs Baker O'Loughlin in Adelaide. Mr Bateman said he took no copies of the documents, which he sent, because he was instructed not to do so by Mr Michael
Fuller, and he said he did not know that Mr Michael Fuller wanted as many documents as possible, which could implicate him, to disappear. He did not consider what Mr Fuller's intentions were, but he denied he knew he was "setting about to cover his tracks". Mr Bateman said he had not had such instructions, namely not to retain copies of documents, previously and he took the course of reviewing the files and dictating for himself a memorandum as to what was in them, although he did not tell Mr Fuller he was doing that. He said, Tp.824:- "My purpose in creating the document was for the purpose of seeking legal advice should the occasion arise. I felt uncomfortable with the nature of the instruction, the souring of the relationship. I felt that I'd done nothing wrong in relation to any of the matters in the files, but I was being asked to hand over files to another firm of solicitors. Whilst I felt there was nothing wrong in those files or what I had done, I felt that I needed a record so that I could obtain legal advice elsewhere for myself should the occasion arise.

Q. You might just as well have taken a copy of the documents in the file? 
A. That is so, but the instruction was to the contrary." 
Mr Bateman was then referred to a conversation he asserted took place in relation to an ATRK memorandum of fees and to which he referred in paragraphs and 24 of his witness statement of 21 October 1997, part of Exhibit 11. It was put to Mr Bateman that he had fabricated that conversation, because he did not wish it to appear that there had been a conversation with Mr Cummings about the apportionment of the fees charged by ATRK, with a proportion being attributed to Beach. Mr Bateman denied this and said that when Mr Cummings asked whether money could be charged back to Beach in relation to the SCAFA he expressed the view that he did not think it could be. He agreed Mr Cummings suggested that some apportionment was possible and that he, Mr Bateman, said he would need to look at the file to assess whether that was so as he did not believe it was. Although Mr Bateman said the conversation related initially to the SCAFA, he then recalled that Mr Cummings was looking at whether "all payments that were due by Beach under SCAFA had been covered". He said he did not recall any discussion about any "debt restructure", nor about a reasonable apportionment having regard to time spent on Partnership Pacific or
Prudential-Bache and:- "Q. Nothing said about Beach? 
A. Yes. There was the reference to Beach, picking up part of the bill under SCAFA. That was the framework of his question.

Q. Nothing said about Burbank? 
A. There may have been in the context of the reference to SCAFA, but it was, as I say, the framework for the question and the thrust that I understood that he had. What he was asking me was what could be passed on, what percentage could be passed on of that bill to Beach as due and payable by it under SCAFA.

Q. Nothing said about 30 per cent of this bill being equally apportioned to Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic? 
A. No. The only percentage that I recall him talking about was what proportion could be attributed to the consortium bid aspect": Tp.827. 
It was put to Mr Bateman that he was aware that Mr Ferguson's fees for the period 1 April 1989 to 23 June 1989 concerned attendances by Mr Ferguson in relation to discussing the Burbank acquisition and proposed funding of it and he said that the file, in that period, related to the restructuring aspects and the ELFIC facilities, and "when we got to 28 April, the proposed loans in connection with the acquisition of Burbank". He said it covered other matters of restructuring proposals and a number of things. He denied he was aware, when speaking to Mr Cummings, that Mr Cummings was raising an apportionment of that bill between the various members of the IRL Group, which had received professional services up to 23 June 1989. He said he "clearly understood" that the thrust of what he was being asked was what could be passed on to Beach under the SCAFA and:- "Once I had rejected that as being a reasonable thing - and I thought it was stretching to do that - the conversation turned to the question of what percentage was attributable to the consortium bid, and that was about it." 
It was expressly put to Mr Bateman that he made up the conversation set forth in paragraph 24 of his witness statement of 21 October 1997 after he had heard
Mr Kelly's opening. Mr Bateman said that he was in Court during the opening and when it touched upon Mr Cummings' notes at pp.25,415J and K, and he agreed that it was after the opening that he was asked to consider what had happened.
He referred back to such documents as were available to him, which included a file note of talking to Mr Towner, who was the executive director or chairman of Claremont at the time. He said that assisted him. Mr Bateman said it was unlikely that he kept a copy of a note of what he and Mr Cummings discussed, and he denied that he fabricated the conversation. I accept Mr Bateman's evidence on this point. The matter was obviously one of importance in the context of any retainer of ATRK by Beach. The significance of it was forcefully pointed out by Mr Kelly in his opening. It could hardly have been thought that Mr Bateman's statement of 21 October 1997, which was prepared after the opening and at the specific request that he should make a response, would escape the most vigilant attention from Mr Kelly. The short question posed for my consideration is whether during the litigation Mr Bateman prepared a deliberately false statement to the truth of which he knew he would be required to pledge his oath and did so. This was not a matter which arose out of an ill and hastily considered answer in the witness box in the course of cross-examination. It was a carefully considered response by Mr Bateman to a very specific question. It was a statement Mr Bateman knew he had to verify.
If it was untrue it was deliberately untrue. I do not consider it was untrue.
I accept it as truthful. Nothing was pointed to in the evidence which made the statement improbable. I had the opportunity of observing Mr Bateman being cross-examined over a lengthy period. Whilst it was conceded that some of his answers were discursive and, at times, non-responsive, I came to the firm view that Mr Bateman was telling the truth. Further, for the reasons to which I have referred, I consider it is inherently improbable that Mr Bateman put forward a deliberately false statement.

Mr Bateman was shown the file note of his conversation with Mr Towner, which he said refreshed his recollection such as to enable him to make the statement in paragraph 24 of his witness statement of 21 October 1997, and he said that that note caused him to recall his expressing dissatisfaction to Mr Towner about the way in which Claremont had sought to off-set the bill "and that related back to the way in which Cummings had misused my conversation in the way I have described earlier to-day". It was put to Mr Bateman that that file note had absolutely no connection with the conversation he had with Mr
Cummings and he said it had a direct connection and showed how Mr Cummings had misused the conversation. As I have said I accept Mr Bateman's evidence on this point and the note does give some corroboration for which he contended.

At Tp.832 Mr Kelly put to Mr Bateman that the conversation about which he gave evidence at Tp.481 had not taken place, and he said that they had expressed the view that there was some uncertainty in the documentation as to whether the money at Rahn & Bodmer was for a fixed term or at call. I have referred to the denial by Mr Glossop of certain matters Mr Bateman said, the absence of challenge to that denial, and stated my conclusions on this point.

At Tp.833 Mr Bateman was asked about the meeting of 22 February 1989, and he said:- "Q. That was a meeting do you say, in which no real financial difficulty of any of the companies in the IRL Group was discussed at all? 
A. No, certainly the position of the assets, the liabilities, cash flows, they were discussed. The priority cash requirements were discussed. It was certainly indicated that there were various companies that were in different positions from each other and that in the case of the priority cash requirements the consortium bid elements added to the complexities and the difficulties in the cash flow requirements. That's what I concluded and understood.

Q. The problem you had, which eventually led to you preparing the memorandum of which you speak before returning documents to Fuller's brother, was because of your state of knowledge of the affairs at Rahn & Bodmer, was it not? 
A. Not at all.

Q. What was the problem that you saw yourself as having? 
A. I felt that I had done nothing wrong at all. However, the circumstances were such that, where there was a change of solicitor, we were being asked to return our files. There was a general atmosphere, to my mind, that I was unhappy with. The combination of those circumstances gave rise to an apprehension on my part. I could not identify in my mind what it was that might arise in the future, but I felt that I needed to prepare the documents so that I could obtain legal advice in the future." 
Once again the cross-examination was directed to the state of Mr Bateman's knowledge of the affairs of Rahn & Bodmer, when a case of actual fraud on his part was still being pursued.

Should The Evidence Of Mr Bateman Be Accepted? 
I have noted earlier some general criticisms of Mr Bateman's evidence, which
Mr Kelly made and, in considering his evidence I have expressed certain views as to its veracity and reliability which, generally speaking, are favourable to Mr Bateman, and lead me to the conclusion that his evidence should be accepted. As I have said Mr Kelly submitted that Mr Bateman prevaricated, evaded answering the question, made long and irrelevant "speeches", "never completely" told the entire truth, attempted to create a certain impression about his involvement without giving the full context, had self-interest at heart, and deliberately tried to distance himself from his undeniable involvement in certain matters. In this context Mr Kelly instanced the evidence about the authenticity of his signatures on the minutes, which he described as "a farce to mislead the Court as to his true involvement as a director of Spargos and Enterprise". Mr Kelly then dealt with the Beach
General Advice file, Mr Bateman's directorships, the restructuring and refinancing, the meeting with Mr Glossop and Mr Winby on 21 February 1989, the reference to "real Swiss accounts", the conversation with Mr Worthington on 16
May 1989, the discussion with Mr Cummings on 12 July 1989, the sending of the
Standard Chartered documents to Mr Cordell, and the account to Beach. I have dealt with a number of these matters and I do not propose to repeat what I have said. Essentially for the reasons I have given I accept the evidence of
Mr Bateman as being truthful.

Mr Kelly dealt nextly with the assertion by Mr Bateman that he scanned the memorandum of 10 February 1989. He submitted that I should find that Mr
Bateman received and carefully read the contents of that memorandum and its attachments. Whilst the evidence of Mr Bateman that he was not concerned with the financial position of the various companies and that he did not have the memorandum and its attachments after 14 February 1989 appeared, at least initially, to have difficulties, I have concluded that on the first matter it was not necessary, for the reasons I have set out in extenso, for Mr Bateman to have detailed financial knowledge of the type contained in the memorandum.
I appreciate that Mr Glossop has given evidence that, at the least, Mr Bateman considered the file on 14 February 1989 and he believed Mr Bateman had the file with him at the meetings on 21 and 22 February 1989. He conceded he did not take a particular interest in the documents Mr Bateman had on the latter dates. It would be consistent with Mr Bateman's not being interested in the internal financial positions of the companies and considering that the material was "director's stuff" for him not to have retained the file, although, in the context of what was transpiring, it does seem strange that he did not keep it at least for a reference point. This concern is somewhat heightened by the terms of Exhibit U and certain figures Mr Bateman wrote, which would indicate a greater familiarity with the financial position of the companies than that to which he agreed. On this aspect I have come to the conclusion that it is more probable than not that Mr Bateman did have the memorandum and its attachments at the meetings on 21 and 22 February 1989, but that he regarded the information, for the reasons to which I have referred, as not of particular relevance to the task he was being asked to perform. I also think that Mr Bateman looked at the memorandum and its attachments with sufficient care to establish to his satisfaction that they were not documents to which he had to give further consideration. In my opinion the explanation for these deficiencies in recall is that the matters were of less importance or significance to him, whereas, for reasons to which I have referred, they were of substantial significance to Mr Glossop. It was, as I have said, a matter of perspective. I therefore think, on this aspect, that Mr Glossop's evidence is to be preferred to Mr Bateman's. However, that conclusion does not cause me otherwise to doubt the overall veracity of Mr Bateman's evidence.

Mr Kelly turned nextly to the meeting of 22 February 1989. For the reasons I have given I reject Mr Main's evidence as to what transpired at this meeting in so far as it is inconsistent with or at variance with that of Mr Bateman. I have stated my view of Mr Main as a witness. I do not accept that Mr Bateman was aware either prior to, as a consequence of or subsequent to that meeting that the funds of Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic at Rahn & Bodmer were "blocked" in the sense that they were not available to those companies until
IRL and, perhaps, IRAG repaid Rahn & Bodmer.

I have pointed to a number of matters which, in my opinion, make it more probable than not that on the issues as to which I am satisfied Mr Bateman was telling the truth, he was. Mr Hughes, in his written submissions on the credit of Mr Bateman, disputed, in my view validly, the general observations as to Mr
Bateman's demeanour and credibility. He submitted he should be accepted as a witness of truth, who was doing his best to give evidence about a complex series of transactions which occurred over eight years ago. Obviously enough he required access to his notes to refresh his recollection. In particular, in relation to Mr Bateman's knowledge of the position at Rahn & Bodmer, Mr
Hughes drew attention, in his paper headed "The Claim Based On Actual Fraud", (paragraph 19), to the fact that Mr Bateman made notes and drew diagrams, which proceeded on the basis that those deposits were available. He added to the five instances set forth in that paragraph a reference to p.25,275. I think I have referred to them all in my review of the evidence thus far, and I regard the point of the submission as valid.

The Evidence Of Mr Brian James Thomas 
Since 1984 Mr Thomas has practised principally in the commercial, banking and finance areas. On 10 May 1989, when employed by ATRK as a Senior Associate, he was asked by Mr Ferguson to do some work for Spargos and he met with Mr
Ferguson for one hour forty minutes and recalled receiving instructions to act concerning a proposed loan by ELFIC of A$3.8m to a subsidiary of Spargos,
Inspar, to enable Inspar to pay money due to acceptors of a successful takeover bid Inspar had made for the issued share capital of Petrogulf. At about that time he became aware that ELFIC required that Petrogulf reduce an existing facility of A$5m and that Spargos proposed to make a loan to
Petrogulf to enable this to be done.

Mr Thomas opened the file and, on 10 May 1989, had a telephone conversation with Mr Furnell, a solicitor of Messrs Clayton Utz, who was acting for ELFIC.
He telephoned Mr Fuller, who he understood to be a director of Spargos and one of the people from whom he would receive instructions. On 11 May 1989 he spent considerable time perusing documents, which included a draft facility and security documents concerning the loan, and he became aware that part of the security being offered to ELFIC was a second mortgage over the Bellevue Mine tenement, which, he was instructed, was owned in a joint venture by Spargos and its subsidiary, Queen Margaret Gold Mines NL, and that Rothschilds held a first mortgage over it. That made it necessary to obtain Rothschilds' consent to the proposed second mortgage.

Mr Thomas also became aware that Inspar was due to pay the acceptors by 12 May
During the afternoon of 11 May 1989 Mr Fuller came to his office and gave him a letter from Spargos to ELFIC, which was on typed not printed
Spargos letterhead, p.26106, and a letter on printed Beach letterhead addressed to ELFIC, p.26104. He recalled that in a statement he made to the
National Crime Authority dated 10 November 1993 he said that he drafted the letter from Beach to ELFIC of 11 May 1989. In paragraph 13 of his witness statement of 8 September 1997, he said that on reflection "I believe that this is not so". When Mr Fuller gave him the letters he said:- "Spargos has taken an assignment of a deposit held by Beach with ELFIC. Both Boards have approved it. If the loan facility goes ahead, Spargos will give the deposit back to ELFIC in reduction of the Petrogulf facility. Here are the letters to enable ELFIC to take the deposit but you mustn't hand them over until the deal is settled. I don't want ELFIC taking the deposit and not lending the money to Inspar." 
Mr Thomas replied that it did not seem appropriate to send a letter from
Spargos unless it was on "proper letterhead", as ELFIC may not accept it. Mr
Fuller said he could organise some letterhead and in some way he furnished it to Mr Thomas, who asked his secretary to type the letter. Whilst this was being done Mr Fuller said that he could not wait as he had to catch a plane to
Adelaide, and although Mr Thomas asked him to wait he said he would sign blank letterhead, which he did, some being on Spargos', some on Beach's and some on
Claremont's letterhead. The letter at p.26187 was the one typed on Spargos letterhead, which sheet of paper Mr Fuller signed before the terms of the letter were typed.

Mr Thomas said that at some time prior to 12 May 1989 he was told that Beach had assigned its deposit with ELFIC to Spargos in exchange for an assignment by Spargos to Beach of the US Dollar equivalent of that sum from a deposit
Spargos had with a bank in Switzerland and, at about the same time, someone, who he thought was Mr Fuller, said that it was convenient to do a transfer of the deposits, and that Spargos could use the money in Australia and Beach might have a need to use funds overseas.

Mr Thomas said he did not consider that it was necessary for him to obtain any more information about the assignment of the deposit with ELFIC or the swap of deposits, and that he was not asked by Mr Fuller or anyone else from Spargos or Beach to give any advice about such assignment. He said:- "At no time was I asked to, did I agree to or did I intend to advise or act as a solicitor or do anything else for Beach in respect of the assignment of the deposit with ELFIC or to give advice or act as a solicitor or do anything for Beach or Spargos in respect of the assignment of the deposit at Rahn & Bodmer." 
He said that because Mr Fuller told him, and he believed Mr Fuller, that the exchange of deposits had already occurred, he did not consider that either
Spargos or Beach was relying on him to make any enquiry or to give any advice about the transactions. He understood that both Mr Fuller and Mr Cummings were lawyers with considerable commercial experience. He assumed that they, their fellow directors and the management of Spargos and Beach were conscious of their obligations to the companies and had given the appropriate consideration to the transactions and decided that they were in the interests of Spargos and
Beach.

He did not consider the assignment to be unusual or complicated, and he said it was a transaction in which both Spargos and Beach gave equal consideration.
He believed that Mr Fuller and Mr Cummings and the other directors of the companies were competent and honest businessmen, and it did not occur to him that the deposit in Switzerland could be encumbered as Mr Fuller had told him it had been assigned.

At 9.15 am on Friday, 12 May 1989 Mr Fuller telephoned Mr Thomas, and told him that he would be spending a couple of days fishing. Mr Thomas told Mr Fuller that "Elders" was insisting that the charge must have a representation that
Rothschilds had given its consent to the second charge, and Mr Fuller replied that he was willing to go ahead on the basis that an undertaking was given to obtain the consent within a definite time or, alternatively, the Petrogulf facility might not be reduced and the funds could be used to settle for
Inspar. He said to Mr Thomas that he had told Ms Sonia Ritchie it was impossible to get the consent in time for draw-down on 12 May 1989.

Later on the same day Mr Thomas had another telephone conversation with Mr
Fuller, in which Mr Fuller told him that he, Mr Fuller, was looking to give
ELFIC the deposit "but only if they lend about two and a half million or so now". Nextly, on the same day, Mr Thomas had a telephone conversation with Mr
David Turnbull of ELFIC, who told him that ELFIC wanted the Petrogulf facility reduced by $5m immediately and that ELFIC needed a direction from Beach about the $5m. Mr Thomas had a further telephone conversation with Mr Turnbull, in which Mr Thomas told him Spargos wanted to withdraw about $2m from the existing account to be put into an account in its name. Mr Thomas said:- "It's as if Beach takes out its $5m, gives it to Spargos and Spargos puts it back into an account in its name." 
Mr Thomas learnt that the deposit might be located in Melbourne and he discussed with a Victorian solicitor a stamp duty question and, thereafter, had a further conversation with Mr Turnbull in which he asked him what ELFIC's requirements were for Spargos to collect the deposit. Mr Turnbull told him he would provide details, and Mr Thomas asked:- "Will it be enough if you get an authority from Beach like this: `Elders is authorised and directed to pay the deposit held by Elders on behalf of Beach as Spargos may direct in writing'".

Mr Thomas made a note of the proposed authority and composed it because he was concerned that the letter from Beach of 11 May 1989 might attract stamp duty, which would be payable by Spargos as the assignee, as a result of being construed as a memorandum evidencing an assignment of property, and he remembered considering whether Spargos could choose not to use the letter from
Beach of 11 May 1989, but request Beach to write a different letter along the lines of that which he had proposed to Mr Turnbull. In these circumstances he had a telephone conversation with Mr Cummings in which he told Mr Thomas that
Mr Glossop had spoken to Rothschilds, which wanted to see the proposed charge documents before it decided whether it would consent and before the documents were signed. Mr Cummings said that Spargos would use the deposit by directing
ELFIC to pay $3m in reduction of the Petrogulf facility and $2m to Inspar.

After that telephone conversation Mr Thomas deleted the figure "5" in the second last line of the last paragraph of the letter from Spargos of 11 May and substituted the figure "3". He then spoke to an officer of ELFIC and told him he would prepare letters addressed to ELFIC setting out the basis of
Spargos' instructions for dealing with the $5m. He was told that there was no problem with Spargos' withdrawing that amount provided instructions were received by 11 am on the following Monday.

Mr Thomas subsequently spoke to Mr Glossop and told him that he should ensure that the currency swap was recorded in Spargos' books as a purchase and not as a derivatives transaction; that the deal with ELFIC had been done, so that the money for the takeover should be with him on Monday; and that he should check with Rahn & Bodmer to make sure they had done their paper work. At that stage Mr Thomas did not know the correct name of the Swiss bank was Rahn &
Bodmer and he referred to it incorrectly. It is inherently improbable that Mr
Thomas would have been acting on that part of the transaction and not been aware of the correct name.

On the evening of Friday, 12 May 1989 Mr Thomas dictated a draft letter from
Beach to ELFIC, which was based on the note he had written during his conversation with Mr Turnbull, and a draft letter from Spargos to ELFIC, being a direction to ELFIC to pay the $5m deposit in the manner that Mr Cummings had told him had been agreed. He had the letters typed and, after speaking to Mr
Fuller on Monday, 15 May 1989, when he asked him if the letters were "OK" and he confirmed they were, Mr Fuller agreed to his request to use them.
Thereafter Mr Thomas had another telephone conversation with Mr Fuller and made certain changes with which Mr Fuller agreed, and he asked Mr Thomas whether the letter could be printed on the letterhead he had left with him. Mr
Thomas also told Mr Fuller that there would be a problem by simply ignoring the 11 May 1989 letters, "because they have been signed and delivered". Mr
Fuller said that if that was the case and if they could not be taken back "we'll just have to send them", and Mr Thomas said that he would send all four letters to ELFIC, which he did.

On 16 May 1989 Mr Thomas sent letters to Spargos, which Mr Bateman had signed, enclosing copies of the Beach and Spargos letters of 11 and 15 May 1989. In the second paragraph of the letter to Spargos he referred to copies of minutes of Spargos and Beach, which he said were delivered to him at some time on 15 or 16 May 1989, although he did not recall the circumstances and played no role in their preparation. The allegation in the Further Amended Statement of
Claim that ATRK had prepared the minutes was abandoned. He referred to the fact that in his statement to the National Crime Authority of 10 November 1993 he said that he may, although he was not sure, have drafted the resolutions, but, on reflection, he believed he did not. One reason was that the format was different from that he employed. For the reasons I have just given it can no longer be in issue that this statement was in error.

On either 15 or 16 May 1989 Mr Fuller asked him to send copies of the letters sent to ELFIC to Mr Worthington "at Beach", and Mr Thomas then wrote to Beach enclosing copies of the letters and the original Beach resolution of 10 May
He arranged for Mr Bateman to sign the letter and he said he sent the letter to Beach because Mr Fuller asked him to and not because he regarded
Beach as his client. He regarded Spargos as the client, and he added that he would not have written to Beach or known to address the letter to Mr
Worthington, if he had not been asked to do so by Mr Fuller. He considered it consistent with good practice that Beach be informed of what had happened to the deposit and how its share of interest would be paid to it, and he said it was also necessary to return the original resolution to Beach. Subsequently Mr
Thomas created a sub-file for the currency swap transaction and, on 20 June , he sent a memorandum of professional fees to Spargos. He did not send any fees to Beach, and it did not occur to him to do so.

He did not hear about any proposed acquisition of the Burbank oil field until about June 1989, although, on 15 May 1989, Mr Fuller had told him of an overseas deal, the result of which would be, according to Mr Fuller, that
Beach would owe Spargos $11m. Mr Thomas was unaware of any connection between that proposed transaction and the exchange of deposits.

In July 1989 Mr Bateman told Mr Thomas that Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic were proposing a facility in favour of Beach, so that it could acquire an oil field in the United States, and Mr Bateman asked him to attend to the documentation and said that Mr Cummings would be coming to see him. Mr Thomas had a meeting with Mr Cummings in which he was told that Beach was buying an oil field in the United States called Burbank, that part of the purchase price was being funded by a loan from Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic, and that Mr
Bateman had told him that Mr Thomas would prepare the documentation. Mr
Cummings said that he wanted to make sure that it was in proper order, "especially because Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic are lending money to a company which has directors common to each of them".

Mr Cummings continued that he wanted to make sure that everybody could see that the interests of Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic had been properly protected. Mr Thomas told Mr Cummings that he wished to make it very clear that he could not act for both the lenders and the borrower in the transaction, and that he would act for the lenders but Mr Cummings would have to find someone else to act for Beach. Mr Cummings agreed and said that Mr
Cordell would do so.

Because of other commitments it was not until August 1989 that Mr Thomas took steps to draw up the documents and, after preparing a resume of the proposed transaction, he had a conversation with Mr Cordell about it on 4 August 1989.
By 9 August 1989 he had prepared a draft of the proposed loan document, which came to be known as the SCAFA, and, on 10 August 1989, he received a further letter from Mr Cordell, to whom he wrote on 11 August 1989 enclosing a draft of the proposed agreement. This correspondence was entirely consistent with Mr
Cordell acting for Beach.

On 16 August 1989 Mr Lidstone furnished a list of title documents that had been forwarded to Mr Cordell concerning the Burbank oil field and, on 22
August 1989, Mr Thomas received a further letter from Mr Cordell stating that he had reviewed the material with Mr Fuller and that a number of amendments had been made and, on 30 August 1989, Mr Thomas received a further letter from
Mr Cordell enclosing a copy of a letter that he had sent to Mr Cummings. On or about 22 September 1989 Mr Thomas prepared a further draft of the SCAFA, in which he included as Schedule 1 the commitment of Spargos, Enterprise and
Jingellic in the following amounts respectively, namely A$2,350,000,
A$7,900,000 and A$4,275,000.

On 4 December 1989 Mr Cordell wrote to ATRK thanking them for their letter of the same date, referring to various matters necessary to conclude the transaction, and noting "that we will need instructions from our clients Beach
Petroleum NL confirming that such letter of acknowledgment may be issued ...".
On 5 January 1990 Mr Cordell wrote a letter enclosing various documents relevant to the transaction in accordance with instructions received from Mr
Cummings of Beach.

On 18 August 1989 Mr Cordell sent a memorandum of fees to Mr Fuller for Beach, which covered the period October 1988 to August 1989 and related to the preparation of the Charge and Option Agreement and the notice of exercise of option and "dealing with Abbott Tout Russell Kennedy, Australian solicitors, regarding security documentation for loans to be made to Beach".

From time to time before 4 October 1989 Mr Thomas had told Mr Cummings he needed instructions as to the precise amounts Spargos, Enterprise and
Jingellic had lent Beach, so that he could include the correct figures. On or shortly prior to 5 October 1989 copies of letters from Rahn & Bodmer dated September 1989 and addressed to each of Spargos, Beach, Enterprise and
Jingellic were delivered to him stating that as at 30 June 1989 those companies held deposits at Rahn & Bodmer, which "were not encumbered in any way". In these circumstances it is hardly surprising that Mr Thomas had no suspicions about the accounts. Mr Thomas said he did not know why the letter concerning the Beach deposit was given to him. He used the information in the
Rahn & Bodmer letters addressed to Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic to make manuscript alterations to the SCAFA, which were incorporated into a further print of it on 5 October 1989. On that day he telephoned Mr Cummings and sought confirmation that the principal balance referred to in the Rahn & Bodmer letters "is the amount those companies lent Beach", to which Mr
Cummings replied by words to the effect of "yes".

Mr Thomas assumed that the letters from Rahn & Bodmer set out "factual information as to deposits" and, with a view to avoiding the imposition of stamp duty, he proposed the SCAFA should be executed in the Australian Capital
Territory. It was his practice in 1989, in those circumstances, to use the services of Mr John Buxton of the Canberra firm of Messrs Abbott Tout Russell
Kennedy, a partnership separate from and independent of ATRK. If there were a number of parties who did not have a representative in the Australian Capital
Territory, it was his practice to offer the services of Mr Buxton to act as attorney under power.

On 5 October 1989 he prepared powers of attorney in favour of Mr Buxton and himself from Spargos, Enterprise, Jingellic and Beach and, at 6.15pm on that day, he attended at Beach's offices and met Messrs Cummings, Fuller and
Worthington. He took with him the latest draft of the SCAFA and the four powers of attorney and went through the changes that had been made since it was approved by Mr Cordell. Towards the end of the meeting Mr Fuller said that it was not certain whether Beach had 43 per cent or 47 per cent of North
Burbank, but subject to that being confirmed the documents were in order and could be sent to Canberra for signing with which, he said, Mr Worthington agreed.

On 6 October 1989 Mr Thomas sent a letter to Spargos enclosing a letter of the same date to Beach, which letter enclosed a memorandum of fees and statement of account addressed to Spargos. He regarded Spargos as ATRK's client, but he knew that under the terms of the SCAFA Beach, as borrower, had agreed to pay
Spargos' costs, which he explained in the second paragraph of his letter to
Beach.

Mr Thomas said that his practice in 1989, was to refrain from sending documents, such as the SCAFA, for execution until final approval had been received from the client and, from 11 to 24 October 1989 he spoke to Mr
Cummings about other matters and obtained, ultimately, his final approval to send the document for execution. It was sent to Mr Buxton on 24 October 1989, with the request that it not be dated, executed on 25 October 1989 and returned from Canberra undated. Mr Thomas wrote in the date "19 October 1989" and he said, in paragraph 120, that he believed that it was on that date that
Mr Cummings gave him final approval.

He said it was not his practice, in 1989, to date documents such as the SCAFA otherwise than on their date of execution unless he had express instructions to do so. He had no recollection of Mr Cummings giving him those instructions "but I would not have done so without such instructions". He continued that in it was his practice, in circumstances where he was instructed that a document was to be effective on a date earlier than its date of execution, to write the word "effective" immediately prior to the date of the document. He believed he forgot to do that on this occasion. He concluded by saying that at no time was he asked to, did he agree to or did he intend to advise or act as a solicitor or do anything for Beach in respect of the SCAFA. He considered the drafting of the power of attorney, which was left at Beach for execution, to be a step taken to ensure the proper execution of the SCAFA for the benefit and protection of the lenders.

At Tp.851 Mr Thomas identified a minute of a meeting of directors of Beach held on 5 October 1989, which he prepared acting on behalf of the lenders in the SCAFA transaction. He said he believed the minute was brought into existence on 4 December 1989 and he was told by either Mr Fuller or Mr
Cummings to prepare it. He was referred to a copy of his witness statement given to the National Crime Authority on 15 November 1993, but he said he did not have a recollection of whether it was Mr Cummings or Mr Fuller or somebody else, who instructed him to prepare the minute. He agreed it recorded a resolution that he and Mr Buxton be appointed as attorneys of Beach. Mr Thomas said he was not acting pursuant to the power of attorney when he dated the
SCAFA, and that he could not recall the circumstances leading up to the date's being inserted, although he suspected the authority was from a conversation he probably had with Mr Cummings, from whom he was receiving instructions on behalf of Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic. Mr Thomas agreed he would not have dated the document 19 October 1989 unless he had instructions to do so, and he said that he would not necessarily need instructions from "everybody", which was a party to the document, before "putting any date on it other than its correct date", "because on occasions lenders have authority to date documents". It was put to Mr Thomas that he dated the document 19 October 1989 because Mr Cummings told him. He said he did not remember any conversation to that effect, but the probability was there was such a conversation with Mr
Cummings. He did not recall any conversation with Mr Cummings in respect of
Beach, and he said he was acting in accordance with his instructions on behalf of Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic. I am satisfied that Mr Thomas dated the
SCAFA in accordance with and because of instructions received from Mr
Cummings. There is no magic about the date and no reason to have adopted it, save for the explanation he gave. Also his evidence was inherently credible.

Mr Thomas agreed that before he acted in any matter in relation to companies in the Group he was told by either Mr Fuller or Mr Cummings who the client was, and that Mr Cummings had given him instructions to act for Spargos,
Enterprise and Jingellic in relation to the SCAFA, during the course of which conversation he told Mr Cummings he was not prepared to act for both the lender and the borrower. That was because he was aware of the various publications through the Law Society establishing professional standards in that regard and that the basis for those standards lay in a solicitor's avoiding accepting conflicting engagements from two or more clients. He was particularly conscious of not being in a position of conflict especially in a loan transaction.

He said he doubted whether he construed himself as acting for Beach in preparing the resolution, but he regarded himself in preparing the minutes as acting for the lenders in the sense of ensuring that the minute was acceptable to them. However, he agreed he prepared the minutes about two months after the meeting in circumstances where he was told, by someone, what had transpired, and he said that a lender could be told what had happened and then instruct him. Mr Davidson's evidence supported the view that those representing a lender may, in the circumstances, prepare the relevant borrower's minute.

He was referred to his file note of 5 October 1989, when he attended at the offices of Beach and Mr Fuller, Mr Cummings and Mr Worthington were present.
He agreed he went through the SCAFA, which had previously been approved by Mr
Cordell, and that he did not say he was in a position of conflict "but it was abundantly clear from the conversation that Cordell was acting on behalf of
Beach": Tp.863. His recollection was of referring to the changes from the document that Mr Cordell had previously approved with Mr Fuller, and of some discussion about ascertaining the percentage interest in North Burbank. He agreed that meant that subject to checking the title particulars he would attend to the execution of the instrument by sending it to Canberra, and he said that was on instruction from Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic and pursuant to an authority from Beach. He never regarded himself as doing any legal work for Beach in relation to the SCAFA and, when asked about the power of attorney, he said he prepared one for Beach to sign for the purpose of enabling Beach to be legally committed to the SCAFA, whereby he appointed himself and Mr Buxton as the attorneys, so that Beach would become legally committed to the transaction if, as he said, Beach authorised it.

He agreed the entire purpose of sending the SCAFA documents to Canberra was so that Beach would save stamp duty, and that in doing so, he was acting in the interests of Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic because it was not in their interests for the borrower to "unnecessarily incur stamp duty". In these circumstances he said he was doing something that was proper in the interests of the lenders and he was asked whether it was a proper matter, in their interests, to backdate the SCAFA. He thought it should have read "effective 19
October 1989", that he had forgotten to put in the word "effective", and that he was rectifying that omission. He did not know if there was any particular importance in the date but, although he agreed he was speculating, he said it seemed to him that that was probably the date when the final approval was given. In the end there was not any significance whether the document was dated 19 or 25 October 1989, and that was the position as at 25 October 1989.

Mr Thomas was asked about whether the SCAFA transaction was complete on 5
October 1989, and whether it struck him that the transaction was "a singularly strange" one. He said it was not and it was not a unique transaction where moneys are advanced before the documentation. He said it was neither quite strange nor very common: Tp.867.

At Tp.868 Mr Thomas was asked about Mr Fuller's providing some blank letterhead and asking him to engross an authority on blank Beach letterhead.
He said he did not remember whether he raised any question of whether ATRK could accept instructions to prepare the authority nor saying to Mr Fuller that ATRK would have a conflict were it to act for both Beach and Spargos in relation to the currency swap. He agreed he would not print off a letter if he did not believe he was so authorised by the person with authority to have him print it. In May 1989 Mr Thomas believed Mr Fuller was the chairman of directors of Beach. He had caused Beach letterhead to be sent to him and he asked Mr Thomas to print out a letter, which Mr Thomas had drafted, on that letterhead. Mr Thomas was asked whether he accepted those instructions from
Beach and replied that it was a request from Mr Fuller, whom he knew had authority to sign letters on Beach letterhead and that he was drafting the words "in the interests of Spargos". He agreed he knew the letter was likely to go to ELFIC, although there was a stamp duty issue which may have prevented that, and he was the person who accepted instructions from Mr Fuller to deliver the letter of 15 May 1989 to ELFIC and:- "Q. When he told you to deliver the letter of 15 May on Beach letterhead, presigned by him, you understood that you were doing what you were told to do by Beach? 
A. No, I was - the entire file was me acting on behalf of Spargos. It was the Spargos re ELFIC file. The only aspect in respect of that letter that had anything to do with Beach was the fact that Cummings - sorry, that Fuller asked me to print the letter out, and it was going to be held on behalf of Spargos and sent on behalf of Spargos." 
It was put to him that he understood the instructions were from Beach and he said he did not accept that he received any instructions from Beach. He was asked how Spargos could tell Beach to do all these things if Beach did not want to, and he said that as he saw it the parties were acting for themselves and he was, in essence, acting as a post boy. He did not agree that the delivery of the letter to ELFIC necessarily had a legal effect as the transaction had occurred already and Spargos already held a letter, which said the deposit at ELFIC had been assigned. He continued:- "So with the delivery of that letter, which was in Spargos' control, that was enough to cause ELFIC to be obliged to pay the money away. The Beach letter of the 15th was a letter which, in certain circumstances, may have made the stamp duty position clearer, Spargos' stamp duty position clearer": Tp.817. 
Mr Thomas was asked about the conversation with Mr Turnbull as to the terms of the direction ELFIC required.

Mr Thomas was taxed as to whether he was accepting instructions from Mr Fuller on behalf of both Spargos and Beach and, in relation to Beach, he said he regarded Mr Fuller as basically making his own decisions whether or not the letters should be forwarded. He agreed he composed the words of the authority, which he placed on Beach letterhead and had delivered to ELFIC for the purpose of its acting upon that authority in the implementation of the transaction. He did not think there was a detriment because he understood there was a transaction, which had been completed, and that the 11 May letter gave effect to almost identical concepts. He said that had Mr Fuller not been the chairman of Beach he would not have prepared the authority on letterhead and he would not have delivered it.

At Tp.874 Mr Thomas said he took no steps to ascertain whether there was any fund on deposit at Rahn & Bodmer that was available to be swapped for the $5m coming from Beach. He repeated, Tp.875, that he was not acting for Beach and so he did not deal with its position. He said he did not know whether
Beach was acting for itself, or through Mr Fuller or Mr Cummings, or whether it had other people acting for it, and that he did not know what was happening in respect of the Rahn & Bodmer moneys nor whether there was a Swiss lawyer involved. He suspected that Mr Fuller and/or Mr Cummings were documenting or carrying out the transaction on behalf of Beach.

He said there was nothing about the transaction that struck him as odd, that he thought Mr Fuller and Mr Cummings were honest, and that he knew they were experienced solicitors in their own right. He understood that Spargos could use the money in Australia and that Beach had the Burbank transaction in mind.
He did not know Spargos was desperately short of cash, but he did know that in the week leading to 12 May 1989 it had approached ELFIC to borrow money to lend to Inspar to fund the Petrogulf takeover, for which acceptances had to be paid by 12 May 1989. He did not turn his mind to the fact that if Spargos had money on deposit at Rahn & Bodmer, which was available to be swapped for the Beach funds, it could just as easily have drawn a cheque or arranged a telegraphic transfer of its own money and applied it to its own needs. He thought this transaction seemed convenient for both Spargos and Beach. He said he saw nothing odd about Beach's not having an externally instructed solicitor, as many companies have legally qualified staff and that Beach and
Spargos were doing the transactions themselves. He agreed, again, that he took no steps to check with Rahn & Bodmer about money being available, which would be a prime example, in my opinion, of an action if he was acting on behalf of Beach. He did not recall whether he turned his mind to ATRK having a conflict of interest in the transaction: Tp.878, and he said that he considered the currency swap was a transaction which was a convenient use of assets of the companies.

At Tp.888 Mr Thomas said that whilst preparing the SCAFA he became aware that a number of repayments had already been made by Beach, and he recalled that on about 8 September 1989 he drafted a number of Deeds of Assignment in relation to a repayment of $2,511,780.81. Firstly, there was an assignment of that amount from Claremont to Beach, which was then on deposit with ACC, and then an assignment from Beach to Spargos. He denied, that in doing so, he was acting for Claremont, Beach and Spargos. He said he was acting for Spargos in the assignment from Claremont to Beach, and that he was doing so under instructions from Mr Cummings, who, he knew, was a director of Claremont,
Beach and Spargos. He said it was all done under "the over-riding conversation" he had with Mr Cummings in which he said to Mr Cummings that he was not acting for Beach in respect of anything that touched upon the
Spargos/Beach/SCAFA document. His instructions were to have Spargos repaid some moneys and, in response to a question as to whether he had instructions from Claremont, he said he had instructions from Spargos to prepare the documents "and that it was a matter for Claremont and Beach to make their own decision": Tp.891. He repeated it was a matter for those companies to execute the assignments "if they wanted". He agreed he arranged for the execution of the documents after a conversation with Mr Worthington, and that he prepared powers of attorney for each of the companies so the assignments could take place in Canberra, but he denied he was acting for all the parties at the one time. He said the presence of a letter from ACC confirming the availability of the money was "purely a matter of convenience at that time", and that he saw the transaction "as a convenient arrangement under which moneys on deposit by
Claremont at Atlantic might be paid to Spargos under the SCAFA", just as he had seen it to be a matter of convenience that Beach's $5m at ELFIC should be paid to Spargos. Mr Thomas maintained that in this transaction he was acting for Spargos. He said that a director of Claremont could choose to authorise the transaction without obtaining separate legal advice, and that the preparation of the documents did not require Claremont to retain ATRK in the sense of a retainer, but in the sense of doing a particular activity. He did not think that the assignment from Beach would require instructions to prepare the documentation because he was told that Spargos wanted an early repayment of $2.5m and he was preparing documentation for the consideration of Claremont and Beach, which would enable that payment to take place. He was preparing those documents on behalf of, and in the interests of, Spargos to ensure that the money came via a good chain of title, and with a view to both Claremont and Beach independently of ATRK considering the documentation.

At Tp.897 Mr Thomas confirmed that he understood Mr Cordell was acting for
Beach in the SCAFA transaction, and that he dated the document 19 October , although he said that was not done pursuant to the power of attorney. He agreed that that date imposed obligations in law on Beach from then, rather than from the date on which the document was actually signed. He said he did not remember speaking to Mr Cordell about changing the date, although it would be normal practice, before doing so, to speak to a solicitor acting for Beach.
He repeated he did not remember and that he was unable to find his complete file: Tp.899.

Commencing at Tp.905 Mr Thomas was cross-examined on the preparation of several draft letters to respond to the Adelaide Stock Exchange in relation to its allegation of a possible breach of Listing Rule 3A(2)(c). He agreed that from reading a facsimile transmission from Ms Kahl he was advised that
Enterprise originally deposited $17m with ACC, that $12m was withdrawn, and that the balance had, by 25 November 1988, been withdrawn in full. He understood, therefore, Enterprise no longer had any money with ACC. Mr Thomas was asked how he drew two letters, which were inconsistent with the instructions as to the withdrawal of the moneys. He said he did not accept that he would deliberately mislead a person and he thought the more likely explanation was that he simply overlooked the concluding words "and the balance has now been withdrawn in full". He denied the first letter was drafted as a device to mislead ASX and that the second draft "was carefully drafted" to mislead it. He agreed there was certainly a factual error in respect of the first, which he said was an error by accident and not by design. He denied that he drafted the letters to assist Enterprise to avoid "the heat that was being applied to it when it was under the management of
Fuller and Cummings": Tp.911. I accept the evidence of Mr Thomas. I do not consider that he engaged in any conduct which was deliberately misleading.

Commencing at Tp.913 Mr Thomas was cross-examined about instructions he gave in relation to the currency swap in the context of an attempt by ATRK to withdraw certain admissions made in the original Defence. Mr Thomas agreed,
Tp.920, that as at May 1996, it was his belief that the Beach letter of 11 May was typed at his direction and he said "I was wrong". He said he considered the matter "within the parameters of not having my file there", and then he was questioned about his statements that the letter was not full size, was reduced and misaligned. He said that because he did not have good copies he simply assumed that the letter was prepared by him. He was then cross- examined as to his position with ATRK in May 1995 when the proceedings were commenced and his involvement in the currency swap transaction. He complained about the lack of documentation to which he was able to refer. He said, at
Tp.923, that when he forwarded documents to ELFIC on 15 May 1989 he was doing so on behalf of Spargos; that he had the letters of 11 May 1989, which were held by Spargos and which were notices of assignment; and that there were the letters of 15 May 1989, which he regarded as being held for Spargos. He read the words of the 15 May letters to Mr Fuller and handed over to him the responsibility of deciding whether they were appropriate for the two companies.

The admission, which led to this problem was:- "Admit that Abbott Tout Russell Kennedy prepared documents on behalf of Spargos to be forwarded by each of Spargos and Beach notifying ELFIC that Spargos had taken an assignment of Beach's deposit with ELFIC." 
Mr Thomas said the words should be read as his having prepared documents on behalf of Spargos and that what he intended to say was that the documents were to be forwarded from Spargos and Beach, rather than by them. Mr Thomas was then referred to a bundle of documents, which included the letter on Beach letterhead dated 11 May 1989. He denied that he was being untruthful in saying that he was under a disadvantage in relation to the copy of that letter and, when it was put to him that the admissions "well" accorded with his recollection of the events, he denied that and added:- "I am not going to risk my professional reputation for anyone, particularly when I'm not a party to the proceedings. I find it offensive that this is being put to me." 
I have referred to the impression that answer made on me as I heard it given.

He elaborated upon this by saying that he did not have his original file to which he wanted access and he thought it "disgusting" that he could not have access to that file, a matter which "irks me incredibly": Tp.927.

I am satisfied that Mr Fuller handed Mr Thomas the letter on Beach letterhead bearing date 11 May 1989 and that in so far as the admission in the pleading is to the contrary of that ATRK should be allowed to withdraw it on the basis that it was made in error arising from the absence of all relevant documentation. I am satisfied for a number of reasons. Firstly, I accept the evidence of Mr Thomas, who I regarded as a credible witness. His evidence, generally speaking, accorded with the probabilities. Secondly, on 11 May 1989
Mr Fuller sent a facsimile transmission to Mr Glossop at 11.05 am, which included a letter on Beach letterhead dated 11 May 1989 and which, according to the transmission record, was sent from Adelaide. That letter is exactly the same as the letter on Beach letterhead handed by Mr Fuller to Mr Thomas, the obvious conclusion being that the one letter was prepared and a copy was sent by facsimile transmission to Mr Glossop and the original was handed to Mr
Thomas. This is consistent with the copy of the letter on typed Spargos letterhead also being sent by facsimile transmission to Mr Glossop and the original furnished to Mr Thomas. Thirdly, the other letter of 11 May 1989 on
Beach letterhead, p.26187, which was undoubtedly typed at ATRK's office, differs from the one handed to Mr Thomas in that there is a consistent absence of commas, which appear in the other letter. This indicates, when taken with all the other evidence, that it was typed by a different person. I think the better inference is that if the other letter of that date had also been typed at ATRK's offices there would have been a consistency in this regard. I accordingly consider that the admission was made in error and that ATRK should be permitted to withdrawn it. Any discretionary considerations in this regard are overcome by the fact that the matter was argued in full and no prejudice was shown.

Mr Kelly submitted that Mr Thomas did not come to Court as an independent witness and that his evidence must be assessed on the basis that he had an interest in creating the overall impression that he was, at all times, acting for Spargos in relation to the Currency Swap transaction and Spargos,
Enterprise and Jingellic in relation to the SCAFA. It is, Mr Kelly submitted, this interest, which predicates all his explanations and his interpretation of documents. He submitted that Mr Thomas put a "constant gloss" on the documents to give the impression that he was not acting for Beach, which made "the entirety of his evidence unreliable".

I think it convenient to deal with the two transactions independently.
Firstly, in relation to the currency swap transaction, as I have noted, the allegation that the resolutions of 10 May 1989 were prepared by ATRK was expressly withdrawn. Secondly, there is no evidence that satisfies me that Mr
Thomas was asked to act on behalf of any party in relation to the assignment from Spargos to Beach at Rahn & Bodmer. Thirdly, I am satisfied, essentially for the reasons I have given, that Mr Fuller delivered to Mr
Thomas letters prepared by or at Mr Fuller's direction and dated 11 May 1989 on Beach's printed letterhead and the typed letterhead of Spargos. Fourthly, it is conceded, and in my view properly so, that in this transaction ATRK was acting on behalf of Spargos in concluding the agreements entered into pursuant to the resolutions of 10 May 1989. Fifthly, I do not see any reason why in such a transaction, as explained to Mr Thomas, there was any conflict between the interests of Spargos and of Beach. Sixthly, Mr Thomas was dealing with the chairman of directors of both Spargos and Beach, who he knew to be an experienced commercial lawyer. Seventhly, there was nothing inherent in the transaction to give rise to any suspicion. Eighthly, in seeking to reduce the incidence of stamp duty in Victoria Mr Thomas was acting in the interests of
Spargos, which was the party liable to pay any such duty. Ninthly, in causing the letters to be delivered to ELFIC, Mr Thomas was, on instructions from Mr
Fuller, performing an administrative act, in the sense that the agreement had been reached previously.

Mr Kelly submitted that in so far as any of these activities related to Beach
Mr Thomas, and hence ATRK, was acting on behalf of Beach. In my view that is not the proper construction to place on the evidence and, I repeat, that this was not a situation in which ATRK was asked to act on the transaction in
Switzerland. I accept the evidence of Mr Thomas, who in my opinion was an inherently truthful witness, that it was his belief that the matter was being handled on behalf of Beach, so far as the Australian side of the transaction was concerned by appropriate people, and that the matter was being handled in
Switzerland by others.

Mr Hughes submitted that when Mr Fuller told Mr Thomas on 11 May 1989 that
Beach had assigned its deposit to Spargos as part of the Currency Swap, Mr
Thomas was acting for Spargos in relation to advances it proposed to make to
Petrogulf to reduce its indebtedness to ELFIC and so that Inspar could pay acceptors in relation to the bid for Petrogulf. So much was not in issue. He submitted that the consequence of the resolutions of 10 May 1989 was to create an agreement binding in equity on Beach and capable of specific performance at the suit of Spargos, and that all that remained to be done was to perfect
Spargos' legal entitlement to the deposit assigned to it by Beach by notification to ELFIC, and that all ATRK was asked to do was to deliver to
ELFIC the letters, which Mr Fuller gave to Mr Thomas.

However, in relation to these simple instructions, two problems arose, both relating to Spargos. Firstly, Mr Thomas was concerned that the Spargos letter was on typed rather than printed letterhead. Accordingly, he had the letter re-engrossed on Spargos letterhead. Secondly, he believed that Spargos may be able to avoid the incidence of stamp duty and, to that end, he prepared a further letter, which Mr Fuller authorised him to insert on Beach letterhead, but which letter was obviously for the benefit of Spargos as the party potentially liable to pay the stamp duty. The ultimate delivery up of all the letters concluded the transaction, but Mr Thomas had specific instructions from Mr Fuller, who he knew to be the chairman of directors of Beach, to act in that way. The circumstances thus far do not satisfy me either that ATRK were acting on behalf of Beach in the transaction or, if for any reason they were, that there was any conflict of interest between Spargos and Beach, which required ATRK to give any advice to Beach or, more relevantly for present purposes, to advise Beach to obtain independent legal advice.

The assignment in Switzerland was not purportedly effected until either 13 or September 1989, but, relevantly for present purposes, that was not a matter as to which ATRK received instructions from any party.

Mr Kelly submitted at Tp.1437, when I asked him what the conflict was, that
Spargos had an interest in obtaining Beach's money, and Beach had an interest in preserving and protecting its assets. He said the resolutions each made it plain that the assignments were supposed to be contemporaneous:- "So the assignments plainly hadn't occurred. The assignments are occurring upon delivery of notice to ELFIC, so that ELFIC might then pay the money. So there is on the face of it an unexecuted assignment, an incomplete assignment. There is no assignment as such. At the very highest one might infer a contract, but one knows that there isn't a contract; there's a fraud. That's the underlying fact in this case." 
However, ATRK did not know, and had no reason to suspect, that there was a fraud at that time. If ATRK had been instructed to act for Beach on the
Switzerland assignment the true circumstances would have been, in all probability, disclosed. This simple fact would have ensured that those perpetrating the fraud did not ask ATRK to become involved in that aspect of the matter.

Mr Hughes submitted, I think correctly, that Mr Kelly's submission showed a fundamental misconception, because, on what Mr Fuller disclosed, there had been assignments in equity.

Mr Kelly also relied on the writing of the letter to Mr Worthington. The explanation proffered for that was that it advised Beach what had happened and returned its original resolution to it. This, Mr Thomas said, was done on the instructions of Mr Fuller. In my view there is no reason to doubt that evidence and, in all the circumstances, I do not see how it can be asserted that there was any assumption of responsibility to Beach by those simple activities. Undoubtedly Mr Worthington telephoned Mr Bateman to find out whether the money assigned in Switzerland was hedged and, consistently with
ATRK not acting for Beach, Mr Bateman referred him to Mr Fuller.

The fees were rendered to Spargos and, presumably, paid by it. There is no suggestion of any fees being rendered to or paid by Beach in relation to this matter.

The involvement by Mr Thomas in the SCAFA was, I am completely satisfied, confined to his acting on behalf of Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic. There are various matters which lead, in my opinion, inevitably to this conclusion.
Firstly, Mr Thomas said, and this evidence was not contradicted in any way, that when he was approached to act in the matter he made it clear that he would only act on behalf of the lenders and he was told that that was understood and that Mr Cordell would act on behalf of Beach. Secondly, there cannot be a skerrick of doubt that Mr Cordell did act on behalf of Beach in this transaction. Thirdly, with one or two possible exceptions, there can be no suggestion that ATRK acted for Beach. The possible exceptions are that ATRK arranged for the execution under power of attorney of the SCAFA in the
Australian Capital Territory to avoid the incidence of stamp duty. Mr Thomas said, although this evidence was trenchantly criticised, that in doing so ATRK was acting on behalf of the lenders, it not being in their interests for the borrower to pay stamp duty. I see no reason not to accept this explanation, but even if it not be accepted, the activity of having the agreement executed on behalf of Beach in the Australian Capital Territory cannot have given rise to any conflict between Spargos and Beach, and certainly, even if there was a conflict, it was not productive of any loss. If it had been suggested to Beach that it should seek independent legal advice as to whether the document should be executed in a place where it would attract no stamp duty or less stamp duty than if executed in New South Wales one can imagine the scepticism with which that advice would have been received. In any event the advice probably would have been sought from Mr Cordell who, for obviously good reasons, would no doubt have agreed to the course proposed.

The other matter is that the SCAFA was backdated to 19 October 1989. There is no suggestion that that action brought about a conflict between the lenders and Beach. No submission has been made that the date of the document was in any way material to any event arising under it and whilst Mr Thomas conceded that before altering the document in that way he would, normally, speak with the solicitor on the other side, the fact that he did not do so, which I think is probably the case, does not indicate that he thereby assumed to be acting on behalf of Beach and, even if he was, that there was any conflict between the lenders and Beach or, if there was, that that required other independent solicitors to be retained or led to any loss. Mr Thomas' evidence that he dated the document in accordance with instructions he received should, in my opinion, be accepted.

As I have noted previously the review of the Charge and Option Agreement by Mr
Bateman was consistent with his acting in protection of the interests of the lenders.

It was submitted by Mr Kelly that Mr Thomas' involvement in the drafting of the Beach minute of 5 October 1989 reflected upon the position. However, as I have noted, the evidence of Mr Davidson was that it would not be unusual for the lender or its legal representatives to draft such a minute for the borrower to ensure that the lender was thoroughly protected.

Although the evidence of Mr Thomas was attacked as being not worthy of credit
I disagree. I considered that Mr Thomas was a witness upon whose evidence I can safely place reliance because I regarded it as truthful and inherently probable. His demeanour confirmed this.

The Evidence Of Mr David James Ferguson 
Mr Ferguson's witness statement, which is dated 8 September 1997, became
Exhibit 15.

In paragraph 16 Mr Ferguson said that he recalled the meeting on 22 February and that thereafter he had certain meetings. He had a note dated 27 April , which suggested to him that Mr Fuller told him other things about the acquisition of Burbank, although he could not recall what was said. He continued that Mr Fuller did not ask him for advice about the acquisition of
Burbank and that he understood from what Mr Fuller said that the Burbank transaction was a "done deal". He said it was important for him to be aware of the financial position of Beach and Claremont, including assets held by them, so that he could ensure that all information relevant to those matters was included in the draft takeover document he was preparing, and he required certain information from Mr Worthington in relation to his preparation of that documentation. Although he annexed various notes he was unable to recall, generally speaking, the circumstances in which they came into existence. He said, in paragraph 36, that he read Mr Main's statement dated 30 July 1997, and that whilst he was present for part of the meeting on 22 February 1989, neither when he was present nor on any other occasion did he hear anyone say anything to the effect that any deposits at Rahn & Bodmer were "blocked", nor did he see Mr Bateman, or anyone else, write anything to that effect on the white board "or anywhere else". He heard that Spargos, Enterprise and
Jingellic had moneys on deposit with Rahn & Bodmer, and he was not aware of any encumbrance or restriction in respect of those deposits.

At Tp.948 Mr Ferguson agreed that on 27 April 1989 Mr Fuller telephoned him and gave him professional instructions, which he communicated on 28 April 1989 to Mr Bateman.

Mr Ferguson was shown a letter he wrote on 5 May 1989 to Mr Clemens of
Standard Chartered Australia Limited, the first line of which stated:- "We act for the companies in the Independent Resources Group".

That letter contained a Deed of Confidentiality, which he prepared to facilitate ongoing discussions between his clients and Standard Chartered
Australia Limited, and he agreed that "our clients" referred to the companies in the Independent Resources Group, being the companies listed in the Deed of
Confidentiality, including Beach. He agreed ATRK were acting for all those companies in connection with the preparation of the Deed of Confidentiality, but he did not agree they were acting in relation to the proposed restructure and refinance of the IRL Group. Mr Ferguson said that ATRK was acting for the companies in the IRL Group in connection with the preparation of the Deed of
Confidentiality.

He also agreed, Tp.952, that he was involved in the preparation of a Put
Option in connection with the ELFIC financing and he was aware that IRL and a number of other companies were seeking finance from ELFIC. He said he could not say that he knew, as at 5 May 1989, that the IRL Group "was in all sorts of strife", because he was aware they had certain financial requirements, but he was not aware of the details of their finances "sufficiently to say they were in strife". He agreed that through 1988 and into 1989 there were ongoing investigations by the NCSC, and that there were investigations in relation to assets of Enterprise being used for the benefit of other companies in the
Group, although he was not certain whether they were made by the NCSC. He was aware that the general substance of the allegation was that something in the order of twice the then current market price for Claremont shares was paid by
Petrogulf to acquire the parcel held by FAI, and of the underlying allegation that IRL had taken control of Claremont without making a takeover offer. He was also aware that one of the tasks being undertaken was raising a large sum of money to fund the proposed settlement of the NCSC investigations. He said that settlement was a critical component because of the NCSC's concern.

He said many different structures were considered in the early months of 1989, each of which required substantial amounts, and that by 2 May 1989 a critical element was the raising of a large sum from ELFIC. He was referred to the various companies, including Beach, in respect of which Deeds of
Confidentiality were prepared and he agreed that "somehow all of the companies in what you understood to be the IRL Group would be affected by the restructure".

At Tp.957 Mr Ferguson said that Mr Fuller told him something about the cash assets, which were available to Beach in order that he would be fully briefed to perform his professional function, and he said the money was identified because it was held by ELFIC "and it seemed to be significant". His understanding was it was "some sort of good faith deposit", which ELFIC had:
Tp.958.

At Tp.963 Mr Ferguson agreed that as at 2 May 1989 the Burbank transaction seemed to him to be an independent and substantial transaction, but he denied that the $5m of Beach's money on deposit at ELFIC was discussed between him and Mr Fuller in connection with Burbank. He said his role in the currency swap was "very minor": Tp.964.

At Tp.967 Mr Ferguson said he knew there were deposits with Rahn & Bodmer, which he presumed he discussed with Mr Bateman "at some point", but he did not think he discussed them with Mr Thomas. He said he had no recollection of discussing the currency swap transaction with Mr Thomas, nor any assignments of money in relation to the acquisition of Burbank. He said he did not think
ATRK were in a position of conflict so far as any aspect of the Burbank transaction was concerned, nor that Beach needed, therefore, to seek independent skilled advice. He said he was not involved in the SCAFA in any substantial way, but in so far as he was he did not discern any conflict and his principal role initially was to advise Petrogulf on the NCSC inquiry.

He said he did not think there was any potential for conflict in the preparation of the Confidentiality Deeds but if any transactions had arisen "certainly" that may have been the case, and that in these transactions he was acute to watch out for potential conflicts of interest.

He was asked, at Tp.969, about the reference to "overseas controllers" on some of the white board print outs, and he said that would have been a reference to overseas shareholders, which were to contribute the necessary capital for the purposes of the restructure.

Mr Ferguson said that he was acting for the proposed offerors in relation to the takeovers for which funding was required and, in those circumstances, he met with representatives of ELFIC on 7 March 1989. During that meeting there was a reference to the Burbank transaction and he noted:- "$5m to go out in next week and further $5m halfway through the bid." 
The notes indicated to him that he was taking down points said in the conversation. He agreed the IRL Group was looking for approximately $70m in relation to the takeover and he had no specific recollection why Burbank was raised, nor did he have a specific recollection of his state of knowledge at 7
March 1989 in relation to it. He agreed the Burbank transaction was relevant as it was an asset acquisition affecting the target companies.

At Tp.986 Mr Ferguson agreed that he was speaking to Mr Worthington on 17
March 1989 about material financial events that concerned Beach, amongst other things. He said he was aware, as at 7 March 1989, that $5m was to go out in the next week in relation to the Burbank deal, and that when he attended on Mr
Worthington on 17 March 1989 he was asking him about the then financial position of Claremont and Beach so that he would find out about material events of a financial character since the last audited accounts, including whether any significant payments had been made. He agreed that the Burbank transaction would have been a topic of conversation in the context of identifying material events or information.

At Tp.992 Mr Ferguson was asked about a diagram. He said it indicated, he thought, a proposal that moneys on deposit with Rahn & Bodmer would be used to finance the Burbank transaction. He thought it was possibly correct that he was recording notes of something Mr Fuller put to him, so that he and
Mr Fuller could discuss it in the context of any s.129 problem, although he considered that the restructure of the Group was probably directed more specifically to the takeover of Claremont.

At Tp.1003 Mr Ferguson said the topic of Burbank was raised at the meeting of February 1989, and that he thought the transaction was concluded. He did not agree Mr Bateman was the person who effectively led the discussion at that meeting, and he said there were "certainly others" that did so from time to time. He provided a report on the status of the NCSC settlement and the discussions with ELFIC and then left. Mr Ferguson did not recall what working material Mr Bateman had and he had no recollection whether he had "some sort of folder".

At Tp.1010 Mr Ferguson said he could not say whether, as at 15 March 1989,
Beach would have come within "our" concept of the Independent Resources Group, and that it was a "fairly loosely used term". He said he always identified
Beach "as something separate with Claremont" and his personal perception was that Claremont and Beach were separate. Historically the IRL Group had comprised IRL with its immediate Group companies and he referred to Enterprise and Spargos before his answer was interrupted.

At Tp.1022 Mr Ferguson said he would not have included Beach in the term "IRL
Group" in the context of costs for the payment of accounts.

At Tp.1024 Mr Ferguson said he was aware of an allegation that IRL had taken control of Claremont without a takeover offer, which was a central focus of the NCSC inquiry, and he repeated that he would not have included Claremont in his use of the term "IRL Group".

Mr Ferguson did not agree that he was acting for companies in the IRL Group in
May 1989, but he agreed that ATRK acted for a number of companies, which might from time to time have been referred to as in the IRL Group. He also agreed that the "clients" referred to in his letter of 5 May 1989 included Beach, but he said that was for the purposes of the preparation of the Confidentiality
Deeds and in respect of all the companies to become parties to those Deeds
ATRK was acting for each. Mr Ferguson disagreed with the proposition that he was not being truthful when he said he did not regard Beach as part of the IRL
Group as at 15 March 1989: Tp.1026.

At Tp.1028 Mr Ferguson said a number of models had been worked on in relation to takeovers, the most important being the takeover of Claremont.

In many respects Mr Ferguson's evidence was vague, the vagueness stemming from his lack of recollection in so far as he was not assisted by notes. Mr Kelly submitted that Mr Ferguson was feigning lack of recall and that he had a good recall to which he would not admit because it would impact adversely on ATRK's case. I do not accept this criticism. I formed the impression that Mr Ferguson was giving truthful evidence to the extent his memory allowed, and that his stated lack of recall of events some eight years ago was genuine.

The Charge And Option Agreement 
In paragraphs 125 and 126 of the Further Amended Statement of Claim Beach alleged that by facsimile transmissions dated 12 and 13 October 1988 Messrs
Joelson Wilson were instructed to act as Claremont's solicitors and, particularly, to prepare the necessary documentation to record the terms of the loan of US$2,990,000 that Claremont had made to BPC, a charge to secure the repayment of the same initially over BPC's assets and later over the share capital of Mazeley and, accordingly, over BPC's working interests in the
Burbank Oilfield, and an option for Claremont to purchase the same initially for US$19,500,000. It was further alleged that by facsimile transmissions dated 11 May 1989 from Beach, Messrs Joelson Wilson were instructed that at all times Claremont had been acting as a duly appointed and authorised agent for Beach, which had resolved to exercise an option to acquire what was described as a 47 per cent interest in the Burbank Oilfield if an appropriate and satisfactory price could be negotiated in the region of US$21m to US$26m, and Messrs Joelson Wilson were authorised by Beach to conduct negotiations as to the price on its behalf. ATRK admitted these allegations.

The Charge and Option Agreement, which bears date 29 June 1989, was prepared by Messrs Joelson Wilson. Messrs Gardner Weller acted for Firstway. Mr Kelly acknowledged expressly that ATRK were not engaged for the purpose of carrying out the "conveyancing" part of the transaction. It recorded an agreement between Firstway, Beach and Claremont and recited that Firstway was the beneficial owner of the entire issued share capital of Mazeley; that Mazeley was the beneficial owner of the entire issued share capital of BPC and BOG; that Beach was a subsidiary of Claremont; and that in consideration of the grant of the option "herein contained" Beach had advanced or procured the advance to Firstway by way of loan of an aggregate amount of US$8,197,564.
Recital D stated that this amount comprised:- 
US$149,990 advanced on 13 September 1988; 
US$2,989,922 advanced on 13 October 1988; 
The equivalent of US$491,510 advanced on 30 October 1988; 
The equivalent of US$200,672 advanced on 3 January 1989; 
The equivalent of US$191,950 advanced on 27 February 1989; 
The equivalent of US$4,093,500 advanced on 17 March 1989; and 
The equivalent of US$79,950 advanced on 19 April 1989.

The recital stated that the repayment of the Option Fee, together with interest as specified, was secured by the charge "hereby created".

The recitals continued that Claremont, acting as a duly appointed and authorised agent for its principal Beach, had negotiated the arrangements between Beach and Firstway; that Firstway was the legal and beneficial owner of the shares specified in Schedule 1 to the Agreement free from all interests and had full right to grant the charge "hereinafter contained as security"; and that in consideration "of these presents" Firstway had deposited as security "with Beach's Solicitors, Messrs Joelson Wilson & Co ...
(`Beach's Solicitors') the bearer certificate for the Shares and Mazeley's share certificates in respect of the entire issued share capital of BPC (`the
BPC Shares') and Mazeley's share certificates in respect of the entire issued share capital of BOG (`the BOG Shares')".

Firstway charged in favour of Beach "by way of first mortgage or charge" all the Shares with the repayment of the Option Fee, being the sum of US$8,197,564 "together with interest thereon".

Clause 6.1 provided that the Option Fee was repayable to Beach, together with interest as specified, on 31 July 1989 "unless the Option shall be exercised".
Clause 7.1 provided that Firstway granted to Beach "and/or Claremont in its capacity as agent for Beach the option to acquire the Shares (`the Option') from" Firstway "at any time whilst the Option Fee remains outstanding".

Clause 7.2.1 provided that on the exercise of the Option the purchase price payable by Beach and/or Claremont was US$28m less the aggregate of the Option
Fee, but not including interest thereon, and a further adjustment in relation to operating income.

Upon the exercise of the Option the Option Fee was deemed to be part of the purchase price and was to be released to Firstway on the date of completion.
The purchase price was payable as to US$13m on the date of completion following the exercise of the Option, and as to US$6,802,436 180 days after the date of completion following the exercise of the Option.

The Agreement was signed by a solicitor from Messrs Gardner Weller, Mr Stephen
Daultrey, as agent on behalf of Firstway, and by Mr Main, on behalf of Beach and Claremont, pursuant to powers of attorney granted to him.

On 29 June 1989 Firstway wrote to Beach and Claremont in relation to Clause .4 of the Charge and Option Agreement and, on the same date, Beach wrote to
Firstway in relation to the terms of the Agreement.

Certification as to title was provided to Messrs Joelson Wilson by Messrs
Brenman Raskin Friedlob and Tenenbaum and, on 30 June 1989, Mr Main, pursuant to Clause 7.3.1, gave notice of exercise of the Option by Beach. On an unspecified date Beach and Claremont had given a power of attorney in favour of Mr Main to act for them in relation to the Option Agreement.

On 30 June 1989 Mr Cummings sent a facsimile transmission to Mr David Berens, a solicitor of Messrs Joelson Wilson, stating that he was confused because the
Charge and Option Agreement was not to become binding on 14 June 1989, as had been suggested, and also because he understood Claremont's role was simply as agent for Beach. He confirmed that Mr Main had been appointed a duly authorised attorney for each of Beach and Claremont to execute the documentation on their behalves. He sent a further facsimile transmission on that day to Mr Berens setting out the way the matter was to be implemented. Mr
Berens replied on 3 July 1989 stating the agreement did not become binding on June 1989, but was signed by the parties and held in escrow pending its exchange and dating, which occurred on 29 June 1989. Mr Berens reported that he attended a meeting at Beach's London office with Mr Main and Mr Stephen
Daultrey "as solicitors for Firstway Ltd".

Mr Brian Thomas Morris, the accounting expert called on behalf of Beach dealt with the various amounts comprising the Option Fee in the documents set out in
Exhibit 20.

The Option Fee, which converted to A$10,057,638, was treated as a payment by
Claremont on behalf of Beach, which had the effect of reducing the indebtedness of Claremont to Beach in that amount. Mr Morris said, Tp.1098, that it was certainly his understanding that Beach paid Claremont the amount pursuant to the Charge and Option Agreement "and that that was paid by way of entries which reduced the inter-company indebtedness between the two companies". He supposed that Claremont paid the moneys towards the acquisition of Burbank for which Beach would get the benefit. It was suggested to him that none of the moneys were paid for that purpose.

Mr Morris agreed, Tp.1099, that none of the money was advanced to Firstway and that there were no payments made to it by way of loan and added:- "I think that beyond that, I don't know that we need to go further yet." 
Mr Morris was taken through the various payments and he was referred to a report he had prepared for the G53 proceedings in which he recorded what happened to the moneys. The first amount of US$150,000 was provided by
Claremont in September 1988 to meet the payment of earnest money pursuant to a
Sale Agreement of 31 August 1988 whereby BPC agreed to acquire from the vendor certain interests in the North Burbank unit.

The second payment of US$2.99m came about by virtue of Claremont's arranging the transfer of that amount in October 1988 to facilitate the completion of the obligations of BPC to the vendor pursuant to the Sale Agreement for the acquisition of a portion of the Burbank Oilfields.

The third payment of A$575,000 on 28 December 1988 was paid by Claremont to
BPC to enable BPC to purchase a different interest in Burbank from another vendor.

In relation to the three payments Mr Morris said he thought they funded the acquisition of Burbank by Mazeley's subsidiary, and he believed that the transactions were brought to account within Claremont on an understanding that it was paying some option to the vendor of some of the Burbank interests. He continued, Tp.1101:- "I don't have a lot of trouble with those transactions being constructed to be deposits or options or loans or any of those things. They certainly went for the benefit of Firstway's subsidiaries, so ultimately they might have been brought to account as between Firstway and BPC as loans and fitted exactly the sort of description that's found in Recital D of the Charge and Option Agreement." 
He agreed that the moneys enabled Firstway's subsidiaries to acquire Burbank and he thought "on their face" they related to the acquisition of Burbank by
Claremont.

The point of the cross-examination was to establish that the moneys were not loans to Firstway, but the provision of funds directly to enable the Burbank
Oilfield interests to be acquired by the companies, which were subsidiaries of
Mazeley. Arguably, however, as between Beach and Firstway, the payments could have the character of a loan and, once received by Firstway, the money could be used by it as it wished.

The fourth payment of US$200,000 was made on 3 January 1989. The funds were dispersed to two entities one of which was part of the Ska Trust and one of which Mr Morris thought was "quite possibly a Ska Trust entity, I don't know".

The fifth payment of 110,000 was made on 27 February 1989. The money was remitted to Messrs Gardner Weller and then dispersed to IRL and Cambridge, and
Mr Morris agreed that "beyond the apparent nexus between Claremont remitting moneys to Gardner Weller" neither that sum nor the fourth payment of
US$200,000 appeared to have any connection with the acquisition of Burbank:
Tp.1103.

The sixth payment of A$5m on 17 March 1989, unlike the first five payments, had its origin in Beach and resulted in Mr Worthington's arranging for $5m to be remitted to Messrs Gardner Weller, which was dispersed to Banque Pictet in
Geneva, whence it went to Garaweh Pty Limited, which was a company owned and controlled by Messrs Fuller and Cummings, whereafter the moneys were dispersed to Cortaus as to $2,545,000, $1,225,000, and $1,225,000 on 29 March 1989, 31
March 1989 and 4 April 1989 respectively. On 26 April 1989 $2,000 was paid to
Cambridge, and on 9 May 1989 $1,150.28 was paid to Jurisprudence. Mr Morris said that beyond the remittance to Messrs Gardner Weller in the first instance, none of those payments appeared to have had any connection with the acquisition of Burbank. He explained this by saying that the moneys went to
Messrs Gardner Weller before being transferred to Banque Pictet.

The seventh payment of A$100,000 on 19 April 1989 arose from a telegraphic transfer from Messrs Gardner Weller to Barclays for payment of a money market account with FAI. Mr Morris said that was where "it ended up".

At Tp.1104 Mr Morris said:- "Q. So that subject to your qualification about the first three payments, would you agree that the description which appears in Recital D to the Charge and Option Agreement .. is a description which does not match the underlying reality? 
A. It certainly doesn't match the underlying reality of what came of the $10m. 
Q. All right. It has the effect, does it not, of disguising the real thing? 
A. Yes, it certainly does that." 
Mr Morris agreed, Tp.1105, that the moneys, subject to the qualification he raised about the first three payments, were not paid from the trust account of
Messrs Gardner Weller for any purpose in connection with the acquisition of
Burbank, and when it was put to him that they were not paid to Firstway by way of loan, he replied that that depended upon the relationship between Firstway and Messrs Gardner Weller.

Mr Morris said that the wording of Recital D was "awkward", which did not surprise him as he knew that it was "part of a fraud". It was then put to Mr
Morris that the reduction in Claremont's indebtedness to Beach on 30 June 1989 reflected a transaction, which did not occur, to which he responded that
Claremont paid away $10m and Beach paid it $10m. He said "those transactions did occur". Mr Morris was asked to assume that the moneys referred to in
Recital D were not moneys Beach either advanced or procured to be advanced to
Firstway and he said that he was "clearly assuming that if Recital D is not true, then Beach did not have an obligation to pay $10m to Claremont". He continued:- "Q. So my simple proposition to you, with which you're having difficulty, is that unless there is an accordance, a symmetry, between the underlying transaction and the way in which it is described in the Charge and Option Agreement, then the consequent reduction in Claremont's debt to Beach would not be something which you would accept as being appropriate or valid; is that not right? 
A. It's obviously based on an assumption that the transactions didn't happen and the second assumption that the Charge and Option Agreement doesn't give rise to an obligation on the part of Beach to pay Claremont $10.1m, and the answer then would be yes, that's right.

Q. All right. Mr Morris you know that Mr Lonergan has suggested that the payment - the reduction in Claremont's debt to Beach was in substance a sham, don't you? 
A. I'm a little bit careful about the word `sham', your Honour. But Mr Lonergan has made suggestions regarding the $10m that it be set aside and disregarded." 
Mr Morris described his difficulty with the word "sham".

The issue thereby raised was whether Beach ever came under a contractual obligation to repay Claremont the amounts referred to in Recital D, which obligation only arose, pursuant to Recital D, in the event of Beach's either lending or procuring the lending of money to Firstway. It is quite clear from the evidence that none of the money was lent, in the sense of being paid directly, to Firstway. However, that is not the only way in which a loan may be made and it is necessary to bear in mind that if the Option was not exercised there was an obligation on Firstway to repay the money. A number of payments were made to Firstway's solicitors and, for the resons I have suggested, that was a sufficient discharge of the obligation to make the loans to Firstway, if it be assumed that the solicitors then dealt with the money in accordance with Firstway's instructions.

The SCAFA 
The SCAFA was prepared by Mr Thomas pursuant to the instructions he received to act on behalf of Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic. I have noted that it was signed in Canberra by Mr Buxton pursuant to powers of attorney on 25
October 1989 and dated by Mr Thomas on 19 October 1989. It recited that on 3
July 1989 Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic, which were referred in the document as "the Financiers", advanced A$13,813,228.21 to Beach, which was referred to in the Agreement as "the Company". Such advance was stated to be deemed to be paid pursuant to an agreement entered into by the parties "substantially upon the terms of this Agreement by 15 October 1989". The third recital stated:- "The parties now wish to enter into this Agreement upon the following terms and conditions and upon the basis that the advance of $13,813,228.21 made by the Financiers to the Company on 3 July 1989 was advanced upon the terms and conditions of this Agreement." 
It was not in issue that the amount was drawn down or deemed to be drawn down, on 3 July 1989, and the repayment date was 180 days thereafter. I have referred to the respective amounts provided by each of the Financiers.

Mr Morris agreed, Tp.1108, that there was no doubt "whatsoever" that there were in fact no advances made to Beach on 3 July 1989, and he said he had ascertained that the amounts reported in the accounts of Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic at Rahn & Bodmer were transferred to an account in the name of Firstway on 18 September 1989 "for value 1 July 1989". He accepted that that was pursuant to meetings at Rahn & Bodmer on 13 and 14 September 1989 and to letters of authority of 14 September 1989. He continued, Tp.1109:- "Q. What I am saying is that the SCAFA document appears to stand alone in recording a loan transaction in favour of Beach? 
A. And - I'm sorry, I just don't have a clear enough recollection of the SCAFA transactions. Are you saying that the entries that were recorded at Rahn & Bodmer were entries that recorded debiting an account of Spargos, for example, and crediting Firstway and not touching an account of Beach? 
Q. Yes.

A. Yes. I think that's right.

Q. So that the notion of a loan to Beach is not one which can be found in any of the accounting entries relating to the deposits held by Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic at Rahn & Bodmer? 
A. Yes. The entries made at Rahn & Bodmer are simply between accounts of Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic and an account of Firstway.

Q. Those entries record a straight transfer from Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic to Firstway, don't they? 
A. Yes, I think they do.

Q. From what those entries record, the notion of loan to Beach is a fiction? 
A. Yes. On the face of those entries and those entries alone, there is no evidence of a loan to Beach, yes." 
The last answer pointed up the fact that money may be lent by A to B for the purpose of B purchasing an asset from C without A paying the money to B, but, rather, paying it directly to C.

The Evidence Of Mr Brian Henry Davidson 
Mr Davidson, whose witness statement is Exhibit AQ, commenced to consider the currency swap at paragraph 68. He referred to the matters pleaded in the
Amended Defence, including that ATRK were instructed by Mr Fuller on behalf of
Spargos on 11 May 1989 that on 10 May 1989 a deposit of A$5m held by Beach with ELFIC had been assigned by Beach to Spargos. After tracing through the actions taken by Mr Thomas, Mr Davidson noted that the Beach deposit was paid away during the afternoon of 15 May 1989. He drew his conclusions in relation to this matter commencing at paragraph 239. He said that the Hypothetical
Solicitor in Mr Thomas' position, on or about 11 May 1989, would have considered whether there was any reason why ATRK should not continue to act for Spargos in relation to existing loan facilities provided by ELFIC to companies in the IRL Group and a proposal for the provision of further loan facilities by ELFIC, because of any actual or potential conflict of interest arising from the facts disclosed on or about 11 May 1989 in relation to the proposed currency swap, and would also have considered whether there was any reason why ATRK should not act for Spargos and Beach in relation to that transaction.

In paragraph 242 he said that the Hypothetical Solicitor would have assumed from the information given to him that the currency swap was a step in the ongoing ELFIC loans matter and that ATRK could continue to act for Spargos unless facts were disclosed or subsequently emerged in relation to that transaction, which indicated that an actual or potential conflict of interest existed or was likely to arise. He continued that the Hypothetical Solicitor would have asked a number of questions to obtain a full understanding of the nature of the transaction and that "probably" he would have asked why a public company would want to swap a cash deposit in Australian currency, which was deposited with a major and well known Australian financial institution, for a deposit by another Australian public company with a small and relatively unknown Swiss bank, which deposit was denominated in United States Dollars. He said the Hypothetical Solicitor would have enquired as to the terms of the two deposits in relation to interest rates payable and the period of notice required for withdrawal, so as to be in a position to compare them, and that he "would probably have asked why each company did not use its own cash for its own purposes", and what the benefit was to each company in effecting the transaction as well as "probably" enquiring about advantages and risks involved. He continued that the Hypothetical Solicitor "would probably have enquired" as to why the deposit of A$6m stated in Inspar's Part A Statement to have been deposited by Spargos with ACC and to be made available to Inspar was not available, and would have been concerned that Petrogulf, for which ATRK was also acting, could be prejudiced by the non-availability of the A$6m
Spargos deposit. The use of the word "probably" did not indicate any dictate of proper practice.

He said the Hypothetical Solicitor would have asked questions to ascertain the contractual nature of the arrangements with ELFIC and the Swiss bank to satisfy himself that each deposit was capable of being freely assigned, so that each assignee would get full value for the assignment. He added that as the solicitor was not a Swiss lawyer and not qualified to advise on Swiss banking procedures, he would have asked questions as to the appropriate procedure to validly effect an assignment of a deposit with a Swiss bank. He said that the Hypothetical Solicitor, having considered the answers provided to those various questions, would have advised that before the assignment could be effected there was a need to obtain written confirmation from each of
ELFIC and the Swiss bank as to the name in which the deposit was recorded; the precise amount and terms of each deposit; and the assignability of the deposit free of encumbrances, so that the deposit would be readily available to the assignee. He would also have obtained advice from the Swiss bank, or from a
Swiss lawyer in relation to the Swiss deposit, as to the documentation necessary to effect a valid assignment thereof, and as to whether there was any Swiss legal, taxation, stamp duty or other regularity or revenue requirements or constraints in relation to the proposed assignment thereof. He continued that the Hypothetical Solicitor would have given a warning to the effect that without this information and advice there could be problems or difficulties in respect of the assignment of the Swiss bank deposit to Beach and, in the absence of full and frank answers to the questions and reactions to advices, had concerns as to whether there was a real likelihood of a serious conflict of interest arising between Beach and Spargos.

Mr Davidson stated that the Hypothetical Solicitor would have been aware of the ASX Listing Rules, and in particular Listing Rule 3J(3), which requires approval of shareholders of a listed company to related party transactions falling within the ambit of the Rule and, knowing of the relationship between
Spargos and Beach he would have considered whether the ASX would regard the association between the companies as such that the transaction should be referred to a meeting of members of each company for approval. He was further of the opinion that the Hypothetical Solicitor would have asked questions to determine whether the value of the asset being assigned by each company and the consideration being transferred by the other was in excess of five per cent of the shareholders' funds of each company as disclosed in its last audited accounts, and he would have advised that if the value of the deposit being assigned and transferred exceeded five per cent of the shareholders' funds of either Beach or Spargos, then the company concerned must comply with
Listing Rule 3J(3), or make an application to the ASX as to whether or not that Rule would have to be met.

He said that advice would have been given to consider whether the transaction should be notified to the ASX under Listing Rule 3A(1) and as to the need for the directors of Spargos and Beach to observe their fiduciary duties and other obligations under s.229 of the Companies Code, and for each company to deal with the other on an arm's length basis. The Hypothetical Solicitor would have enquired as to the nature and extent of the role to be undertaken by ATRK and as to who was to compare the documentation in relation to the proposed currency swap, and whether it was proposed that Beach should be separately advised and represented and "recommended that it should be". He said that in the absence of instructions that Beach would be separately represented, the
Hypothetical Solicitor would have indicated that ATRK would have to consider whether it would be prepared to act for both parties, the assumption being that ATRK did act for both parties.

He said that Mr Thomas, who was then an employed solicitor of ATRK, would have discussed the transaction with the partner having overall responsibility for
Spargos and Beach.

Mr Davidson made certain assumptions of law in relation to the currency swap matter. In paragraph 177 he assumed that on or about 12 May 1989 there was an express oral retainer of ATRK to act for and on behalf of Beach in relation to the currency swap, which was made by Mr Fuller on behalf of Beach and Mr
Thomas, or alternatively Mr Bateman, on behalf of ATRK, on the occasion when
Mr Fuller spoke to Mr Thomas, or alternatively Mr Bateman, on or about that date in relation to the currency swap. The retainer was to effect the currency swap.

Mr Davidson further said that as a result of that retainer, a fiduciary duty arose in favour of Beach and, in addition, it was an implied term of the contract or, alternatively, it was the duty of ATRK as solicitors acting on behalf of Beach, that ATRK would exercise reasonable skill, care and diligence in the performance of any legal work in relation to that transaction.

He said that at the same time there was an express oral retainer of ATRK to act for and on behalf of Spargos in relation to the currency swap, which was made by Mr Fuller on behalf of Spargos, and Mr Thomas, or alternatively Mr
Bateman, on behalf of ATRK when Mr Fuller spoke to Mr Thomas, or alternatively
Mr Bateman, about the matter. He repeated that the retainer was to the same effect.

In the alternative he assumed an implied retainer of ATRK by Beach and Spargos "which occurred concerning the currency swap up to and including the writing of the letters dated 16 May 1989 .. and that the same fiduciary duties and duties of care arose".

In the alternative he assumed that ATRK assumed a fiduciary duty and a duty of care in relation to Beach and Spargos in relation to the currency swap arising out of the fact that ATRK acted for and on behalf of or in the interests of
Beach and Spargos in those same events.

This evidence of Mr Davidson was not challenged. However, in my opinion it proceeded on several assumptions, which the evidence did not establish.
Firstly, he assumed that ATRK was retained to act for Beach, which, in my view, they were not. Secondly, he assumed that ATRK was retained to act on the
Switzerland link of the transaction. Once again, in my opinion, they were not.
The removal of these assumptions necessarily takes away the fundamental bases on which Mr Davidson predicated his evidence. I would also observe that on the facts proved the solicitor, on the instructions received, would not have concluded, after considering the matter, that there was any conflict.

In paragraph 82 Mr Davidson commenced to consider the Charge and Option
Agreement. He noted that the acquisition was funded in the manner described in the document entitled "Provisional Report to the Board of Beach Petroleum NL" from Mr Main dated 5 July 1989, and that the terms of the funding were recorded in the file note of Mr Bateman of 12 July 1989. In relation to the funding he observed that it involved a recognition of payments said to have been made by way of an Option Fee; accounting for the proceeds of the currency swap as if it had been paid by Beach to Firstway; applying loan funds purported to have been advanced by Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic under the
SCAFA; and paying the balance by way of vendor finance.

Commencing at paragraph 171 he made certain assumptions of law in relation to what he described as "the Burbank matter". He said that on or about 27 April there was an express oral retainer of ATRK to advise Beach in relation to the acquisition of the Burbank interests made by Mr Fuller, on behalf of
Beach, and Mr Ferguson, on behalf of ATRK, as recorded in the file note dated April 1989 and the memorandum of professional fees dated 29 June 1989. He defined the scope of the retainer as being to advise Beach "in relation to the structure and proposed financing of the Burbank acquisition".

Mr Ferguson's file note stated:- "Beach will acquire a further asset, being 47% of Burbank, through Mazeley. Claremont will also participate in Burbank .. $16m of the purchase price remains outstanding, secured by a Beach note. There will be a subscription agreement for shares in Newco to a level of $16m, guaranteed by a bank. $11m will be paid for Burbank in cash and $5m by arrangement of the Rothwells debt, making up the $16m. Condition precedent to ELFIC facility will be presentation to ELFIC of guarantee for $16m subscription (see earlier clause re 20m). Schedule to FAI Put Option shows assets totalling $33m. ELFIC is only aware of $20m asset sales - most are Beach assets.

Beach buys Burbank; there will be $16m cash component in the purchase; Beach funds its acquisition by borrowing money from Enterprise; there is $17.7m cash on deposit at Rahn & Bodmer; Rahn & Bodmer will be instructed to settle on behalf of Beach and pay the money to the vendors; Beach will then owe Enterprise $16m which it will repay on asset sales; Enterprise is made party to the bid and utilises $16m to partly repay the debt of Beach; the Enterprise money should go straight back to Rahn & Bodmer but will go to ELFIC. The Rahn & Bodmer deposits are held by Enterprise as to $7.5m, Jingellic, $4m and Spargos $7.1m." 
Mr Davidson asserted that as a result of that retainer, he making the assumption it constituted a retainer, a fiduciary duty arose in favour of
Beach and, in addition, it was an implied term of the contract of retainer, or alternatively, it was the duty of ATRK as solicitors acting for and on behalf of Beach, that ATRK would exercise reasonable skill, care and diligence in the performance of any legal work in relation to the Burbank matter. He continued that either further or in the alternative there was an express oral retainer of ATRK to advise Beach in relation to that matter, in the same terms, and giving rise to the same duties "on the occasion on 2 May 1989 recorded in the
ATRK discovered documents numbered 1.268-1.273 ..". He said that further, and in the alternative, there was an express oral retainer of ATRK to advise Beach in relation to the Burbank matter, in the same terms and giving rise to the same duties, on the occasion recorded in the file note dated 12 July 1989. He continued that on 27 April, 2 May and/or 12 July 1989 there was an express oral retainer of ATRK to advise Claremont and Spargos, Enterprise and
Jingellic in relation to the acquisition of the Burbank interests the scope of which was to advise them in relation to the structure and proposed financing of the Burbank acquisition. As a consequence fiduciary and the other duties to which he had referred in relation to Beach arose. He assumed an implied retainer, a fiduciary duty and a duty of care.

Commencing at paragraph 227 he set out the way in which he considered the
Hypothetical Solicitor would have acted and, in paragraph 228, he said that that solicitor, in Mr Ferguson's position on 27 April 1989, would have asked himself whether there was any reason why ATRK should not continue to act in connection with the IRL Group restructuring or any aspect of that matter, or why ATRK should not act in connection with the proposed Burbank acquisition because of any actual or potential conflict of interest arising from the facts disclosed on 27 April 1989 in relation to the Burbank acquisition. He continued that on that date the Hypothetical Solicitor would have assumed that the Burbank acquisition was a step in the ongoing IRL restructuring transaction and that ATRK could continue to act unless facts were disclosed or subsequently emerged in relation to the Burbank acquisition, which indicated that an actual or potential conflict of interest existed or was likely to arise.

The Hypothetical Solicitor would have asked a number of questions to obtain a full understanding of the nature of the transaction, particularly as to the assets of Burbank, the manner in which such assets were then owned, the shareholding structure of Burbank and Mazeley, and the jurisdiction in which each of these companies was incorporated. The purpose of doing so was to be in a position to advise Beach as to its rights and obligations in relation to the transaction, the due diligence to be undertaken and the regulatory requirements with which it would have to comply. He referred to the requirement of the Hypothetical Solicitor to be aware of the ASX Listing
Rules; to have made enquiries as to the extent of Claremont's involvement to determine whether there was compliance with Listing Rule 3J(3); to have warned as to the possible need to comply with those Rules; to have advised that as the ultimate assets were located in the United States there was a need to instruct lawyers in that country to undertake appropriate due diligence to ensure that good title would be obtained and to advise generally on Federal and State regulatory requirements and procedures in relation to the proposed acquisition; and to have advised that as the ultimate assets were being acquired through the acquisition of shares in a holding company, that appropriate due diligence should be carried out in relation to the holding company and any intermediate companies, including the need to instruct lawyers in the jurisdictions where such companies were incorporated and the desirability of obtaining audited or certified accounts of each such company.

He continued that the Hypothetical Solicitor would have advised as to the need to deal with Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic on an arm's length basis and to comply with the requirements of s.230 of the Companies Code in relation to any borrowings from those companies, and as to the need for the directors of
Beach, Claremont, Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic to observe their fiduciary duties and other obligations under s.229 and to deal with each other company on an arm's length basis. He said the Hypothetical Solicitor would have advised as to the obligation of Beach and Claremont to notify the ASX of the acquisition, and enquired as to the role that ATRK were required to undertake, as to who was to prepare the documents in relation to the proposed acquisition, including an enquiry as to the name of the lawyer acting for the vendor, and indicated that until he had further information and had perused a draft of the acquisition documents, he would not be in a position to advise
Beach or Claremont as to their respective rights and obligations and the regulatory requirements with which they must comply in relation to the proposed Burbank acquisition.

In paragraph 231 he said that the Hypothetical Solicitor, after the discussion with Mr Fuller on 27 April 1989, would have discussed the proposed acquisition with a partner of ATRK, who had overall responsibility for the IRL Group restructuring "which appears to have been Mr Bateman", to inform him of the new developments and to obtain his comments thereon, particularly as to whether this might create any problem for ATRK in continuing to act in the transaction.

He continued that on 2 May 1989 Mr Bateman received further instructions in relation to the proposed acquisition as set out in his notes which stated:- "1. Spargos will enter into an agreement to lend $16m (or $18.7m) to Claremont to enable it to on-lend to Beach to fund purchase of Burbank.
 . Real Swiss accounts would be opened for Enterprise, Spargos, Claremont, Beach and the vendor.
 . Loans would be minuted as follows: ) Jingellic to Enterprise.
 ) Enterprise to Spargos.
 ) Spargos to Claremont (on security of Burbank).
 ) Claremont to Beach.
 . A consultancy agreement (for $300,000) would be prepared with Beach and the company.
 . A purchase agreement would be prepared (between Claremont, Beach, a Beach subsidiary (S129), the vendor re Mazeley).
 . Beach would announce (a) the purchase of Burbank and (b) a proposal to find a buyer for Victoria Gas.
 . Clayton Utz would be instructed in relation to 1 and 3(4) and 6(b) and given that loan agreements are in place in May 1989 and asset sales may take six months with takeover in the middle, there was no question of a breach of s.129 of the Companies Code by Beach. The loans, sale of assets by Beach and purchase of Burbank are to occur irrespective of whether there is to be a takeover or when it is to occur." 
Mr Davidson said the Hypothetical Solicitor would have addressed specific issues in relation to the acquisition of the issued share capital of Mazeley and the need to undertake appropriate due diligence in order that Beach and
Claremont could be satisfied that they would get good title to the shares in
Mazeley and to the Burbank assets, and that all of the companies and their underlying assets would be in good standing, and that there would be no undisclosed actual or contingent liabilities in Mazeley and/or its subsidiaries.

In paragraph 234 Mr Davidson said that Mr Bateman received further instructions from Mr Cummings on 12 July 1989, which he set forth in paragraphs 113, 114, and 115 of his report.

In paragraph 235 Mr Davidson said that having regard to the concerns the
Hypothetical Solicitor would have had following the instructions received on July 1989 he would have discussed them with one or more of his partners, particularly the managing partner or the senior partner of ATRK, so that the firm was aware of his concerns and so that a strategy for dealing with them was developed. He believed that consistently with that strategy he would have attempted to arrange a meeting with as many of the directors of Beach,
Claremont, Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic as he was able, so as to express his concerns as to actual or potential conflicts to them, or if unable to do so, he would have written letters addressed to the directors of each of those companies setting out his concerns.

He noted that on or about 21 July 1989 Mr Bateman perused and considered the
Charge and Option Agreement and, on or about 24 July 1989, he had a discussion with Mr Cummings in the course of which he gave Mr Cummings advice in relation to it. He opined that that advice was given "either as a consequence of his retainer in relation to the Burbank acquisition or as a consequence of a separate retainer to advise in relation to the Charge and Option Agreement".
He does not state by whom such instructions were given. Nor did he appear to consider that the perusal was carried out and the advice was given by Mr
Bateman acting as the solicitor for the lenders.

In paragraph 237 he stated that the Hypothetical Solicitor would have written to the directors of Beach and Claremont advising them of their obligations under the ASX Listing Rules and, in the event of their failing to give instructions to comply with those Rules, he would have had:- ".. such a high level of concern that the interests of the outside shareholders of Beach and Claremont were being severely prejudiced, that unless he could satisfy himself by some other means that this was not so, he would decline to act further in relation to the Burbank acquisition and advising on the Charge and Option Agreement and would advise Beach and Claremont of his reasons for so deciding." 
He expressed the view that not only would the directors have been the subject of such advice, but that because of the concern a copy of the letter addressed to the directors would have been forwarded to the company secretary and/or the chief executive officer and:- "If the solicitor perceived that the directors were acting contrary to the interests of the shareholders, or were constantly failing to observe the requirements of the Stock Exchange, he would view the matter with such a level of seriousness that he may undertake research to determine the precise legal requirements and his own position and he may also consult with counsel for independent advice." 
There are several matters which need to be noted about Mr Davidson's views on this point. Firstly, he assumes that ATRK were acting on behalf of the parties to the Charge and Option Agreement in some way. The evidence satisfies me that they were not. It is clear that Messrs Gardner Weller were acting on behalf of
Firstway and that Messrs Joelson Wilson were acting on behalf of Beach and
Claremont. The latter firm prepared the documentation, which was executed in
England by Mr Main on behalf of Claremont and Beach pursuant to a power of attorney. It is not in issue that ATRK did not see the documentation until after it had been entered into. In these circumstances it seems to me that a fundamental assumption that Mr Davidson made is not established and there is no suggestion in the evidence that ATRK were retained, in addition to Messrs
Joelson Wilson, to advise on the transaction. Mr Davidson does not address the position based on two other firms of apparently reputable solicitors acting for the parties on the Charge and Option Agreement, nor does he assist in assessing the position of ATRK in those circumstances. In my opinion the proper inference to be drawn is that in so far as Mr Ferguson and Mr Bateman were made aware of what was happening that was essentially by way of information being furnished to them in the context of their performing the role of advising on the takeover of the companies within the Group with a view to reducing the number of listed companies, and of advising the lenders under the SCAFA.

Great stress was laid upon the diary note of Mr Bateman of 2 May 1989 and it was submitted that he was giving advice as to how the transaction should be implemented. I think it more correct to say that he was giving advice which was relevant to the SCAFA. It was submitted by Mr Kelly that the reference in paragraph 2 of that memorandum to "real Swiss accounts" indicated that Mr
Bateman knew, as clearly as may be, that the other accounts with Rahn &
Bodmer were not "real". Mr Bateman denied that this was intended and he said that he was recording the necessity to have actual Swiss accounts, so that the flow of moneys could be seen through them, rather than some form of assignment of the debts. I accept this evidence and, in my view, it supports the view that Mr Bateman believed that Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic had money to be lent in bank accounts with Rahn & Bodmer. So far as the conversation with Mr Cummings on 12 July 1989 I accept the evidence of Mr Bateman that he noted down what Mr Cummings said to him about the views the various companies could take, and that this was not a note, as Mr Kelly contended for, indicating that Mr Bateman was giving advice to Mr Cummings as to how the directors should act.

Commencing at paragraph 111 Mr Davidson considered the SCAFA and referred to the conference between Mr Bateman and Mr Cummings on 12 July 1989 and to the various figures set out in the Charge and Option Agreement and, in paragraphs and 133, he stated his assumption that at the time of Mr Bateman's reading the Charge and Option Agreement on 21 July 1989 none of the documents had the handwritten amendments, which now appear on the face of each, and that those were brought into existence to deal with the concerns expressed by Mr Bateman to Mr Cummings on 21 July 1989. Mr Davidson referred to the facsimile transmission from Mr Cummings to Mr Cordell of 24 July 1989, which recorded the advice given by Mr Bateman in relation to the Charge and Option Agreement and, commencing at paragraph 139, to Mr Thomas' having discussed the SCAFA on October 1989. He set out the way in which the SCAFA came to be executed.

Commencing at paragraph 189 he set out the assumptions of law he made in relation to the SCAFA. They were that on or about 5 October 1989 there was an express oral retainer of ATRK to act for and on behalf of Beach in relation to it, the retainer being made by Mr Cummings, on behalf of Beach, and Mr Thomas, on behalf of ATRK, when Mr Cummings spoke to Mr Thomas as recorded in file notes at pp.351, 352 or 353 of his statement. The scope of the retainer was to settle the terms of the SCAFA and arrange for its execution under power of attorney in the Australian Capital Territory. Mr Davidson repeated that as a result of the retainer a fiduciary duty arose in favour of Beach and, in addition, it was an implied term of the contract or, alternatively, it was the duty of ATRK to exercise reasonable skill, care and diligence in the performance of any legal work in relation to the SCAFA. He assumed there was an express oral retainer of ATRK to act on behalf of Spargos, Enterprise and
Jingellic in relation to the SCAFA, which is not in issue, the scope of the retainer being to settle the document and to arrange for its execution in the manner to which I have referred. He set out the same duties arising from that retainer and, in paragraph 191, he assumed an implied retainer by Beach and
Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic. As to Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic, that was not in issue. The implied retainer, so far as Beach was concerned, was said to be found in the events which occurred on 5 October 1989 in relation to the SCAFA, including the settling of its terms and the arranging for it to be executed under power of attorney in the Australian Capital
Territory.

Commencing at paragraph 259 Mr Davidson expressed his views in relation to the
SCAFA and, once again, posed that the Hypothetical Solicitor would have taken certain steps and, being in Mr Bateman's position on 12 July 1989, would have asked himself whether there was any reason why ATRK should not act for Beach as the borrower as well as Spargos, Jingellic and Enterprise as the lenders.
Mr Thomas made it clear that he would not act for Beach as well as the lenders and his evidence was that in so far as he did acts referable to Beach they were acts done conformably with his role as the solicitor for the lenders. His evidence was that Mr Cummings accepted that he, by which I include not only Mr
Thomas but also ATRK, would not act for Beach, and Mr Cummings said that he would arrange for Mr Cordell to do so. I accept that Mr Cordell acted for
Beach and, accordingly, a fundamental assumption of Mr Davidson is not proved.

In my opinion there is no reason why I should not accept the evidence of Mr
Thomas that he refused to act for Beach and that he was told by Mr Cummings that Mr Cordell would be acting for Beach. There is no doubt on the evidence that Mr Cordell did act for Beach. Mr Davidson did not deal with the matter on this basis. Because of the common directorships it is, unless one is careful, easy to blur the distinctions between the roles of ATRK, but in the present case there is clear evidence from Mr Thomas of three matters I consider to be of vital importance, namely his refusal to act on behalf of Beach, Mr
Cummings' acceptance that Mr Cordell would act on its behalf, and Mr Cordell's acting for Beach.

In paragraph 262 Mr Davidson considered the position on the basis that Beach retained ATRK, and the rest of his commentary on this aspect of the matter proceeded on this assumption, which I find not to have been established by the evidence.

I think it also necessary to point out that Mr Davidson dealt with each transaction individually. He does not adopt the position that one can look at the overall situation, by which I mean that on one view of the evidence ATRK were acting for all the companies in the Beach Group. If I may say so with respect, I think this is the correct approach, as a failure to consider each transaction can lead to error. In paragraph 224 he stated, and this was not challenged, that where a solicitor acts for a "group" of companies, by which he meant:- ".. a number of companies who have common or interlocking shareholders and/or common directors, or where other solicitors in the same firm or partnership act for other companies in such a `group', the same standard practice applied, with the additional complication that, in assessing whether or not there was an actual or potential conflict of interest between members of the one `group' such as to preclude the solicitor from acting for both companies in relation to the one transaction or either company at all in relation to that transaction, the solicitor would be mindful of the fact that common directors from whom they might otherwise accept instructions may themselves be in a position of conflict." 
He said that in such a case the solicitor would be concerned to ensure that he had a thorough understanding of the proposed transaction, before taking any steps to act in relation to the matter, "so that he may discern any actual or potential conflict which may preclude him from acting". He identified such conflict as arising from the possibility that the director or directors furnishing instructions may be in a position of conflict, and continued:- "The circumstances in which the standard practice is to be applied, however, are more complex. In every case, the solicitor will ask whatever questions may be necessary so that he may fully acquaint himself with the proposed transaction and ensure that he has received satisfactory answers before he accepts instructions and proceeds to act so that he does not accept instructions and proceed to act when he is not in a position to do so." 
The standard practice which Mr Davidson set forth in paragraph 222, is:- "The standard practice in New South Wales was, at that time, and still is, that where there was a real conflict of interest between the parties, or a likelihood of a real conflict of interest, a solicitor must not act for both parties, no matter how small the conflict may seem to the solicitor to be, as set forth in the Loxton Memorandum at page 759." 
Mr Davidson's assertions that there must be a "real" conflict or the "likelihood" thereof is consistent with the approach Lord Upjohn required in
Boardman & Anor versus Phipps <case>; [[1967] 2 AC ] and shows its acceptance in this State.

In two of the major transactions, namely the Charge and Option Agreement and the SCAFA, ATRK did not, in the first instance, act for either party, and in the second instance act for one party. Mr Davidson did not suggest that in the circumstances, which presented themselves in the present case, there was any prohibition or restriction on ATRK's acting for one party. By that I mean that
Mr Davidson did not suggest that because of some knowledge obtained in acting for Beach in other transactions ATRK were precluded from acting for other parties entering into the commercial transactions he was considering. One can well imagine cases where there would be such a preclusion but, as I have said,
Mr Davidson did not suggest any in the present context, nor did I discern any.

The cross-examination of Mr Davidson commenced at Tp.1056. He agreed, firstly, that in 1989 most prudent lenders required evidence in the form of a certified copy of a directors' resolution that the borrower had authorised the transaction and the execution of the security documents, and that frequently the lender would prescribe or prepare, or at any rate approve, the terms of the resolution of the borrowing company. Thus the part played by Mr Thomas in relation to the preparation of the Beach resolution was unexceptional.

Secondly, he agreed that in 1989 a corporate lender engaged to lend money in connection with the acquisition of property, which would stand as security for the loan, frequently required from the borrower, if it was a company, a certified copy of a resolution of the directors in terms prescribed or prepared or approved by the lender authorising the execution in a valid form of the loan agreement. He said that was required as a matter of prudent practice by most of the major lenders.

Thirdly, he did not agree that in 1989 that it was his experience, in relation to such a lending, that notwithstanding that the loan and security documents were executed pursuant to powers of attorney on behalf of the borrower, the lender would normally or usually select the donee of the power. He did not agree that where documents were executed in the Australian Capital Territory to avoid stamp duty, which was not suggested to be an improper practice in any way, that the documents would be signed by the one attorney, and it was not his experience for documents not to be dated, "particularly when they are executed in another jurisdiction": Tp.1059.

Fourthly, he agreed it was common practice for a corporate lender engaged to lend money in connection with the acquisition of property, which was to be the security for the loan, to require from a borrower, if it were a company, a certified copy of the directions of the borrower authorising the execution of a power of attorney for the purposes of executing the loan documents, and that it was usual practice for the lender to satisfy itself that the borrower had good title to the property, which was to act as security.

Fifthly, he was asked whether it would be usual practice for the lender, or its lawyers, in 1989 to suggest or require alterations to the document of transfer to make its position in relation to title safe. He said the lender and its lawyers would want to satisfy themselves that good security was being obtained and that if there was need to make any alteration to the documents to achieve that result, they would be made at the insistence of the lender or its lawyers. The requirements of the lender could be made known either in writing or orally. Thus Mr Bateman's suggested amendments to the Charge and Option
Agreement cannot be regarded as the furnishing of advice to Beach. It was a task undertaken in his role as solicitor for the lender.

Commencing at paragraph 181 Mr Davidson made the following assumptions of law in relation to the s.12 notices issued by the NCSC to Claremont and Beach.
ATRK admitted they advised Claremont and Beach in relation to those notices.
Mr Davidson said that on or about 5 July 1989 there was an express oral retainer of ATRK to act for and on behalf of Beach in relation to a notice issued to it, which was made by Mr Cummings, on behalf of Beach, and Mr
Willcock, on behalf of ATRK. The scope of the retainer was to "attack" the notice:- ".. so that the National Companies and Securities Commission would not look at the Burbank transaction".

Mr Davidson said that as a result of that retainer a fiduciary duty arose and that there was an implied term of the contract or, alternatively, it was the duty of ATRK, as solicitors acting for Beach, to exercise reasonable skill, care and diligence in the performance of any legal work in relation to that matter.

In paragraph 182 he assumed that ATRK was retained on behalf of Claremont in respect of a notice under s.12 addressed to it, the retainer arising in the same way and the instructions being the same, all of which had the consequences to which Mr Davidson referred in relation to Beach.

In paragraph 248 Mr Davidson began to consider the obligations imposed on ATRK and, in paragraph 249, he stated that the Hypothetical Solicitor in Mr
Willcock's position on 5 July 1989:- ".. would have asked himself whether there was any reason why ATRK should not act for Beach and Claremont to `attack' the" notices "so as to resist the production of documents covered by the terms of the notices." 
He was of the view that the Hypothetical Solicitor would have asked a number of questions to obtain a full understanding of the reasons why the NCSC was seeking production of the documents and to ascertain, in general terms, the nature and extent of the documents covered by them and, in particular, he would have asked questions to ascertain why the two companies were anxious to resist production of documents in relation to "an incomplete transaction ". In this regard he referred to Mr Willcock's file note of 5 July , which evidenced a telephone conversation between Mr Willcock and Mr
Cummings in which Mr Willcock was told that the notices were "on way (this pm)", and that he had asked Mr Cummings:- "Do you want to stand & fight on this issue?" 
He recorded Mr Cummings as having said that it was very important that "we" attack these notices, and "don't want them looking at an incomplete transaction (Burbank)". The underlining appears on the file note.

The note continued that Mr Cummings said that "this", i.e. the issuance of the notices, "is a standard fishing exercise".

Mr Davidson said the Hypothetical Solicitor would have considered whether there was any reason why ATRK should not act for both Beach and Claremont in attacking the notices and opposing the production of documents covered by them, and advised Mr Cummings that he would need to discuss with the partner of ATRK with overall responsibility for Beach and Claremont whether ATRK could act for Beach and Claremont in the matter and whether it was appropriate for each company to "attack" the notices and resist production of the documents sought.

Mr Davidson was of the view that having received instructions and asked those questions the Hypothetical Solicitor in Mr Willcock's position would have discussed the matter with Mr Bateman as he, Mr Willcock, was not a partner and would not accept instructions without approval or confirmation by a partner.
He said:- "The purpose of this discussion would have been to inform Mr Bateman of the issue of the Notices by the NCSC, the instructions by Mr Cummings to `attack' the notices, the information which he had received in answer to his enquiries from Mr Cummings and to confirm with Mr Bateman that it was appropriate that ATRK should act for both Beach and Claremont in the matter." 
In paragraph 253 Mr Davidson said that at that time Mr Bateman was aware of the currency swap transaction and that, as a result of it, Beach had taken an assignment of a deposit denominated in US Dollars with a Swiss bank and that there was "no access to the use of those funds". He said Mr Bateman was also aware that neither Beach nor Spargos had sought shareholder approval pursuant to ASX Listing Rule 3J(3) in respect of the currency swap, and that it had not been notified to the ASX by Beach or Spargos.

In paragraph 255 Mr Davidson observed that on 12, 13 and 14 July 1989 Mr
Bateman engaged in correspondence with the NCSC in relation to the notices on behalf of Beach and Claremont and, on 12 July 1989, received the instructions from Mr Cummings in relation to the Burbank matter, which were set forth in the diary note of that date. He recorded that at that time Mr Bateman had a copy of the document entitled "Provisional Report of the Board of Beach
Petroleum NL from C. Paul M. Main" of 5 July 1989.

In the end the problems suggested by Mr Davidson about the s.12 notices ceased to have, in my opinion, any significance. The documents were all produced to the NCSC and several years later that body had not analysed them. Relevantly for present purposes the "attack" on them evaporated and there was no suggestion of any attempt to conceal the uncompleted Burbank transaction or of any conflict of interest, let alone one which would require ATRK to act other than they did. I should also note in this context that Mr Kelly submitted that the failure to call Mr Willcock, who took the instructions, gave rise to a
Jones versus Dunkel inference that he could have said nothing in relation to this aspect, which would have assisted ATRK's case. As things turned out there was, in my opinion, no reason to say anything.

In my opinion, a number of the opinions offered by Mr Davidson were not established because the hypotheses he was asked to make were not established.
I have referred to the observations by Mr Davidson that the Hypothetical
Solicitor would "probably" have acted in certain ways. Finally his evidence made it clear that a number of value judgments had to be made by ATRK. I am not satisfied, on the basis of my consideration of the evidence and the findings I have made that those value judgments were not made correctly. I, of course, have an advantage, which Mr Davidson did not enjoy, of having many more facts before me.

Exhibit AG 
Before Mr Bateman sent his files to Mr Fuller's brother in 1991 he prepared pages of notes in relation to those files. The notes are headed:- "ATRK Files On IRL `Group' Companies" and in seventy four numbered paragraphs there is a summary of each of seventy four files, which was returned. The files have been set out in alphabetical order and those referred to in paragraphs 3, 4 and 5 were files in which ATRK obviously acted for Beach. The first is headed:- "Re General Advice 88/89 .." 
The note stated that the file covered the period 22 November 1988 to 16 May and that a "copy" of it was forwarded to Beach on 9 April 1991. It continued that the only matter "really dealt with" was the Annual General
Meeting held on 22 November 1988 in relation to the position of Messrs Lobban and Kolm. The second file is headed:- "Re PPL Facility ...".

It is stated that it covers the period May 1989 to December 1989 and that a copy of it was forwarded to Beach on 26 March 1991. The matters dealt with included the proposed short term financing facility by Partnership Pacific
Limited in favour of Moage to enable it to on-lend to another company to fund an acquisition, the security suggested, and the reduction on 6 June 1989 in the draft Facility.

The third file is headed:- "Re General Advice ..." and it covers the period 3 April 1990 to 20 December 1990. A copy was forwarded to Beach on 26 March 1991. The matters dealt with are said to have included advice concerning a notice of meeting, a proxy form and related matters concerning "the forthcoming AGM", which appears to have been that held on 27 November 1990, and the attendance thereat of Mr Bateman.

Mr Kelly referred to a number of files commencing at paragraph 43 and headed "IRL Group" in relation to various matters. At paragraph 43 the heading is "Re
Restructuring ..". The file, which covered the period 9 January 1989 to 5
February 1990, was sent to Messrs Baker O'Loughlin on 28 March 1991 and dealt with the proposed restructuring involving Newco bidding for IRL, Enterprise,
Jingellic, Southerns, and CGMA for specified prices and "creeping three per cent" in Cortaus, and bidding for Spargos, Moage and Claremont for specified prices. There was no reference to Beach, although, of course, it was as to sixty five per cent a subsidiary of Claremont. The note referred to a variation whereby a consortium would bid forty cents for Claremont and some discussion concerning the possibility of a float of the South East Asian assets into a Hong Kong company "with some concept which would result in" various companies in the Group, but not including Beach, having an interest.
The file referred to Overseas Newco being controlled by overseas interests, and Australian Newco NL being owned by a company and the Australian public, although there was no reference to Beach.

There was reference to the financing proposed through ELFIC and Elders and activity to be taken through Newco, which was to be owned by Messrs Fuller and
Cummings.

In sub-paragraph (j) it was stated:- "Discussions with Glossop and Winby 21 February 1989 concerning the debt position of the various companies and how those debts might be serviced." 
Mr Kelly, understandably enough, placed particular emphasis on this entry as showing that on that date Mr Bateman had a more detailed discussion with Mr
Glossop and Mr Winby about the debt position and its servicing than he was prepared to concede. However, the next sub-paragraph dealt with a review of proposed facility letters from ELFIC in relation to the bids, which would be consistent with the type of financial information that Mr Bateman asserted he was discussing.

In sub-paragraph (l), upon which Mr Kelly also relied heavily, it was stated that on 22 February 1989 there was a review of priority cash requirements "with discussion on refinancing options". There is, of course, no doubt that priority cash requirements were discussed on that day and that a topic of discussion was refinancing options. The sub-paragraph continued that there were discussions on 7 March 1989 with Mr Cordell in relation to certain financing, which is consistent with the evidence of Mr Bateman that he understood Mr Cordell to be representing a potential overseas investor or party interested in taking an equity position.

The notes continued to deal with matters which, on their face, related to possible takeover offers. There is a reference to Beach in sub-paragraph (v) in the context that Cambridge would buy Spargos shares from it giving
Cambridge a certain interest in Spargos. The consequences were set forth and in sub-paragraph (s) it was stated that on 14 March 1989 there was a review of "such ideas", including a consideration of shareholders' meetings that might be required for approval of the various transactions and the amount to be borrowed and, in sub-paragraph (t), that there was a review of alternatives and cash flow considerations.

The note continued to deal with negotiations with FAI and, in April 1989, with further discussions as to variations on the restructuring theme. This was elaborated upon and, in sub-paragraph (bb), the chronology of which would indicate it occurred on or about 27 April 1989, it was stated:- "Further note of proposed Burbank transaction whereby Beach and Claremont buy Mazeley Limited (ninety per cent to Beach and ten per cent to Claremont) for $30.3m of which $11m is paid by Beach and $16.1m is to be paid by Beach. Beach borrows $18.7m from Jingellic/Enterprise/Spargos. They lend to Claremont which on-lends to Beach with security over Burbank. Jingellic/Enterprise/Spargos funds are held by R & B and R & B is instructed to settle on behalf of Beach to vendor of Mazeley. Beach sells assets and repays $18.7m to Enterprise/Jingellic/Spargos." 
Sub-paragraphs (cc) and (dd) set forth the notes of what transpired on that day and it is interesting to note that in relation to the setting up of Swiss accounts the word "real" is not included. These notes are, in my opinion, totally consistent with Mr Bateman's evidence that he did not understand that money was not available at Rahn & Bodmer to enable Spargos, Enterprise and
Jingellic to make the loans. Indeed, in sub-paragraph (dd) it was stated that
Enterprise had cash at Rahn & Bodmer.

Sub-paragraph (ee) referred to matters discussed or considered on 8 May 1989 in relation to a "buy out proposal", and sub-paragraph (ff) dealt with notes dated 22 May 1989 in relation to restructuring. In paragraph 44 the heading is "Re Articles" and the note referred to instructions to review all companies within the "Group" as to the Articles with a view to having uniform Articles.
A model set was provided for limited liability companies, but no further instructions were received. These are the first two notes dealing with "IRL
Group".

In paragraph 70 the heading is:- "Spargos Mining re Beach ..".

The note stated:- "File sent to Baker O'Loughlin 23 April 1991. This file is the work done by Brian Thomas on behalf of Spargos as agent for the syndicated lenders to Beach. After a time a new file was opened `Spargos Mining re Beach Syndicated Loan - 171376'." 
This note, in my opinion, corroborates the evidence of Mr Thomas that he was acting on behalf of the lenders in the SCAFA. In paragraph 75 the heading is:- "Spargos Mining re Beach Syndicated Loan - 171376".

It was stated:- "File sent to Baker O'Loughlin 3 April 1991. This is a continuation of the work done by Brian Thomas for Spargos as agent for the syndicated lenders to Beach. After Spargos was replaced as agent and Jingellic became the agent a new file was opened in the name of Jingellic, being Jingellic Minerals NL re Syndicated Loan - 180202." 
At paragraph 55 the heading was:- "Jingellic Minerals NL re Syndicated Loan - 180202" and it was stated:- "File sent to Baker O'Loughlin 23 April 1991. This file is the continuation of work done by Brian Thomas after Jingellic became the agent for the syndicated lenders to Beach. Jingellic replaced Spargos as the agent." 
In my opinion these three notes are of real significance in determining the role of ATRK in the SCAFA. They were contemporaneous notes brought into existence by Mr Bateman when he was sending away his files and, in most cases, not keeping copies of them. The notes were prepared by him because relations between him and Messrs Fuller and Cummings had deteriorated or "soured", as he described it, and he was concerned that there may, in the future, be litigation. In these circumstances it is inherently probable that Mr Bateman would make truthful notes so that he would be in a position to seek legal advice if that became necessary. That having been established it seems to me that the notes relating to acting for the lenders are totally corroborative of the evidence of Mr Thomas that he was only prepared to act for the lenders and not for the borrower. There could have been no reason in 1991 for Mr Bateman's fabricating that note particularly as it was a note he made for the purposes to which I have referred and which he kept at his home.

Breach Of Fiduciary Duty 
In his written opening in relation to the structure and funding of Burbank, Mr
Kelly submitted that Beach put its case, in relation to "the assumption of a fiduciary duty to Beach in relation to the structure and funding of the
Burbank acquisition" on the basis that ATRK were, at all material times, a firm of solicitors engaging in the area of corporations law, takeovers, mergers and acquisitions and that the two relevant partners, Mr Bateman and Mr
Ferguson, had particular experience in those areas and held themselves out as experts in them. He continued that in the first half of 1989 ATRK undertook the task of advising "the IRL Group" in relation to the proposed restructure and refinance of it "including the structure and funding of the proposed acquisition of Burbank", and that the members of the Group included a number of listed public companies with interlocking shareholdings, including IRL,
Spargos, Enterprise, Jingellic, Claremont and Beach. He set forth the common directorships and submitted that when ATRK undertook to advise the Group in relation to its restructure and refinance, including the structure and funding of the Burbank acquisition, "ATRK assumed a relationship of trust and confidence with all of the companies in the Group". In particular, it was submitted, that Mr Bateman and Mr Ferguson became privy to confidential information concerning the financial affairs of those companies and the problems they were facing; that they formulated various proposals and gave professional advice in relation to the restructure and refinance of the Group, including proposals which specifically addressed the structure and funding of
Burbank; and that they acted in a number of related matters, including the preparation of Deeds of Confidentiality to be executed by a number of finance houses from which the IRL Group was seeking support in relation to their restructure and refinance. The submission continued:- "The advice given by ATRK was of a nature and given in circumstances such that it was to be expected that the companies in the IRL Group would rely upon that advice in considering their options, particularly Claremont and Beach, who were the prospective purchasers of Mazeley, and Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic, who were supposed to provide funds for the acquisition." 
The submission was that as a matter of principle, a merchant banker, solicitor or other person, who held himself out as having expertise in advising in the area under discussion and gave advice is in the same position as a stockbroker, bank manager or other person, who holds himself out as having expertise in advising on investments and undertakes to give that advice. The reason was stated as being that the relationship between the adviser and the advisee, in those circumstances, was one of trust and confidence in which the adviser undertook to act in the interests of the advisee in giving advice in his field of expertise, in circumstances in which the advisee may be expected to rely upon the adviser and the adviser "thereby assumes a position of ascendancy over the advisee such that the advisee is vulnerable to an abuse of his position by the advisor". It was submitted that where a group of companies is involved the duty of an adviser, who undertakes the task of advising the group, is to treat each member as a separate legal entity and to consult the interests of that member rather than the interests of others, in similar circumstances to the obligation imposed upon a director. It was submitted that in such a case each client is entitled to expect that the solicitor will be in a position to approach the matter with nothing in mind but the protection of the client's interests against those of the other party, and not to have to depend upon a person who has conflicting allegiances, and who may be tempted consciously or unconsciously to favour another client or simply seek a resolution of the matter in a way which is least embarrassing to himself.

It was submitted that the client of a solicitor is entitled to receive the benefit of all of the skill and knowledge of the solicitor, including knowledge of facts of which the solicitor has knowledge and which are material to be known to the client, and not to suffer a divided loyalty in which the solicitor has a duty to maintain confidentiality in relation to the same information in favour of another client.

Each of these submissions may, in appropriate factual circumstances, be correct. However, in each case it is necessary to determine what the facts are and how and to what extent, in the particular circumstances, these principles are to be applied. Of particular significance are the terms of the retainers and, in my opinion, each retainer, certainly in the first instance, must be considered separately.

Extent Of ATRK's Duty And Breach Of Fiduciary Duty 
The essential step in considering the duty owed by ATRK to Beach is deciding what, qua Beach, ATRK was retained by it to do. It is also helpful, in that context, to consider the way in which breaches have been treated in the decided cases. The essence of the fiduciary duty was stated by Mason J in
Hospital Products Limited versus United States Surgical Corporation & Ors <case>; [(1984-1985) 156 CLR 41] at pp.96-97, when his Honour said:- "The critical feature of these relationships" (including the relationship of solicitor and client) "is that the fiduciary undertakes or agrees to act for or on behalf of or in the interests of another person in the exercise of a power or discretion which will affect the interests of that other person in a legal or practical sense. The relationship between the parties is therefore one which gives the fiduciary a special opportunity to exercise the power or discretion to the detriment of that other person who is accordingly vulnerable to abuse by the fiduciary of his position. The expressions `for", `on behalf of', and `in the interests of' signify that the fiduciary acts in a `representative' character in the exercise of his responsibility, to adopt an expression used by the Court of Appeal." 
Subsequently his Honour confirmed that contractual and fiduciary relationships may co-exist between the same parties which he said had "never been doubted".
He continued:- "Indeed, the existence of a basic contractual relationship has in many situations provided a foundation for the erection of a fiduciary relationship. In these situations it is the contractual foundation which is all important because it is the contract that regulates the basic rights and liabilities of the parties. The fiduciary relationship, if it is to exist at all, must accommodate itself to the terms of the contract so that it is consistent with, and conforms to, them. The fiduciary relationship cannot be superimposed upon the contract in such a way as to alter the operation which the contract was intended to have according to its true construction." 
In Hawkins versus Clayton & Ors (1988) 164 CLR 539 Deane J said, at p.579:- "The relationship of solicitor and client is, as has been seen, a relationship of proximity which ordinarily involves the combination of those elements with respect to foreseeable loss which may be caused to the client by the performance of professional work. It is a relationship of proximity of a kind which may well give rise to a duty of care on the part of the solicitor which requires the taking of positive steps, beyond the specifically agreed professional task or function, to avoid a real and foreseeable risk of economic loss being sustained by the client. Whether the solicitor-client relationship does give rise to a duty of care requiring the taking of such positive steps will depend upon the nature of the particular professional task or function which is involved and the circumstances of the case." (My emphasis.) 
Thus the Court must determine the terms, ambit and scope of the contract of retainer. It is in relation to that contract that the fiduciary relationship arises, takes its content and exists. In addition, Mr Kelly submitted that there was an assumption of fiduciary duties by ATRK. Fiduciary duties may arise because a solicitor has a personal interest in a transaction, other than the payment of fees, which is not the present case, or because the solicitor, by acting for several parties, is involved in a conflict of interest, which must be of a "real sensible" type. That is the case sought to be made by
Beach.

In Wan versus McDonald & Ors <case>; [(1991-1992) 105 ALR 473] an applicant made a claim based on s.52 of the Trade Practices Act against
Dotwell Pty Limited; her solicitor, who was a shareholder and former director of Dotwell, Mr McDonald; and Mr McDonald's son, who was the managing director of Dotwell. Additional claims were made in deceit, negligence and for breach of contract, particularly arising out of the contract of retainer by the applicant of Mr McDonald as her solicitor, and also for breaches of fiduciary duty. This, accordingly, was a case in which, at least arguably, the solicitor had a personal pecuniary interest.

At p.492 Burchett J said:- "I do not think the authorities require Mrs Wan to prove any more than that, in order to be entitled to a decision in her favour on the ground of breach of Mr Donald McDonald's fiduciary duty to her as her solicitor. Mr Donald McDonald failed to disclose to his client that his other client had, as a result at least of his negligence, obtained $30,000 in advance of the signing of any contract; and, as a result of the conversion of her bank draft, had obtained the whole balance of the purchase money in advance of showing any title or executing any transfer, or even obtaining title. A more material non-disclosure it would be very difficult to imagine in relation to a conveyancing matter. As was pointed out in Farrington versus Rowe McBride & Partners ... where a situation of that kind arose, the solicitor had a responsibility, at the least to explain to Mrs Wan the nature of his dual responsibilities in order to obtain her informed consent to his continuing to act for both clients. And she should have been advised that because of his professional commitment to his other client, and his close personal association with it, and because too of the demonstrated reality that her interest and its interests were not completely coincident in the particular transaction, she should consider taking legal advice. I shall return to the law on this topic; for the present it is enough to say it was stated in Farrington versus Rowe McBride & Partners at 99 (and see also 93) that in such a situation `equity gives a remedy for the loss suffered ... Once the Court has determined that the non-disclosed facts were material, speculation as to what course the aggrieved party, on disclosure, would have taken is not relevant: Brickenden versus London Loan & Savings Co [(1934) 3 DLR 465] at 469'." 
After referring to various authorities, which warned of the risks involved in a solicitor acting for both parties in a conveyancing transaction, Burchett J quoted from Wootten J in Thompson versus Mikkelsen (Supreme Court of New South
Wales, 3 October 1974, unreported), where Wootten J said:- "It seems to me that the practice of a solicitor acting for both parties cannot be too strongly deprecated. It is only because of the possibility that something may be wrong in a transaction, or may go wrong during its implementation, that the employment of highly trained professional people at professional scales of remuneration can be justified. To scrutinise a transaction to discover whether something is wrong in a way that may affect his interests, or to notice and deal with something that goes wrong during the transaction, is what a party employs such a person for. He is entitled to assume that that person will be in a position to approach the matter concerned with nothing (in mind) but the protection of his client's interests against (those) of the other party. He should not have to depend on a person who has conflicting allegiances and who may be tempted either consciously or unconsciously to favour the other client, or simply to seek a resolution of the matter in a way which is least embarrassing to himself." 
Wootten J was of the view that notwithstanding that the solicitor acted "with complete integrity and with the utmost good faith", the client did not receive "the concerned interest and advice that a client is entitled to expect from a solicitor". In the circumstances of that case I have no doubt that what his
Honour said was correct. However, I respectfully doubt the general application of the first sentence from the passage I have quoted. There may be many instances in which a solicitor may act for several parties with propriety. The potential problem is what the solicitor should do if a conflict, being one of the type to which I have referred, arises in the course of the transaction.

Burchett J noted the comment of the Full Court of the Federal Court in
Commonwealth Bank of Australia versus Smith <case>; [(1991) 102 ALR 453] at p.478 that the practice of one solicitor acting for both vendor and purchaser "is an undesirable practice and it ought not to be permitted". This statement was clearly obiter dictum and, as an absolute statement, I would respectfully doubt its correctness. His Honour then noted that where the solicitor has close family and commercial ties with one of the parties the conflict of duty and interest is obvious and he stated that nothing short of truly informed consent could justify his position. He referred to various authorities, which establish that among fiduciaries solicitors stand in a special position because of the necessity to maintain high standards of conduct, and so that the trust and confidence of the community is not lost, thereby frustrating the function of the profession.

At p.496 he considered the position where after a solicitor has acted for both parties a conflict arose, and his Honour said that "the issues of loyalty and propriety seem to me to loom more largely". He noted the practice that the solicitor should then cease to act for either party. Prima facie this affords support for my view that the absolute position contended for in
Thompson versus Mikkelsen and Commonwealth Bank of Australia versus Smith cannot be supported.

The matter was considered by Foster J in Stewart versus Layton [(1992) 111 ALR ], in which case a solicitor acted for both vendor and purchaser. A dispute having arisen because the purchaser could not obtain funds to complete, which led, obviously enough, to issues as to what steps should have been taken on behalf of the vendor against the purchaser, the solicitor stated he could no longer act for the purchaser.

His Honour found that between 21 and 29 September the solicitor obtained significant information in relation to the purchaser, which led him to know there was a risk that the purchaser would be unable to complete. Thus the solicitor had the requisite knowledge and his Honour was satisfied the vendor was entitled to be made aware of those matters at the earliest possible moment, but was not. He was also satisfied, and no suggestion was made to the contrary, that the solicitor did not fail to do so because of a conscious decision to keep it confidential through loyalty to the purchaser. His Honour cited the passage from Thompson versus Mikkelsen, to which I have referred, and continued, at p.709:- "The respondent was undoubtedly in this period focussing his endeavours upon achieving a settlement of the transactions in compliance with the notices to complete. If settlement were not achieved there would have been an embarrassing situation for all concerned. He was undoubtedly seeking to avoid this. In this context, however, it seems to me that he lost sight of the applicant's entitlement to be kept informed of the risks of her position should (the purchaser) be unable to complete the purchase." 
His Honour repeated that he was satisfied that the solicitor had an obligation to bring the matters of which he knew in relation to the purchaser's financial position to the attention of the vendor, and to discuss them with her so that she could give them appropriate consideration and decide upon steps to be taken if finance was not forthcoming. He said, p.710:- "Undoubtedly, in fulfilment of his fiduciary obligation to her, he would have advised her of it and, in discussion with her, formulated a plan of action, should (the purchaser) have failed to complete the contract." 
At p.711 his Honour said:- "Despite the fact that the respondent acted at all times with the best of intentions towards the applicant he, nevertheless, committed a breach of his fiduciary duty towards her as her solicitor, which breach was rooted in the fact that he continued to act for both parties in a conveyancing transaction after a conflict of duties arose. In his strenuous endeavour to fulfil both duties he failed properly to fulfil his duty to the applicant. This resulted in her entering into a most disadvantageous second mortgage." 
The vendor's necessity to grant a second mortgage to her purchaser was to obtain finance from the settlement of that sale to enable her to complete the purchase of another home she had contracted to purchase on the basis that the funds from the sale of her property would be available for that purpose.

His Honour referred to the fact that the vendor's case was based squarely upon breach of fiduciary duty and to the submission that once that breach was established the relevant principle of equity required that the vendor be compensated by the return of a sum of money he identified. His Honour continued, at p.713:- "It was not necessary, he submitted, to enter into any consideration as to what she might have done had the breach not been committed. This submission was based upon the often cited statement of Lord Thankerton in London Loan & Savings Co of Canada versus Brickenden [[1934] 3 DLR 465] at 469: `When a party, holding a fiduciary relationship, commits a breach of his duty by non-disclosure of material facts, which his constituent is entitled to know in connection with the transaction, he cannot be heard to maintain that disclosure would not have altered the decision to proceed with the transaction, because the constituent's action would be solely determined by some other factor, such as the valuation by another party of the property proposed to be mortgaged. Once the Court has determined that the non-disclosed facts were material, speculation as to what course the constituent, on disclosure, would have taken is not relevant." 
From this passage the following matters emerge. Firstly, the Court was concerned with a breach of the fiduciary duty by non-disclosure of material facts. Secondly, it considered they must be material facts which the client was entitled to know in connection with the transaction. Thirdly, if there is a non-disclosure of such facts the solicitor cannot be heard to maintain that disclosure would not have altered the decision to proceed with the transaction because the client's action would have been "solely" determined by some other factor. Fourthly, "speculation" as to the course the client, on disclosure, would have taken is not relevant. However, the view may be taken that the statement of Lord Thankerton leaves aside the critical question of connecting the breach and the loss, which is a matter heavily in issue in the present case. Thus, if the applicant was committed already to purchase the other house, as she was, the question arises as to what could have been done to obtain the finance, which was not available through no fault on the part of the solicitor. There were two alternatives. She could have obtained bridging finance and cancelled the contract with her purchaser and resold; or she could have granted her purchaser a second mortgage and settled on the basis she did.
The difficulty, as I understand it, for the solicitor was that he did not give her sufficient time, by advising her of the position earlier, to consider which option she should take.

Foster J then referred to what was said by McGechan J in Mouat versus Clark
Boyce (1991) ANZCR 118,577 at 590, in the New Zealand Court of Appeal:- "One suspects a policy basis, sourced in a need to maintain strict standards for fiduciaries and to avoid obfuscatory arguments as to causation of loss where fiduciaries have been found in breach. With such a rationale, it is tempting to regard Brickenden as confined to self-interest and duty conflicts of the type there involved. Arguments for a Draconian imposition of liability are more understandable when a fiduciary stands to gain personally - anathema to conscience - than where there is a mere conflict between clients. I do not, however, see that restriction as open in the light of the approach adopted in Farrington versus Rowe McBride & Partners [[1985] 1 NZLR 83 (CA).] Farrington involved a claim against a solicitor of investment advice. Richardson J acquitted the solicitor in respect of any personal interest in the advice (other than potential conveyancing fees which were regarded as irrelevant), regarding the case of one of conflict between duties owed to the separate clients concerned, but nevertheless quoted and applied the Brickenden principle, supra: at 90, 93. McMullen J proceeded likewise: at 99. It would appear that the Brickenden principle not only is alive and well, but indeed must be applied to both types of conflict situation." 
His Honour's reasons were over-ruled by the Privy Council: Clark Boyce v
Mouat [1994] 1 AC 428, although Foster J did not have the benefit of that decision when he gave judgment. The Full Court, by majority, upheld his
Honour's decision on 4 November 1993 a month after the Privy Council's decision, but made no reference to it. However, O'Loughlin J, in his dissenting judgment, recognised the same type of problems and the factual differences arising between Layton and Mouat.

Foster J continued:- "It appears from the balance of his Honour's judgment that the principle has undergone further development in the New Zealand Courts to which it is not necessary to make reference. However, I respectfully agree with and adopt what his Honour says in the passage cited. Consequently, once it is held that the principle is applicable to the facts of the case, the court administering the principles of equity is relieved of the task of unravelling and exposing the strands of causation connecting breach with damage, a tedious and painstaking task which, even if it may be described as `speculative', is daily undertaken in courts administering the common law." 
Later authority, to which I shall refer, does not relieve the Court of that obligation, the obligation being to consider whether, at the date when compensation is determined, and with the full benefit of hindsight, the loss is caused by the breach on a common sense view of causation.

His Honour considered, as I understand it, that the solution to the problem did not lie in a consideration of causation, but rather in the relief to which the vendor was entitled. After holding she was entitled to a certain amount he continued:- "This does not mean, however, that the court must be otherwise blind to the reality of the situation. Although it must be assumed that she would not have taken the less advantageous course, she would still have been faced with the necessity of settling her purchaser of the Avalon property. The necessity was not thrust upon her as a result of any breach on the part of the respondent. She would still have to shoulder the misfortune of having contracted with a defaulting purchaser. In these circumstances, it is, in my view, as inevitable as it is just that her compensation must be assessed on the basis of placing her now in the position that she would have occupied had she taken the obviously less disadvantageous course of obtaining bridging finance and completing the purchase. It may be reasonably assumed, having regard to (the purchaser's) ultimate bankruptcy, that he would not have succeeded in obtaining the necessary finance to complete the purchase, with the result that the applicant would have been forced to re-sell the property in a falling market. It must also be assumed that she would have been unable to recover from (the purchaser) any loss on re-sale." 
After having regard to those circumstances his Honour assessed damages conformably with what he had said. The method he adopted was essentially consistent with the approach to which I have just referred.

In Clark Boyce versus Mouat [1994] 1 AC 428 the defendant firm of solicitors agreed to act for the plaintiff, who was mortgaging her house to secure a loan to her son, and for her son as guarantor and recipient of the loan. The solicitors pointed out to the plaintiff that her position was substantially different from that of her son and advised her to obtain independent legal advice. She was also told that she would lose her house if her son failed to meet the mortgage payments. The plaintiff declined to see another lawyer and the solicitors acted for both her and her son in completing the transaction.
The plaintiff was left with a liability to repay the principal sum after her son became bankrupt with the mortgage payments in arrears, and she commenced proceedings against the solicitors for damages for breach of contract, negligence and breach of fiduciary duty. The breach of fiduciary duty was said to involve failing to decline to act for her when they were acting for her son, failing to disclose that her son's former solicitor had declined to act, and failing to advise her that it was not in her interests to sign the mortgage. Her claim was dismissed at first instance, but allowed by the Court of Appeal of New Zealand by majority. The solicitors appealed to the Privy
Council, the opinion of which was delivered by Lord Jauncey of Tullichettle.

At p.436 his Lordship said:- "In determining whether a solicitor has obtained informed consent to acting for parties with conflicting interests it is essential to determine precisely what services are required of him by the parties. In this case Holland J was satisfied that Mrs Mouat was not concerned about the wisdom of the transaction and was `merely (seeking) the service of the solicitor to ensure that the transaction (was) given proper and full effect by way of ascertaining questions of title and ensuring that by appropriate documentation the parties (achieved) what they (had) contracted for'.

Gault J considered that this finding was amply supported by the evidence. As has already been observed, Sir Gordon Bisson drew a different conclusion from the evidence as did McGechan J. In their Lordships' opinion Holland and Gault JJ drew the correct conclusion. As Viscount Haldane LC observed in Nocton versus Lord Ashburton [[1914] AC 932], 937: `It is only in exceptional circumstances that Judges of Appeal, who have not seen the witness in the box, ought to differ from the finding of fact of the Judge who tried the case as to the state of mind of the witness'.

Holland J had the advantage of seeing and hearing all the witnesses and of forming an impression therefrom as to their states of mind and what had occurred during the meeting in Mr Boyce's office. There are no exceptional circumstances which would justify differing from his conclusions on these matters.

Their Lordships are accordingly satisfied that Mrs Mouat required of Mr Boyce no more than that he should carry out the necessary conveyancing on her behalf and explain to her the legal implications of the transaction. Since Mrs Mouat was already aware of the consequences if her son defaulted Mr Boyce did all that was reasonably required of him before accepting her instructions when he advised her to obtain and offered to arrange independent advice. As Mrs Mouat was fully aware of what she was doing and had rejected independent advice, there was no duty on Mr Boyce to refuse to act for her. Having accepted instructions he carried these out properly and was neither negligent nor in breach of contract in acting and continuing to act after Mrs Mouat had rejected his suggestion that she obtain independent advice. Indeed not only did Mr Boyce in carrying out these instructions repeat on two further occasions his advice that Mrs Mouat should obtain independent advice but he told her in no uncertain terms that she would lose her house if Mr R.G. Mouat defaulted. One might well ask what more he could reasonably have done.

When a client in full command of his faculties and apparently aware of what he is doing seeks the assistance of a solicitor in the carrying out of a particular transaction, that solicitor is under no duty whether before or after accepting instructions to go beyond those instructions by proffering unsought advice on the wisdom of the transaction. To hold otherwise could impose intolerable burdens on solicitors." (My emphasis.) 
Whilst there were several instances where the plaintiff was advised to seek independent advice, the Privy Council focussed on the obligation of the solicitor, when she failed to do so, only to act in accordance with her instructions and, in doing so, not to proffer advice which went beyond them.

His Lordship said it was nextly necessary to consider the Court of Appeal's conclusion that the solicitor was in breach of fiduciary duties. He agreed it was not in doubt that a solicitor owes a fiduciary duty to a client and cited as "the classical case" of such duty a solicitor's acting for a client in a matter in which he or she has a personal interest, which gives rise to an obligation of disclosure such that if there is no disclosure the transaction, however favourable to the client, may be set aside at the client's instance.
His Lordship also cited as another example a solicitor acting for both parties without disclosing this to one of them or where, having disclosed it, he or she fails, unbeknown to one party, to disclose to that party material facts relative to the other party of which he is aware. He continued, p.437:- "A fiduciary duty concerns disclosure of material facts in a situation where the fiduciary has either a personal interest in the matter to which the facts are material or acts for another party who has such an interest. It cannot be prayed in aid to enlarge the scope of contractual duties. Thus, there being no contractual duty on Mr Boyce to advise Mrs Mouat on the wisdom of entering into the transaction, she cannot claim that he nevertheless owed her a fiduciary duty to give that advice. Furthermore any duty of disclosure can only extend to the solicitor's knowledge of facts and not to his lack of knowledge thereof." (My emphasis.) 
The passages I have emphasised are, in my respectful opinion, of critical importance in the present case. Firstly, resort to fiduciary duty does not enlarge the extent of the retainer. Secondly, any duty of disclosure depends on the solicitor's knowledge for a breach of a fiduciary duty must be intentional. In the present case there was much in Beach's submission based on an extension of this duty once, if these submissions be accepted, the retainer was found. Also this was done without acknowledged regard to the fact that there were fraudulent activities taking place of which, I am satisfied, ATRK did not know. In this respect two principles collide in Beach's argument.
Beach has sought to rely on breach of fiduciary duty to avoid the problems the fraudulent conduct provides to its establishing causation in relation to breach of contract of retainer and negligence. Yet reliance on breach of fiduciary duty demands knowledge not "lack of knowledge" of the facts, which were really driving the transaction.

The duty of a solicitor has been considered in three reasonably recent decisions of the Court of Appeal: Cousins versus Cousins (Court of Appeal, 18
December 1990, unreported); Citicorp Australia Limited versus O'Brien [(1996) NSWLR 398], and Macedone & Ors versus Collins (Court of Appeal, 20
December 1996, unreported).

In Citicorp the question of fiduciary duty was not directly raised as I understand it. The case was one in which Mr and Mrs O'Brien were purchasing a house from Hooker Homes with the assistance of a loan from Citicorp, which was secured by way of a first mortgage over the home. The solicitor acted for all parties. Mr and Mrs O'Brien subsequently fell into default and lost their home. The judgment of the Court of Appeal was delivered by Sheller JA, with whom Meagher JA and Abadee AJA agreed. The trial Judge found that the solicitor had failed to advise Mr and Mrs O'Brien properly about the extent of the financial obligations they were undertaking and the difficulties they were likely to encounter in so doing by virtue of their limited income. In these circumstances his Honour granted relief pursuant to the provisions of the [Contracts Review Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/). The case does not appear to have involved any allegation of breach of fiduciary duty.

At p.412 Sheller JA said:- "Bryson J said that an aspect of Mr Eliades' position of acting for three parties was that it made him less able to give the O'Briens firm advice adverse to their going on with the transactions, if that advice were appropriate. His own financial interests and the financial interests of his other clients were adverse to his giving such advice, and a solicitor should not have been in such a position." 
Whilst, as I have said, there does not appear to have been a specific claim for breach of fiduciary duty this formulation seems, if I may say so with respect, to go very close to raising that situation. Sheller JA continued by quoting from the passages of Lord Jauncey of Tullichettle in Clark Boyce at pp.435 and 436, where his Lordship was clearly dealing with breach of fiduciary duty. I have quoted the passages and, at p.412, Sheller JA said:- "With respect it seems to me that what his Lordship said correctly states the position. The first question is what services the O'Briens required and Mr Eliades agreed to provide. Unfortunately Bryson J made no clear finding about this." 
Sheller JA considered the solicitor's duty and, in doing so, quoted from the judgment of Priestley JA in Cousins, which, in turn, quoted from the judgment of Deane J in Hawkins the passage to which I have referred.

At p.418 Sheller JA continued:- "In my opinion the difficulties faced by the O'Briens which his Honour considered were so great and, to professional persons, so obvious that a solicitor could not reasonably leave them unstated, did not impose the duty his Honour held Mr Eliades to be under. Stated bluntly, such a duty would require solicitors, retained to act on a purchase or mortgage for their skill in the law, to inform every client for whom they so acted of their views about the financial prospects of the purchase or mortgage where they felt or ought reasonably to have felt that there was risk of loss. One consequence of this would be to require solicitors to give opinions, which they were not qualified to give, with the obvious consequence that if they were wrong and the client had acted on the basis of those views, they would be liable in negligence. For good reason such a proposition is contrary to authority. The solicitor's duty is found in the terms of the retainer and the ambit of any additional assumed responsibility relied upon." (My emphasis.) 
In the next paragraph his Honour, in the context of considering a claim in negligence, stated that to make such a case Mr and Mrs O'Brien were bound to prove that if Mr Eliades had advised them, for the reasons suggested, not to proceed with the contract for purchase or finance, they would have acted on that advice. His Honour said:- "They gave no such evidence and in my opinion it was not open to his Honour to infer in the absence of any such evidence that the O'Briens would have taken some course other than the course they did in fact take." 
I should add that there was evidence in that case that Mr and Mrs O'Brien had formed the view that this was the appropriate way in which to act.

The High Court granted special leave to appeal after which the proceedings were settled.

In Macedone my decision that a solicitor owed a fiduciary duty, which he had breached, was over-ruled. Cole JA, with whom Abadee AJA agreed, held that there had been no breach of fiduciary duty. So also did Beazley JA in a separate judgment. Cole JA, p.8, said:- "It was argued on behalf of Mrs Collins that the solicitors owed a duty of care to her not to provide advice to her unless she provided her fully informed consent to Mr Willis acting despite his conflict of interest. However, even if that be so, and I doubt if a duty is properly expressed in those terms, and assuming it was breached, nothing flows in consequence. That is because if the advice which was given by Mr Willis, that the powers under the power of attorney could be exercised to execute documents which in the event of the borrower's default could result in Mrs Collins being evicted and her sole asset being her house sold, was a sufficient explanation of the consequences of giving of the power of attorney, as in my view it was, had been given by another solicitor without conflict of interest, Mrs Collins plainly would still have executed the power of attorney. It follows that any conflict of interest with which Mr Willis may have been burdened was irrelevant to Mrs Collins receiving proper advice regarding the possible deleterious consequences of her executing the power of attorney." (My emphasis.) 
At pp.10 and 11 his Honour continued:- "To avoid this obvious causation problem it was submitted that, as the solicitor had a fiduciary duty to Mrs Collins arising from being in a position of conflict of interest, once loss was established in circumstances of breach of duty, recovery of the loss followed. Reliance was placed upon the notion of equitable compensation, and reference was made to Re Dawson.

The relationship of solicitor and client usually commences as a contractual relationship. However the liability of the solicitor to his client may embrace tortious responsibility. Any responsibility in contract or in tort will depend upon the nature of the function which the contract or the proximity of the relationship requires the solicitor to perform." 
His Honour quoted from the judgment of Deane J in Hawkins versus Clayton at p.579, and said:- "The relationship between a solicitor and a client is also in some circumstances a recognised fiduciary relationship. However it does not follow from that circumstance that fiduciary duties and obligations attach to all aspects of the solicitor's relationship with his client, or acts done in implementation of obligations arising from the contractual or tortious relationship of solicitor and client." 
His Honour stated this was made clear in Breen versus Williams (1996) 186 CLR and he quoted from various of the judgments. After doing so he said, p.12:- "Accordingly it is necessary to determine the scope of the solicitor's retainer in order to determine the tasks which he is obliged to perform, and then to determine whether, in the circumstances of a particular case the acts or omissions of the solicitor said to constitute breach of duty, constituted breach of a fiduciary duty owed to his client, or was merely a breach of contractual or tortious duty otherwise owed." 
His Honour considered that was made clear in Permanent Building Society v
Wheeler [(1994) 14 ACSR 109] at 157, which was quoted with approval in Bristol and West Building Society v
Mothew <case>; [[1997] 2 WLR 436], in which Millett LJ said:- "Although the remedy which equity makes available for breach of the equitable duty of skill and care is equitable compensation rather than damages, this is merely the product of history and is in my opinion a distinction without a difference. Equitable compensation for the breach of the duty of skill and care resembles common law damages in that it is awarded by way of compensation to the plaintiff for his loss. There is no reason in principle why the common law rules of causation, remoteness of damage and measure of damages should not be applied by analogy in such a case. It should not be confused with equitable compensation for breach of fiduciary duty, which may be awarded in lieu of rescission or specific performance. 
This leaves those duties which are special to fiduciaries and which attract those remedies which are peculiar to the equitable jurisdiction and are primarily restitutionary or restorative rather than compensatory. A fiduciary is someone who has undertaken to act for or on behalf of another in a particular matter in circumstances which give rise to a relationship of trust and confidence." (My emphasis.) 
His Honour then referred to a further portion of the judgment and in the last passage Cole JA cited, his Lordship said:- "A fiduciary who acts for two principals with potentially conflicting interests without the informed consent of both is in breach of the obligation of undivided loyalty; he puts himself in a position where his duty to one principal may conflict with his duty to the other ... breach of the rule automatically constitutes a breach of fiduciary duty. But this is not something of which the Society can complain. It knew that the defendant was acting for the purchasers when it instructed him." 
Cole JA considered that as Mrs Collins knew the solicitor was acting for both the borrower and the other guarantors the same position applied to her, but he continued that "none-the-less", as Millett LJ said:- "Even if a fiduciary is properly acting for two principals with potentially conflicting interests he must act in good faith in the interests of each and must not act with the intention of furthering the interests of one principal to the prejudice of those of the other. I shall call this `the duty of good faith'. But it goes further than this. He must not allow the performance of his obligations to one principal to be influenced by his relationship with the other. He must serve each as faithfully and loyally as if he were his only principal.

Conduct which is in breach of this duty need not be dishonest but it must be intentional. An unconscious omission which happens to benefit one principal at the expense of the other does not constitute a breach of a fiduciary duty, though it may constitute a breach of the duty of skill and care. This is because the principle which is in play is that the fiduciary must not be inhibited by the existence of his other employment in serving the interests of his principal as faithfully and effectively as if he were the only employer. I shall call this `the no inhibition principle'. Unless the fiduciary is inhibited or believes (whether rightly or wrongly) that he is inhibited in the performance of his duties to one principal by reason of his employment by the other his failure to act is not attributable to the double employment.

Finally the fiduciary must take care not to find himself in a position where there is an actual conflict of duty so that he cannot fulfil his obligations to one principal without failing in his obligations to the other .... I shall call this `the actual conflict rule' ...

In my judgment the distinction drawn by Ipp J in Permanent Building Society versus Wheeler is sound in principle and is decisive of the present case. On the Society's pleaded case the fact that the defendant was acting for the purchasers played no part in its failure to report the true state of affairs to the Society. It did not inhibit him from fulfilling his obligations to the Society. It is consistent with its pleaded case that the defendant would have done so but for negligent oversight. It would have been exactly the same if he had failed to notice and report the existence and the defect in the purchaser's title. To characterise either such failure as a breach of fiduciary duty because he was acting for both parties in a situation where that fact did not contribute to his failure is, in my opinion, to substitute a verbal formula for principle." (My emphasis.) 
Thus the conduct must be intentional, if it is to constitute breach of fiduciary duty, and that intentional conduct must have resulted from something more than merely acting for both parties. There must have been an intentional act based on the desire to prefer the interests of one client to another.

Cole JA considered that there was no finding that the scope of the retainer exceeded the preparation of and giving of advice in relation to the execution of a power of attorney, and he said the case put against the solicitor was not that any "double employment" in fact inhibited his giving advice. This applied the point made by Millett LJ and, in my opinion, was part of the ratio decidendi. Rather it was that his explanation of the risk attendant upon the giving of the power of attorney was inadequate. His Honour considered that there was no suggestion that in fact the solicitor had acted in any way to advantage his client purchasers at the expense of Mrs Collins, or to disadvantage her for the benefit of them. He said:- "Thus, even if Mr Willis be regarded as being in a fiduciary relationship to Mrs Collins, there is no evidence of any breach of that duty. The advice given by him which Rolfe J thought to be defective was not related to any fiduciary duty by which he may have been bound, and was unrelated to the circumstances giving rise to any such duty: any inadequate explanation was not related to double employment." 
Thus his Honour rejected any assumption of responsibility arising from the giving of advice in so far as that was not given pursuant to the terms of the retainer.

His Honour then said that it followed that even if, contrary to his view, the solicitor gave inadequate advice to Mrs Collins concerning the risks attendant upon her giving the power of attorney, that breach attracted damages associated with breach of contract or tort, with attendant causation problems, and not principles of equitable compensation. In the instant case I am of the opinion that even if there was "double employment" there was no conflict and, even if there was, there was no intentional favouring of parties to the disadvantage of Beach.

Just as Sheller JA was critical of the failure of Bryson J to make clear findings of the scope of the solicitor's retainer, so Cole JA said my findings as to the scope of the solicitor's retainer were "not clear". Those statements make it obvious that it is essential for the Court to find the precise terms of and, therefore, the ambit and scope of the retainer.

Whilst Beazley JA did not agree with another portion of his Honour's reasoning, which is not presently relevant, her Honour disagreed with Cole JA that had Mrs Collins been advised of the full implications of granting the power of attorney, she would still have done so, (which was a finding I had not made), and with his Honour's finding that there was no breach of duty in failing to limit the power of attorney to the time Mrs Collins was overseas.
Her Honour was of the view that it could not be assumed that the solicitors would not have advised Mrs Collins to obtain independent legal advice, as they would have had a duty to do, or that she would not, on this occasion, have taken that advice. None-the-less her Honour continued: "I agree, however, with Cole JA that there was no breach of fiduciary duty." 
This, I assume, was on the basis of the scope of the retainer. The absence of breach made it unnecessary for her Honour to consider equitable compensation, which her finding of fact, which differed from that of Cole JA, would have necessitated. This, in turn, would have required a consideration of causation.

Mr Kelly relied heavily upon the decision of the Full Court of the Federal
Court in Commonwealth Bank of Australia & Anor versus Smith & Anor, which was a case in which it was held that the bank was in breach of various duties, including a fiduciary duty it owed. However, in the course of dealing with that, their Honours said, at p.393:- "He" (the bank manager) "did encourage them to go to the solicitor for the vendor, but with the unfortunate result that the solicitor was in a position of conflict. Had Mr and Mrs Smith sought advice from that solicitor about the merits of the transaction, the solicitor would have been in an impossible position. This is because the acceptance of the double engagement would have placed the solicitor in a dilemma." 
After a citation from Moody versus Cox and Hatt [[1917] 2 Ch 71] at p.81 their
Honours said:- "(We pause to say that various courts in a number of jurisdictions have decried the practice of one solicitor acting for both vendor and purchaser: cf Jennings versus Zilahi-Kiss [[1972] 2 SASR 493] at 90-91, 96. It is an undesirable practice and it ought not to be permitted.)" 
That decision preceded those of the Privy Council in Boyce, and of the
Court of Appeal in O'Brien and Macedone and, if I may respectfully repeat, it is not clear that that statement, in absolute terms, represents the law. Mr Davidson conceded a major qualification to it.

The most recent consideration of the matter is by the High Court in Maguire v Makaronis <case>; [(1997) 71 ALJR 781], in which a solicitor acted for both parties on the sale to the respondents to the appeal of a poultry farm, and his partner was retained by them to assist in obtaining finance, and did so in furtherance of a connection his firm had with a bank as to the provision of short term bridging finance. The respondents executed a mortgage over their family home to the appellants, who were named personally as mortgagees, a fact not disclosed to them. The appellants charged the respondents a procuration fee and a rate of interest higher than that at which they had procured the finance without disclosing those facts to the respondents. The respondents entered into the poultry farming business, which they ran inexpertly and it became insolvent.
The appellants demanded payment of interest and arrears and, in default of payment, instituted Supreme Court proceedings for the recovery of possession.
The respondents counter-claimed for rescission on various grounds including breach of fiduciary duty, on which ground the primary Judge dismissed the appellant's claim for possession and ordered that the mortgage be set aside.
The appellants appealed unsuccessfully to the Court of Appeal and then appealed to the High Court. After setting forth the facts Brennan CJ, Gaudron,
McHugh and Gummow JJ commenced to consider fiduciary duties at p.786. They noted, p.787, that the appellant solicitors submitted that there was no equity in the respondents for the remedy of rescission in the absence of proof by them of loss by reason of entry into the transaction. Their Honours said:- "In particular, it is said that there could be no loss in the necessary sense because the respondents would have gone ahead with the transaction even if the appellants had not failed in their fiduciary obligations by omitting to disclose their identity and interest as mortgagee." 
This was a submission their Honours regarded as of "some novelty", which, prima facie, may be thought to cast some doubt on Cole JA's decision.

They said, p.787:- "The claims which, from the relationship of solicitor and client, may arise in favour of the client include claims founded in contract, tort and for breach of fiduciary duty. In so far as the solicitor has held moneys or other property on trust for the client there may be an allegation of breach of trust. Each cause of action may have its own strengths and weaknesses so that the client may fail in one and succeed in another. In particular, periods of limitation may differ. The courts and legislatures have tended to save from the imposition of arbitrary time limits complaints of breach of trust or other fiduciary duty. Thus, in Nocton versus Lord Ashburton, the framing of the claim against the solicitor in respect of the original mortgage transaction of 1904 as one for breach of fiduciary duty `was probably deliberately done in order to get over the difficulty occasioned by the statute of limitations as regards any mere case of negligence'." 
Their Honours then referred to what Gibbs CJ had said in Hospital Products as to the fiduciary duty of a trustee, and to his Honour's statement that there were other classes of persons "who normally stand in a fiduciary relationship to one another" in which he exemplified solicitor and client.
They said:- "The solicitor is classically a fiduciary to the client and as such owes certain duties in each particular case." 
At p.788 they said:- "The present case stands apart from those just mentioned because it involves both a fiduciary relationship within a well recognised category as well as the claim to a well established remedy. Nevertheless, even here, to say that the appellants stood as fiduciaries to the respondents calls for the ascertainment of the particular obligations owed to the respondents and consideration of what acts and omissions amounted to failure to discharge those obligations." (My emphasis.) 
The footnote referred to Hospital Products and Breen versus Williams.

Their Honours considered that the provision of the bridging finance was at the heart of the solicitor and client relationship, and that a classic case of the fiduciary duty arose where a solicitor acted for a client in a matter in which he had a personal interest, there being an obligation in such a case on the solicitor to disclose his interest: Clark and Boyce versus Mouat. It is, of course, critical to bear in mind that the High Court was here concerned with a case in which the duty arose by dint of the personal interest the solicitors had, which gave rise to a conflict, which meant, in their Honours' opinion, that the loyalty of the solicitors to their clients had not remained undivided "with the result that they could not properly discharge their duties to their clients".

Their Honours came to consider the remedy against the background of those express findings. At p.789 they said that issues of "causation", by analogy with those found with the recovery of damages in tort or contract, did not emerge in the case, because the fiduciary duty forbade, in the particular circumstances, entry by the solicitors into the transaction of which the giving of the mortgage was a central part. This was done where there was no fully informed consent by the respondents and, subject to the need for restitution, the mortgage was liable to be set aside at their suit. They said:- "The breach of duty was patent at the creation of the very thing which is to be set aside." 
Their Honours were saying that as this factor led to the right rescission it was unnecessary to consider the cause of any loss. Essentially for this reason, I think, their Honours did not have to consider, as it was thought when special leave was granted, the applicability of Lord Thankerton's statement in Brickenden.

Their Honours considered at some length the underlying policy of the law in holding trustees to their duties and, thereby, protecting the interests of beneficiaries and then commenced a consideration of Brickenden.
Brickenden, of course, was a case in which the solicitor had benefitted personally from the transaction and was in breach of fiduciary duty to the company for which he was liable to make restitution. The Privy Council held that as there had been a breach of the duty of non-disclosure of material facts, which the client was entitled to know in connection with the transaction, Brickenden could not be heard to maintain that such disclosure would not have altered the decision to proceed with the transaction, and the passage from the opinion of Lord Thankerton was quoted.
Their Honours characterised Brickenden as a case which turned upon whether the loss could properly be said to have been sustained "by" the solicitor having acted in breach of duty, which they said was not the present case. They continued, p.792:- "As indicated earlier in these reasons, their fiduciary duty forbade the appellants, in the circumstances of this case, to enter into the transaction and the equity for rescission was immediately generated by breach of that fiduciary duty." 
It was emphasised that the respondents' case was not that there was an equity for rescission by reason of a misrepresentation, which was the cause of the entry into the transaction, but that it was based upon the fiduciary duty, in breach of which the appellants took the mortgage in their favour, which entitled the respondents to have the whole transaction rescinded so as to permit the parties to be remitted to the original position.

The decision of the majority depended upon the breach being patent at the creation of the mortgage, which was sought to be set aside on the ground that it was one in which the solicitors had a personal interest as to which there was no fully informed consent on the part of the respondents. Therefore, subject to the need for restitution, the mortgage was liable to be set aside and, as I have suggested, no issue of damages and hence no consideration of the requirements of causation, was relevant.

Kirby J noted, p.798, that many breaches of fiduciary duty were asserted at trial, including the appellants' accepting the retainer for the vendors as well as for the respondents and "breaches along the way in failing adequately to safeguard the financial, as well as the legal, interests of Mr and Mrs
Makaronis". His Honour noted that all these were rejected "and may be ignored". This made very clear that the case was fought in the High Court on the basis that the appellants had not disclosed to the respondents that they were the named mortgagees, and that one solicitor stood to, and did in fact, profit from the arrangement. His Honour said, pp.798-799:- "The fiduciary duty cast upon the appellants as solicitors imposed upon them an obligation of full and frank disclosure of all material facts. They had failed to make that disclosure. They had failed, on the basis of full disclosure, to secure the express concurrence of the clients to the involvement of their personal interest. By reason of the arrangements (of which the mortgage was part) under which the funds were procured from the bank, the solicitors had entered into a relationship with the bank which was in conflict with their duties to Mr and Mrs Makaronis ..." 
His Honour stated that the issues were whether the breach of fiduciary duty had any relevant consequences in that other findings made at first instance demonstrated that such breaches did not cause the losses the respondents suffered and, accordingly, should be viewed as legally insignificant; and if, notwithstanding that argument, some relief were proper general equitable principles would impose upon the respondents an obligation to do equity when seeking its assistance.

His Honour referred to the fact, p.799, that neither the trial Judge nor the
Court of Appeal saw any merit in the causation issue and, by applying the reasoning in Brickenden, considered that questions about the causation of the loss did not arise. His Honour said:- "It was not, therefore, for the Court to speculate what might have happened if the solicitors had fully discharged their duties to Mr and Mrs Makaronis. In the course of dismissing the common law claims, Ashley J had found that Mr and Mrs Makaronis would not have altered their decision to proceed with the transaction even if all necessary disclosures and advice had been given to them. However, in accordance with Brickenden, this did not avail the appellants. So far as the claim resting on the breach of fiduciary duty was concerned, the Court would not concern itself with whether the breach actually caused the losses suffered by the clients." 
Accordingly, his Honour may have taken the view that Mrs Collins' decision to go ahead in any event was not determinative of the matter.

If I may say so with respect, it may equally have been said that the material non-disclosure of personal interest of the solicitor entitled the clients to have the transaction set aside even if it was favourable to them, such that there was no loss. No resort to Brickenden would then have been necessary.

Kirby J, p.801, set forth the findings of fact at first instance to the effect that Mr and Mrs Makaronis would have proceeded even if the identity of the mortgagees had been revealed and, accordingly, dismissed the claim for damages for breach of the contract of retainer on the footing that it was not the cause of the loss and damage suffered by them. Kirby J continued:- "Although these findings were made in the context of other claims of the respondents, the appellants argued that they were findings of fact which were equally available to the elucidation of the consequences of the finding of a breach of fiduciary duty. If Mr and Mrs Makaronis would have suffered the losses complained of in any event, because they would have been indifferent to, or would have ignored, advice and independent warnings, it was submitted that it was neither rational nor just to burden the solicitors with the consequences of their headstrong financial dealings. Mr and Mrs Makaronis should be denied relief entirely, including equitable relief. If they were provided with relief, it should be conditional upon their repaying the sum advanced by the solicitors from the funds provided by the bank and guaranteed by the solicitors, as Mr and Mrs Makaronis knew and had agreed." 
Kirby J then cited the passage from Brickenden of Lord Thankerton and noted a submission that it was too widely stated and too absolute in its expression. His Honour, in considering that Brickenden should be applied, said, p.804:- "The rule in Brickenden has survived a long time. It has been frequently applied, especially in recent years. It contains within its formulation words which adequately meet the need for there to be some connection to the breach so as to exclude events which are too remote. Thus it must be shown that any facts not disclosed by the fiduciary were `material'. What is forbidden is `speculation'. In my view the rule in Brickenden can quite comfortably co-exist with the exposition of principle by Street J in Dawson. Facts will not be "material" if the relevant loss would have happened if there had been no breach. Both Lord Thankerton in Brickenden and Street J in Dawson were simply saying that, once a breach of fiduciary duty is shown, the inquiry is not a simple one as to what caused subsequent losses. Equity must strive to repair the breach of fiduciary duty lest the fiduciary in default could be exonerated too easily, the beneficiaries suffer a double disadvantage: the courts being seen to wink at wrongdoing.

Further, practical, reason for adhering to the rule of `strictness' in Brickenden (breach of fiduciary duty being shown) is that it remains open to a court, in fashioning the remedies which it is apt for equity to provide, to consider most, if not all, of the matters which would otherwise be urged as a reason for excluding relief altogether on the ground of the alleged absence of a causal connection between the breach and the loss. The reason why equity may maintain a strict rule in relation to the events which follow a breach of fiduciary duty, whereas the common law developed principles of causation, remoteness and foreseeability to avoid unjust results, was explained by Cooke P in Day versus Mead. The passage from his Honour's reasons was approved by the majority of the Supreme Court of Canada in Canson Enterprises Limited versus Boughton & Co. Cooke P said: `Compensation or damages in equity were traditionally said to aim at restoration or restitution, whereas common law tort damages are intended to compensate for harm done; in many cases, the present being one, that is a difference without a distinction. There is, however, the more significant historical difference that Courts of equity were regarded as having wider discretions than common law Courts. Equitable relief was said to be always discretionary. Its grant or refusal was influenced by ideas expressed in sundry maxims. He who seeks equity must do equity. He who seeks equity must come with clean hands. Delay defeats equity. These are merely examples. Further, relief could be granted on terms or conditions.' 
The wide variety of remedies available to a court of equity following proof of a breach of fiduciary duty permit the court to exercise very large powers to fashion orders apt to a full consideration of all the facts, as they are found. ...

The foregoing arguments suffice to show that adhering to Brickenden does not present the spectre, suggested for the appellants, that fiduciaries will be unfairly burdened with consequences that have no logical connection with their breach and which should properly be ascribed to other causes. If a breach occurs which has no real consequences, the pre-condition of the Brickenden formulation, in the case of a breach constituted by non-disclosure of material facts, will not be made out. The facts in question will not be classified as `material'. Other remedies may lie against the fiduciary. But they will not include relief from the transaction. Where, however, the facts are `material', in the sense that, but for their existence the events which followed would not have occurred, a court exercising equitable jurisdiction is not concerned at the first stage of its inquiry to sort out issues of causation. But clearly, it will be relevant to the exercise of the discretion to provide relief at all, and if so, to determine the form of that relief, to take into account the actual impact of the fiduciary's default. Only in that way will the objects of the relief, principally restitution, be secured." (My emphasis.) 
It seems to me that one must analyse the facts of each case as it arises. In relation to solicitors the fiduciary duty does arise, in the absence of informed consent, when a solicitor has a financial interest in a transaction into which the client is entering. Maguire seems to make clear that in those circumstances the transaction is liable to be set aside ab initio, the real question being the type of relief to which the client is entitled based upon proper restitution. The breach arises from the beginning, thus giving rise to the remedy and, if rescission is sought, one does not need to have regard to causation in giving relief. Secondly, there is a breach of fiduciary duty when a solicitor is acting for several parties in a transaction and a conflict arises between the parties. The breach does not, as I understand it, arise until there is a conflict but, once the conflict occurs the ability of the solicitor to discharge his or her obligations to both parties becomes, for all relevant purposes, very difficult and, in the absence of informed consent, impossible. Inherent in that formulation is that there is a conflict between the parties of which the solicitor is aware. That is because there is a requirement that breach of fiduciary duty requires an element of intent.
Accordingly, so it seems to me, if the solicitor is unaware of the existence of the conflict there cannot be a breach of a fiduciary duty. However, it may be that the solicitor is guilty of breach of the contract of retainer because, if the retainer had been performed properly he or she would have become aware of the facts giving rise to the conflict. But, in those circumstances, the client would be remitted to an action for breach of contract of retainer or negligence. That would mean that damages would be determined by reference to established principles of causation, proximity and foreseeability.

Even in cases where the solicitor is in breach of fiduciary duty, the solicitor is clearly not liable for any loss which may be occasioned.

The cases seem to look at three different situations. Firstly, there is the situation in which the solicitor has a personal interest in the transaction from the beginning as in Brickenden, Wan versus McDonald and Maguire and, therefore, from the beginning is under an obligation to make a full disclosure of all material facts and obtain the informed consent of the client. In those circumstances the breach is at the time of entry into the transaction.

Secondly, there is the situation where the solicitor acts quite properly for both parties but, during the course of the transaction, the solicitor becomes aware of a conflict. In that circumstance the potential breach of a fiduciary duty arises at the moment of the solicitor's becoming aware of that, if the solicitor then fails to avoid the conflict in a manner which causes no damage to the client: Stewart versus Layton.

Thirdly, for there to be a breach of a fiduciary duty there must be knowledge of the relevant facts and circumstances and the actions of the solicitor must be intentional. There must also be a preferring of the interest of one as against the other. This situation has to be accommodated with the position that a solicitor may be in breach of the contract of retainer without being in breach of any fiduciary duty. Accordingly, let it be assumed that in Stewart v Layton the solicitor did not become aware that the purchaser was financially unable to complete. In those circumstances it seems to me that it could not be asserted that the solicitor would have been in breach of any fiduciary duty if he had continued to act for the parties until completion.
Perhaps, Stewart versus Layton is not a good example. Let it be assumed that a solicitor is acting on behalf of both vendor and purchaser and is aware that the vendor, on the faith of entering into the contract with the purchaser, has committed himself or herself to another purchase and is dependent on the proceeds from the sale to fund the purchase. Unless it is the duty of the solicitor to investigate the financial ability of the purchaser to complete with the vendor, so that the vendor can in turn complete the on-purchase then it seems to me that continuing to act in ignorance of the inability of the purchaser to complete does not amount to a breach of fiduciary duty. However, it may be that in such circumstances part of the contract of retainer requires the solicitor, in acting for the vendor, to satisfy himself or herself that the purchaser is financially able to complete. If there is a failure to do that the solicitor may be in breach of the contract of retainer, but not in breach of any fiduciary duty.

In the present case there comes into play another consideration, namely the position where the solicitor is deceived by the client in circumstances where it may not be appropriate to assert that the solicitor should have made enquiries, which would have removed the consequence of the deceptive conduct.

In Beach Petroleum von Doussa J held that Messrs Fuller, Cummings, Main and Johnson acted dishonestly and fraudulently, in breach of their fiduciary duty to Beach and Claremont, and in breach of s.229 of the Companies (SA)
Code, with the intention of depriving Beach of money and of making it available to Firstway, IRL, IRAG, Messrs Johnson and Fuller, and Spargos,
Enterprise and Jingellic, and were therefore liable for the loss suffered by
Beach. His Honour held Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic were to be imputed with the knowledge of their directors and Mr Johnson, and thereby undertook the impugned transactions dishonestly and fraudulently with the intention of depriving Beach of the difference between the purchase price and the true value of the Burbank interests. His Honour further held that as Spargos,
Enterprise and Jingellic had knowledge of the breaches of duty owed to Beach and Claremont by their directors in relation to those transactions, and in that knowledge received payments under those transactions, they were constructive trustees of those funds for Beach.

The question which arises is whether the actions of the directors can affect the position qua ATRK in the circumstances of the present case. It is clear, I think, that the directors, acting fraudulently, could not be said to be acting on behalf of Beach in relation to any party aware that they were acting fraudulently. The question, however, is how this impacts on the situation of the solicitors. If one concludes that the solicitors were unaware of the fraud, it becomes difficult to see how they could be said to be in breach of the fiduciary duty by virtue of the fraud. If it was part of the retainer of the solicitors to ascertain whether the directors were acting in fraud of
Beach, which they failed to do, there would be a breach of their contract of retainer. But, in the absence of such a finding, I do not see how it can be alleged that any liability flowed to them.

The Instructions 
It now becomes necessary to ascertain the precise instructions, which were given to ATRK and the party or parties on whose behalf they were given. Once that has been done it will be necessary to discern whether there is a real or actual conflict, as opposed to an hypothetical or unlikely conflict. The nature of the conflict was stated by Lord Upjohn in Boardman & Anor v
Phipps. Although his Lordship dissented this part of his reasoning was not doubted. At p.123 he said that the general rule is that a trustee "must not place himself in a position where his duty and his interest may conflict", and he quoted from the speeches of Lord Herschell in Bray versus Ford [[1896] AC ] at p.51, and of Lord Cranworth LC in Aberdeen Railway versus Blaikie [1 Macq 461] at p.471, where his
Lordship said:- "It is a rule of universal application, that no one, having such duties to discharge, shall be allowed to enter into engagements in which he has, or can have, a personal interest conflicting, or which possibly may conflict, with the interests of those whom he is bound to protect." 
Lord Upjohn continued:- "The phrase `possibly may conflict' requires consideration. In my view it means that the reasonable man looking at the relevant facts and circumstances of the particular case would think that there was a real sensible possibility of conflict; not that you could imagine such situation arising which might, in some conceivable possibility in events not contemplated as real sensible possibilities by any reasonable person, result in a conflict." "Real" is obviously used as additional to "sensible".

At p.126 his Lordship said:- "It is perfectly clear that a solicitor can if he so desires act against his clients in any matter in which he has not been retained by them provided, of course, that in acting for them generally he has not learnt information or placed himself in a position which would make it improper for him to act against them. This is an obvious application of the rule that he must not place himself in a position where his duty and his interest conflict. So in general a solicitor can deal in shares in a company in which the client is a shareholder, subject always to the general rule that the solicitor must never place himself in a position where his interest and his duty conflict; and in this connection it may be pointed out that the interests may refer (and frequently do) to a conflict of interest and duty on behalf of different clients and have nothing to do with any conflict between the personal interest and duty of the solicitor, beyond his interest in earning his fees." 
His Lordship considered that the question whether the assumption of office led to the conclusion that the appellants were accountable required a close analysis involving a detailed consideration of the following points:- "1. The facts and circumstances must be carefully examined to see whether in fact a purported agent and even a confidential agent is in a fiduciary relationship to his principal. It does not necessarily follow that he is in such a position (see In Re Coomber).
 . Once it is established that there is such a relationship, that relationship must be examined to see what duties are thereby imposed upon the agent, to see what is the scope and ambit of the duties charged upon him.
 . Having defined the scope of those duties one must see whether he has committed some breach thereof and by placing himself within the scope and ambit of those duties in a position where his duty and interest may possibly conflict. It is only at this stage that any question of accountability arises.
 . Finally, having established accountability it only goes so far as to render the agent accountable for profits made within the scope and ambit of his duty." 
It is obvious, if I may say so with respect, that his Lordship was attributing to the words "may possibly conflict" in his third proposition, the meaning he had given them earlier.

It is now necessary to turn to the various ways in which it is alleged the retainer of ATRK gave rise, either by the terms of the retainer or by some assumption of duty, to circumstances in which conflicts of duty arose. I think the first position to which reference must be made is the restructuring and refinancing of the IRL Group. On the facts I am satisfied that this was confined to a consideration of various proposals whereby the total number of companies in the IRL Group could be reduced to either one or two by a series of takeovers which, in turn, would require the provision of finance. That would have been necessary to enable shares to be purchased by the takeover companies from the target companies. In my opinion the evidence establishes and, in this respect, I accept the evidence of Mr Bateman and Mr Ferguson, that it was necessary to look at various proposals, including financing in the context to which I have just referred, and, in doing so, to look at the relationship of the companies within the Group, including Beach, and, to some extent, to consider their internal financial positions. I say "to some extent" because I accept the evidence of Mr Bateman as to the limitation on this for his purposes.

However, I do not regard that exercise, even to the extent of a more detailed consideration of the financial positions of companies within the Group, as leading to any conflict, which could be described as "a real sensible possibility of conflict". Of course, in carrying out this task it was necessary for ATRK to be furnished with certain information about each of the companies in the Group. But, in my opinion, no proposal could have been worked out without such information and without having regard to each company in the
Group. In my opinion it is a very different thing to assert that in the circumstances where solicitors are seeking to establish proposals, which may be workable to achieve an end, that they are thereby, necessarily, acting in a way which will give rise to a conflict. In my view that does not follow and the evidence of Mr Bateman, which I accept, is that if a stage was reached where it was decided to go ahead with any particular proposal then the various parties would be separately represented. Accordingly, if any of the proposals had been sought to be implemented, as opposed to discussed as proposals, it was Mr Bateman's understanding, and I accept this to be the position, that other solicitors would have acted for the various parties in carrying them to completion.

I think, to some extent, that this retainer of ATRK has tended to obscure the necessity for the Court to look at each retainer to decide the party or parties by which instructions were given, and the terms thereof: Hill versus Van
Erp.

I am not satisfied that any instructions were given by Beach in relation to these proposals. Its position was undoubtedly taken into account, but it was not a party, which sought to give instructions. In my opinion the instructions were given either by IRL or by the management company, CMS, to which latter company accounts were rendered. In this context I am satisfied that the currency swap transaction was not, in its original implementation, part of the
Burbank acquisition procedure. It was undertaken for a very different purpose and the Burbank acquisition finance was not connected with it. The amount the subject of the currency swap transaction was only sought to be linked with the
Burbank acquisition when it became necessary to disguise what had happened on and 14 September 1989.

It is now necessary to look to the three specific transactions in which the position of Beach was directly involved. Firstly, there is the currency swap arrangement. Once again, it is necessary to be precise as to the instructions
ATRK received. The facts satisfy me, and so much was not in issue, that the resolutions of Beach and Spargos were prepared on 10 May 1989 without any assistance from or intervention by ATRK. The facts also satisfy me that the several letters of 11 May 1989, the first being written on Beach's printed letterhead to ELFIC, and the second being written on Spargos' typed letterhead to ELFIC, were prepared by Mr Fuller, or on his instructions, and not by ATRK.
ATRK were presented with the documentation and with instructions from Spargos to deliver the letters to ELFIC to enable the consequences of the agreements reached on 10 May 1989 to be implemented. ATRK's position in the transaction was limited to drafting another letter, which may have assisted Spargos' stamp duty position, to delivering the letters to ELFIC and to advising Spargos and
Beach what had happened. ATRK's role was confined to one side of the currency swap transaction. They were not asked to act and did not act in the assignment from Spargos to Beach in Switzerland. The evidence satisfies me that on this aspect of this transaction the correct view is that ATRK were acting only on behalf of Spargos. However, Mr Hughes acknowledged that the view may be taken that there was a joint retainer, although that which had to be carried out on behalf of Beach was minimal. If this be correct there was not, in my opinion, a conflict of interest. There was no preferring of the interests of Spargos to those of Beach and there was no intentional act by ATRK which brought about any breach.

The matter can, however, be tested by assuming that ATRK were acting on behalf of Spargos and Beach. That would give rise to the question as to what real sensible conflict arose between the two companies on the information available to ATRK. That information was that the directors of Beach had resolved to assign to Spargos $5m standing to Beach's credit with ELFIC, in return for
Spargos assigning to Beach an equivalent amount standing to the credit of
Spargos at Rahn & Bodmer and, in relation to which latter part of the transaction, ATRK were not requested to act. Prima facie it is difficult to see any conflict of a real sensible nature. The suggestion that ATRK should have involved themselves in investigating the commercial reasons and justification for acting in this way carries the matter far beyond the retainer, which, on the assumption I am now making, was a retainer from Beach to effect the assignment to Spargos. In saying that, of course, I must have regard to the fact that to the knowledge of ATRK there was a substantial coincidence between the directors of Spargos and of Beach, such directors being experienced directors and solicitors. There is no reason put forward why
ATRK should have been suspicious of this transaction or to have required further information in relation to it. The suggestions of suspicion and apprehension about the transaction really arise with the benefit of knowledge of the fraud the directors were perpetrating on Beach, which came to light much later. That was not a matter, as is expressly conceded, of which ATRK were aware. Looked at as at mid-May 1989 the transaction seemed to be completely unexceptional and, in my opinion, did not give rise to any conflict between Spargos and Beach. The position, and I put it no higher than this, may have been different if there had been no material before ATRK to demonstrate that Beach was obtaining a benefit from the transaction. But that was not the position. The fact that the benefit did not materialise was not a matter of which ATRK could have been or were aware and, more importantly, was not a matter about which they were asked to concern themselves.

A further point arises. It is my conclusion that if ATRK had, for some reason, suggested to Beach that it should obtain independent legal advice that would not have prevented the transaction's going ahead. I am completely satisfied that if the directors of Beach had been told that they should obtain independent legal advice they would have declined to do so. I say this because
I do not think there is any doubt that the financial predicament in which
Spargos found itself at the relevant time necessitated its having immediate access to Beach's funds. I am confident, and I so find, that the directors of
Beach would not have disclosed to ATRK that they would not take independent legal advice, but would have concluded the transaction themselves. I raised, in the course of submissions, why it was necessary to involve ATRK in this transaction at all. Counsel were unable to offer any satisfactory explanation for that, save, perhaps, that it was desirable for the intervention of solicitors to deal with ELFIC. Whether that be so or not I am satisfied that the transaction would have proceeded without any independent advice being sought on behalf of Beach. What I have just written proceeds, of course, on the assumption that ATRK were acting for Beach, which I am satisfied they were not. Accordingly I am satisfied there was no breach of any fiduciary relationship by ATRK to Beach. Even if this conclusion be wrong I am satisfied that, irrespective of any advice that ATRK may have proffered, the directors would have ensured that the transaction went ahead.

The second specific transaction to which it is necessary to have regard is the
Charge and Option Agreement. As I have pointed out ATRK were not instructed to act for any of the companies in relation to the entry into that Agreement and its completion. Mr Kelly expressly stated, on several occasions, that ATRK were not retained to act on the conveyancing transaction, as he described it.
Accordingly, even if there was a conflict it was not a matter which was of any significance, in a relevant sense, to ATRK. There were separate solicitors acting for Firstway, on the one hand, and Beach and Claremont, on the other.
The way in which it is sought to embroil ATRK into the entry into this agreement is by virtue of the advice given on 2 May 1989 that there would be no breach of s.129. Firstly, it is by no means clear that that advice was related to the acquisition of Burbank. However, even if it was, there is not a skerrick of evidence from which the inference could be drawn that that advice caused the entry into the Charge and Option Agreement. It must be remembered that that agreement was being drafted from October 1988 and it was very much a part of the master plan to defraud Beach. Secondly, as I have recorded, there was no evidence from Mr Main to suggest that Beach was in any way induced to enter into the Charge and Option Agreement by virtue of that advice.
Accordingly, I do not consider that ATRK had any retainer to act in respect of the Charge and Option Agreement, nor does the evidence satisfy me that they assumed any responsibility in connection with the entry into that agreement.

The third relevant transaction is the SCAFA. The evidence satisfies me that
ATRK accepted a retainer to act on behalf of the lenders to Beach, and that they insisted that Beach have independent legal advice, which it did in the form of Mr Cordell. It is not to the point, at this time, to say that Mr
Cordell was aware of the fraud being perpetrated on Beach. There is not a skerrick of evidence to suggest that ATRK were aware of that in 1989. I find, as a fact, that they had no knowledge of either the fraud or that Mr Cordell was involved in it. In so far as Mr Bateman considered the Charge and Option
Agreement and gave advice in relation to it the evidence is, which I accept, that that was done in the context of his advising the lenders to Beach of the terms of the document, a practice Mr Davidson said would be undertaken by solicitors acting for lenders. In relation to the SCAFA I have referred to it in some detail earlier and I think it sufficient to say, for the reasons I have given, that I am not satisfied that ATRK were acting on behalf of Beach in relation to this transaction or assumed any responsibility as solicitors to
Beach in respect of it.

Undoubtedly ATRK acted for Beach in certain respects, namely in relation to the giving of general advice in respect of the 1988 Annual General Meeting and in relation to the s.12 notice. However, there is no evidence that any information obtained by ATRK in the course of performing those functions was such that ATRK were prohibited from acting for Spargos in relation to the currency swap transaction, or for the lenders in relation to the SCAFA.

As to the advice given on 2 May 1989 I consider that this did not go beyond a general consideration of what may be appropriate if the particular proposal then being discussed was to come to fruition. Even if the view be taken that that was advice given to Beach, I do not consider that it was given in circumstances where there was any conflict of interest or which could lead to a conflict of interest, or that there was any preferring of the interests of the other parties to those of Beach, or that there was any intentional conflict detrimental to Beach. I do not consider, for the reasons to which I have referred, that it gave rise to any other duty or obligation relevant to the present case.

In the result I am of the view that the principal case put forward by Beach fails at the threshold in the sense that it does not establish that there was any retainer of ATRK by Beach, which gave rise to a conflict of interests which, in turn, demanded that ATRK should have acted differently from the way in which they did.

The Further Submissions Of Mr Kelly 
Mr Kelly submitted that there was a failure by ATRK to cease to act with a divided loyalty, and to act in matters in which there was an actual or potential conflict in their engagement and, he referred firstly to what transpired on 2 May 1989. He also relied on the circumstances of the currency swap.

He submitted that even if there was not a retainer from Beach there was an assumption of a fiduciary duty to Beach because the relationship between ATRK and Beach was one in which matters "entirely confidential" to Beach had been communicated to ATRK for the limited purpose of their giving advice in relation to the structure and funding of the Group, which they proceeded to do "in circumstances where Beach was vulnerable to abuse" by ATRK of its position. He submitted that relationships of a fiduciary nature can arise, even where there is no contract, by the assumption by a party of the position, and that the relationship was not an arm's length commercial one, because ATRK were made aware of "intimate financial insights". Further, the relationship concerned "commercially sensitive matter". Accordingly, he submitted, that even in the absence of a retainer there would be a relationship of a fiduciary character:- ".. in the same way generally that an adviser and a person who is in the position where he may be expected to rely upon advice can establish by assumption such a relationship." 
Theoretically that may be so, although the various authorities to which I have referred cast the gravest doubt on the submission. However, there was no evidence that ATRK in any way used information, which was "entirely confidential", to the detriment of Beach, or failed to supplement that information in a way in which they should. If Beach was "vulnerable to abuse" there was no evidence that that vulnerability crystallised into its being abused in consequence of anything that ATRK did or failed to do. The facts that ATRK were made aware of "intimate financial insights" and "commercially sensitive matter" was not shown to have caused any loss or detriment to Beach in any of the transactions.

At Tp.1316 Mr Kelly confirmed that Beach's case was that ATRK had decided to fight the case not on the basis that Beach instructed them, but on the basis that Beach never, relevantly for the matters now under consideration, did so and, accordingly, there has to be a finding as to whether ATRK acted for Beach in the transactions where that was not admitted. Mr Hughes said that ATRK did not accept that they were bound to a position that they did not act for Beach, but that certain beliefs, it may be said, were entertained as to the identity of the client, being solely one client. However, he acknowledged, that at the end of the day the enquiry has to be, on a review of the evidence objectively, what the retainer was. He said a view, for which he would be contending, was that, leaving aside evidence as to people's beliefs, "which really doesn't count for anything at the end of the day", in relation to the currency swap there was a joint retainer in relation to a non-controversial matter in which there was no conflict. Whilst I have doubt whether there was a joint retainer,
I agree with the balance of the submission as I have said.

Mr Kelly submitted that I should find, Tpp.1321-1322:- "The reality is that the restructure of this Group was a very substantial commercial matter which was treated in every attendance by Abbott Tout as in an attendance by a solicitor on a group of clients. That is what your Honour will find, in my respectful submission. I invite your Honour to reject the evidence of each of these solicitors when they seek to diminish their role and commensurately eliminate the responsibilities that they undertook and the duties that they had. In each of these matters they are acting as solicitors for Beach." 
Mr Kelly submitted that at the meeting of 2 May 1989 Mr Bateman was giving advice as to how the Burbank transaction could proceed without infringing s.129 in the context of the competing needs of all the companies in the IRL
Group. He said that Mr Bateman was not considering the Charge and Option
Agreement, which he did not see until 21 July 1989, but whether the transaction, as a transaction, was one that could and should be undertaken in the circumstances, as distinct from some other transaction enabling the acquisition of those interests. This was being done in the context of the enquiries by Messrs Clayton Utz as to the potential effects of s.129 where it was contemplated that assets of Beach would be sold. He submitted that whilst
Mr Bateman conceded Beach would need advice he said that "that was not the particular focus we had". Mr Kelly said this indicated an inhibition in a divided loyalty and a dual retainer, in the sense that his attention and focus was not on the position of Beach, but "something else". The divided loyalty was to the borrower and the lenders.

None-the-less the question must arise as to why there was any such divided loyalty at that stage. Prima facie it was in the interests of Beach, on the one hand, and Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic, on the other, for the transaction to go ahead.

Mr Kelly submitted that ATRK were, as a matter of fact, inhibited by their "double engagement". He submitted that the inhibition arose because there was a focus on matters other than the interests of Beach and Mr Bateman's mind was closed to giving advice to it and, in this sense, Mr Bateman was not "focussing" on the transaction from the point of view of Beach.

Mr Kelly then referred to the defence of fully informed consent by reference to Maguire and submitted that the breach of fiduciary duty occurred "effectively" when "the fiduciary accepts conflicting engagements". This, so it seems to me, begs the question as to what were the "conflicting engagements". It is clear that where a solicitor has a personal interest there is a conflicting engagement. It is also clear that once a solicitor, who does not have a personal interest, becomes aware of a conflict between two parties for which he or she is acting, there is a "conflicting engagement". In that instance it is only when the "conflicting engagement" arises that the need for fully informed consent becomes relevant. In the present case ATRK do not raise as a defence the existence of fully informed consent.

Mr Kelly then submitted that, as he understood it, ATRK would submit that the fraudsters would go ahead with the transaction come what may, and that that proposition involved a fundamental misconception or error. He said:- "It is irrelevant, we submit, that the fraudsters desired and may even have attempted to have gone ahead in any event. What is relevant is what the company Beach would have done. The knowledge, the intention, the conduct of Fuller, Cummings, Main and Johnson, whilst acting in total fraud of Beach, is not the knowledge, conduct, intention of Beach. It is precisely the opposite." 
This, however, raises the question of the knowledge ATRK had, if any, of the fraud being perpetrated. Mr Kelly said that had the question been asked whether Beach would have gone ahead in any event, if it had been aware of the true position, the answer could only be in the negative. I agree with this, but the position has to be faced as to how, on the material before ATRK at all material times, ATRK could have been aware of the fraud. This led me to ask Mr
Kelly who constituted Beach once one ruled out the directors. Mr Kelly referred to a number of executives and to the fact that they were speaking against the transaction on the information they had, even knowing that no fraud lay behind it.

Mr Kelly submitted that had Mr Bateman given advice that to enter into the
Charge and Option Agreement would have constituted a breach of s.129, which the directors had ignored, he would have been in the same position as the bank manager in Commonwealth Bank versus Smith. He agreed it could not be said that
Mr Bateman had "actual information of a fraud in the sense of deceit" as at 2
May 1989, but he submitted there was an equitable fraud because there was a conflict of duty between the same directors of various companies, and that Mr
Bateman was aware of that breach of fiduciary duty on the part of the directors: Tp.1341. But the evidence does not support the submission that ATRK were aware of the conflict of duty. I do not think it can be correct to say there merely because two companies have a coincidence of directors, any transactions into which one enters with the other will automatically be tainted with conflict for the benefit of one to the detriment of the another.
To give rise to a suspicion of conflict there would have to be some evidence that the transaction was not appropriate to one party. In the present case that type of submission could only apply to the currency swap transaction, because in the Charge and Option Agreement and the SCAFA the parties were separately represented. In neither case did ATRK represent Beach.

Mr Kelly also submitted that the advice Mr Bateman gave in relation to s.129 was incorrect because the transaction was one in which moneys "were going around in a circle". Mr Kelly then referred to a number of aspects of the transaction but, at least at that stage, it was not clear to me why there was a breach of s.129. Ultimately, at Tp.1345, Mr Kelly said that what was wrong about the s.129 advice was "that to give correct advice, you need full information. You need to be fully informed of the facts. Advice is wrong if, in fact, it is not based on questions which produce a full set of facts".
However, Mr Kelly conceded that the advice about s.129 was not negligent, which makes it impossible, in the present circumstances, to characterise it as "incorrect".

He then said that it was only wrong in the sense that there was no advice from the fraudsters that they were intending to perpetrate a fraud and:- "We don't make a case, your Honour, that Mr Bateman was negligent in the giving of his s.129 advice. We make a case that Mr Bateman had a divided loyalty in giving 129 advice." 
Mr Kelly repeated, Tp.1347, that Beach did not make a case that Mr Bateman gave negligent advice in relation to s.129, but it did not follow that he was not negligent, for he denied he had a duty to give any advice to Beach and:- "If he did have a duty by not giving advice to Beach at all, as night follows day he was negligent because he should have done the things that Mr Davidson says he should have done." 
However it seemed to me, and I put this specifically to Mr Kelly, that Mr
Davidson was not considering advice in relation to s.129.

Mr Kelly identified the conflict, Tp.1348, as being the engagement to advise
Beach and Claremont, as intending borrowers, and to advise Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic, as intending lenders. He said the conflict in relation to s.129 was only one aspect of the matter and, I suggested to him, that it would be necessary to "nail down" each conflict for which Beach contended.

Mr Kelly said that Beach's position was that Mr Bateman should have given no advice to it, but told it that he was in a position of conflict and advised it to obtain independent skilled advice. This gave rise to a discussion as to how
Mr Bateman should be aware that there was a conflict by virtue of the fraudulent activities. Mr Kelly did not satisfy me that on the evidence and having regard to the retainers Mr Bateman or ATRK should have been aware of them.

At Tp.1356, Mr Kelly commenced to deal with the elements of the fiduciary relationship by reference, firstly, to Hospital Products. He referred to
Macedone & Ors versus Collins and Maguire versus Makaronis and, in relation to Collins submitted that the Court of Appeal had found, contrary to the view to which I had come, that Mrs Collins would have gone ahead with the transaction in any event. He submitted that this was an irrelevant consideration in the light of Maguire, and to that extent Collins was wrongly decided.

Mr Kelly referred at length to the decision in Commonwealth Bank of
Australia & Anor versus Smith & Anor, which he submitted was "almost on all fours" with the present case.

Mr Kelly submitted that equity fixes upon fiduciaries a very high level of loyalty, including a duty to give undivided attention to the person with whom they have the relationship, and that it fixes very high standards, which are not met because subsequently another person "might repair his position". He submitted the breach of duty was complete when the conflicting engagement was undertaken. Essentially for the reasons I have given, and having regard to the facts of this case, I reject those submissions as applicable to ATRK.

Causation In Relation To Breach Of Fiduciary Duty 
If the conclusions to which I have come thus far are incorrect it is necessary to consider the issue of causation. Mr Kelly's principal submission was that where a person, standing in a fiduciary relationship, has committed a breach of duty by non-disclosure of material facts, which the other party is entitled to know in connection with the transaction, the fiduciary cannot be heard to maintain that disclosure would not have altered the decision to proceed with the transaction because the other's action was solely determined by some other factor. Once the Court has determined that the non-disclosed facts were material, speculation as to what course the other party, on disclosure, would have taken is not relevant: Brickenden versus London Loan & Savings Co et al [[1934] 3 DLR 465.] This was an appeal from the judgment of the Supreme Court of
Canada to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, the opinion of which was given by Lord Thankerton.

At pp.468-469 his Lordship said:- "Their Lordships are clearly of opinion that the appellants' non-disclosure of these two mortgages was a breach of his duty as solicitor to the Loan Company, particularly in view of his personal interest in them, and that it would equally have been a breach of duty if, contrary to their Lordships' opinion, the appellant had only been employed for the certificate of title. It follows that the Loan Company were entitled at least to nominal damages against the appellant.

It remains to consider which of the respondents is entitled to damages, and whether any damage has been proved." 
At p.469 his Lordship stated the well known passage:- "When a party, holding a fiduciary relationship, commits a breach of his duty by non-disclosure of material facts, which his constituent is entitled to know in connection with the transaction, he cannot be heard to maintain that disclosure would not have altered the decision to proceed with the transaction, because the constituent's action would be solely determined by some other factor, such as the valuation by another party of the property proposed to be mortgaged. Once the Court has determined that the non-disclosed facts were material, speculation as to what course the constituent, on disclosure, would have taken is not relevant." 
A very real question, if I may say so with respect, arises in my mind as to what was intended by the use of the word "speculation". None-the-less the statement provided authority for the proposition, for which Beach contended, that once a breach was established, relevantly being the non-disclosure of material facts, the party in breach could not be heard to say that disclosure would not have altered the decision to proceed with the transaction by dint of the decision to proceed being determined solely by some other factor. This, if
I may once again say so with respect, gave rise to a strange, or potentially strange, result. However, in the third edition of Meagher, Gummow & Lehane "Equity Doctrines and Remedies" at paragraph 2304 the authors seem to have adopted the passage, noting that it was applied in Farrington versus Rowe McBride & Partners [[1985] 1 NZLR 83],
Commonwealth Bank of Australia versus Smith and Wan versus McDonald. In these circumstances they considered it surprising that the New Zealand Court of
Appeal in Day versus Mead <case>; [[1987] 2
NZLR 443] held that contributory negligence was a ground for reducing compensation in an action for breach of fiduciary duty; and suspected the decision was also suspect on another ground, namely that stated by Handley JA in "Reduction of Damages Awards", where, speaking extra-curially, his Honour said:- "The decision is clearly wrong. Contributory negligence has never been a defence to an action for legal or equitable fraud. A plaintiff is entitled to relief if the fraud was `a cause' of the loss, even if there were other more weighty causes `for in this field the court does not allow an examination into the relative importance of contributory causes'. The same principles must apply to that species of equitable fraud which comprises breaches of fiduciary duty." 
The third edition was published in 1992. Since then there have been further developments in the law and in extra-curial writings. In Permanent Building
Society (In Liquidation) versus Wheeler & Ors [(1994) 12 ACLC 674], judgment in which was delivered on 28 July 1994, it was held that the rules of causation governing the liability of a fiduciary to account for a breach of duty did not apply to the breach of an equitable duty to exercise care, and that there was a fundamental distinction between breaches of fiduciary obligations, which involved dishonesty and abuse of the trustee's advantages and the vulnerable position of beneficiaries, on the one hand, and honest but careless dealings, which breached mere equitable obligations on the other. It was also held that the test of causation in the case of an equitable duty to take care was whether the loss would have happened if there had been no breach, and that the Society failed to prove that, but for the breach by
Hamilton of his equitable duty to exercise reasonable care, the loss to the
Society would not have occurred. Accordingly the claim against Hamilton for breach of his equitable duty to exercise reasonable care failed.

Ipp J, who gave the judgment of the Court comprising Malcolm CJ, Seaman J and himself, commenced to consider causation at p.683 with reference to Re
Dawson (Deceased) [[1966] 2 NSWR 211.] He referred to the decision of Street J as dealing with "the breach of a true fiduciary obligation, and not the breach of an equitable obligation to take care", although noting that Street J discussed cases of the latter type and, accordingly, holding that it had to be taken that his Honour's remarks are applicable generally. He cited at length from his Honour's judgment at pp.214-215 in support of his Honour's proposition that the obligation of a defaulting trustee is essentially to effect a restitution to the estate. In the same passage Street J noted that the obligation to make restitution in equity imposed on defaulting trustees and other fiduciaries was of a more absolute nature than the common law obligation to pay damages for tort or breach of contract.

His Honour also noted that Street J had stated:- "The principles embodied in this approach do not appear to involve any inquiry as to whether the loss was caused by or flowed from the breach. Rather the inquiry in each instance would appear to be whether the loss would have happened if there had been no breach." 
Ipp J observed that:- "It is to be emphasised that Street J, in saying that `considerations of causation, forseeability and remoteness do not readily enter into the matter', did not depart from the requirement that the beneficiary should prove that, but for the breach of duty by the trustee, the loss would not have happened. As his Honour said `the inquiry in each instance would appear to be whether the loss would have happened if there had been no breach'." 
Ipp J referred to the decisions in Hill versus Rose <case>; [[1990] VR 129] and Canson Enterprises Limited versus Broughton & Company DLR(4th) 129, in which McLachlin J said, at p.160:- "While foreseeability of loss does not enter into the calculation of compensation for breach of fiduciary duty, the liability is not unlimited. Just as restitution in specie is limited to the property under the trustee's control, so equitable compensation must be limited to loss flowing from the trustee's acts in relation to the interest he undertook to protect. ... The need for a link between the equitable breach and the loss for which compensation is awarded is fair and sound in policy and is supported in Guerin." 
His Honour also quoted the following passage from p.160:- "The requirement that the loss must result from the breach of the relevant equitable duty does not negate the fact that `causality' in the legal sense as limited by foreseeability at the time of breach does not apply in equity. It is in this sense that I read the statement of Street J in Re Dawson that `causality, foreseeability and remoteness do not readily enter into the matter' ... and the broad language of Caffrey versus Darby (1801) 6 Ves Jun 488 .. (relied on by Street J), where in fact a causal link between the breach and the loss was found, the court stating that had the trustees adhered to their duty `the property would not have been in a situation to sustain that loss'." 
Ipp J then referred to the extra-curial statement of Sir Anthony Mason "The
Place of Equity and Equitable Remedies in the Contemporary Common Law World"
Vol 110 The Law Quarterly Review 238 at p.244, where his Honour said:- "Whether the Court of Appeal was correct in Day versus Mead in introducing apportionment of responsibility into equitable compensation is another question. It can be argued that apportionment of responsibility is not entirely consistent with the restitutionary character of compensation for breach of fiduciary duty. However, this objection loses most of its force if the principled development of equity is capable of extending compensation for breach of fiduciary duty beyond its restitutionary origins. Obviously a fiduciary should not be held liable for loss that does not flow from a breach of fiduciary duty, a matter that was recognised in the judgment of McLachlin J in Canson Enterprises Limited versus Broughton & Co. The reasons given in that judgment for rejecting the simple analogy with tort law are cogent. To repeat McLachlin J's words: `The better approach .. is to look to the policy behind compensation for breach of fiduciary duty and determine what remedies will best further that policy. In so far as the same goals are shared by tort and breach of fiduciary duty, remedies may coincide.' 
This approach by no means repudiates the notion that assistance can be gained, where appropriate, from the law of tort as it can be gained from other sources." 
At p.328 of the same volume of the Law Quarterly Review there is an article by Mr J.D. Heydon of Queen's Counsel headed "Causal Relationships
Between a Fiduciary's Default and the Principal's Loss". The article was stimulated by the decision of the English Court of Appeal in Target Holdings
Limited versus Redferns [[1994] 2 All ER 337], and was critical of the approach of the majority, which was subsequently overruled by the House of Lords. At p.329 Mr Heydon said:- "It is harsh that a trustee who committed a non-fraudulent breach of trust has to bear the whole of the burden of loss created, it might be thought, not so much by that breach as by an anterior commercial decision of the client which is erroneous. It is chancy because it is quite adventitious that the acts constituting the breach of trust preceded by a relatively short period, rather than coincided with, the happening of events which the client always contemplated: the trustee in the result dealt the client a favour by breaching the trust rather than performing it. These unattractive features were overridden, in the majority's view, by the deterrent value of the strict rule - the importance of keeping `persons in a fiduciary capacity up their duty'. Strict rules based on deterrents are far from being either unique in equity or free from controversy, at least when mechanically applied (e.g. Phipps versus Boardman <case>; [[1967] 2 AC 46).] Perhaps for that reason the majority attempted (e.g. by reading down various aspects of Street J's relatively expansive and much cited account in Re Dawson ..) to delimit narrowly the field to which the strict rule under consideration was to be applied." 
At p.331 Mr Heydon said that Brickenden was a decision which, "though infrequently cited in discussions of this problem, would, if sound, operate conformably with the strict rule", and he cited the passage to which I have referred. He continued:- "So expressed, the principle circumstances much wider than the misapplication of trust property. But if that principle exists, its operation without reference to issues of causation supports by analogy the recoverability of damages against trustees independently of a causal link between breach and loss. Indeed, the rules overlap in areas where the wrongful disposition is coupled with culpable non-disclosure by the fiduciary. The particular present interest of the Brickenden principle is that, if sound, it casts great doubt on the validity of Ralph Gibson LJ's approach and dissent, which incorporates an inquiry into `the way in which the parties would have behaved'." 
Mr Heydon suggested that "in many respects the history of the Brickenden test is curious" and that until "recently" it had been rarely discussed or applied and had "suffered decades of forensic oblivion". Notwithstanding this substantial attack upon the decision Mr Heydon noted it had "lately enjoyed a revival of attention" and referred to various decisions which made reference to it. In doing so he referred to the statements of Gummow J, speaking extra- curially, in "Compensation for Breach of Fiduciary Duty" in T.G. Youdan (ed), "Equity, Fiduciaries and Trusts" (1989) at p.90. He also referred to the article by Handley JA and paragraph 2304 of Meagher, Gummow and Lehane.

Gummow J, after quoting the passage from Brickenden at p.90, referred to a case in which it had been applied and, at p.91, suggested:- "Again, before a measure of damages in tort is adopted, it will be necessary to consider the impact upon any such measure of the equitable defences that do not run against an action for damages in tort. In this sense, any rationale that develops to determine the character of compensation awarded for breach of fiduciary duty will have to allow for the natural sophistication of equity." 
His Honour expressed the view, p.92, that equity was possessed of:- `... sufficient vitality and sophistication to give practitioners, equipped with sufficient subtleness of mind, the means to evolve a coherent and compelling body of law upon compensation for breach of fiduciary duty'." 
Mr Heydon's criticisms were shown to be well founded, if I may say so with respect, when the appeal in Target: Target Holdings Limited versus Redferns <case>; [[1996] 1 AC 421], was allowed, Lord Browne-Wilkinson delivering the speech in which the other Law Lords agreed. His Lordship said, p.431, that in any ordinary use of words the breach of trust by the solicitors could not be said to have caused the actual loss ultimately suffered by Target:- "..... unless it can be shown that, but for the breach of trust, the transaction would have not gone through ..." 
He noted it was common ground that there was a triable issue as to whether, had it not been for the breach of trust, the transaction would have gone through, so that the decision of the Court of Appeal could only be maintained on the basis that, even if there were no causal link between the breach of trust and the actual loss eventually suffered, the trustee in breach was liable to bear, at least in part, the loss suffered: p.432.

As with the present case that was a case "redolent of fraud and negligence".
However, his Lordship said that in considering the appropriate principles suspicions of such wrongdoing "must be put to one side", because if the law as stated by the Court of Appeal was correct "it applies to cases where the breach of trust involves no suspicion of fraud or negligence". His Lordship then pointed out that in the case of a breach of trust the trustee may apply for discretionary relief pursuant to a provision of the [Trustee Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/), which is mirrored in the New South Wales [Trustee
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/). In those circumstances he thought it would be "an unjust and surprising conclusion" to reach the conclusion arrived at by the Court of Appeal.

After considering various authorities and submissions his Lordship cited at length from the judgment of McLachlin J and cited two further passages from her Honour's judgment to which I have not referred. The first, p.162, stated:- "A related question which must be addressed is the time of assessment of the loss. In this area tort and contract law are of little help ... the basis of compensation at equity, by contrast, is the restoration of the actual value of the thing lost through the breach. The foreseeable value of the items is not in issue. As a result, the losses are to be assessed as at the time of trial, using the full benefit of hindsight." (The emphasis was added by his Lordship.) 
He quoted the following passage from p.163:- "In summary, compensation is an equitable monetary remedy which is available when the equitable remedies of restitution and account are not appropriate. By analogy with restitution, it attempts to restore to the plaintiff what has been lost as the result of a breach, i.e. the plaintiff's loss of opportunity. The plaintiff's actual loss as a consequence of the breach is to be assessed with the full benefit of hindsight. Foreseeability is not a concern in assessing compensation, but it is essential that the losses made good are only those which, on a commonsense view of causation, were caused by the breach." (The emphasis was added by his Lordship.) 
His Lordship continued, at p.439:- "In my view this is good law. Equitable compensation for breach of trust is designed to achieve exactly what the word compensation suggests: to make good a loss in fact suffered by the beneficiaries and which, using hindsight and commonsense, can be seen to have been caused by the breach." 
I have gone forward from the decision of Ipp J, but I would wish to return to it to quote two passages. Firstly, having quoted from the decision of Deane J in Chan versus Zacharia <case>; [(1983-1984) 154 CLR 178] at pp.198-199, his Honour said that those considerations had no application to the breach of a duty to exercise care and that there was no reason to apply to the latter the rules of causation that govern the obligation of a fiduciary to account for such a breach. His Honour continued that a court of equity, applying principles of fairness:- ".. should not require an honest but careless trustee to compensate a beneficiary for losses without proof that but for the breach of duty those losses would not have occurred." (My emphasis.) 
He concluded:- "In my opinion, the principles of causation referred to in Brickenden and in Breen apply only to breaches of true fiduciary obligations and not to breaches of the equitable obligation on the part of a trustee or director to exercise reasonable skill and care ...

Applying the principles laid down in Re Dawson (Deceased) and Hill versus Rose, I conclude that PBS failed to prove that, but for the breach by Hamilton of his equitable duty to exercise reasonable care, the loss to PBS would not have occurred." (My emphasis.) 
In Greater Pacific Investments Pty Limited (In Liquidation) versus Australian
National Industries Limited & Anor [(1996) 39 NSWLR 143] McLelland
A-JA, with whom Priestley and Meagher JJA agreed, after referring to a number of the authorities and articles, to most of which I have referred, said, at p.154:- "The fact that an equitable right of action accrues as soon as the breach is committed does not mean that the quantum of compensation is to be fixed as at the date of that breach. The date as at which the quantum of compensation is to be fixed is the date of determination of the proceedings, according to the circumstances then pertaining and with the full benefit of hindsight. The assessment is of the loss to the victim caused by the breach on a commonsense view of causation: see Target .. applying Canson ..." 
Judgment was given on 30 April 1996, which was shortly after argument in
Maguire ceased. There is no reference to the decision in Maguire, the two passages relating to causation being firstly that in the joint judgment at pp.792-793, where their Honours said:- "Several matters appropriately will be taken into account when there falls for consideration, in an action against a fiduciary arising other than out of breach of trust, the criteria which supply an adequate or sufficient connection between the equitable compensation claimed and the breach of fiduciary duty." 
Their Honours found it unnecessary to further consider Brickenden, notwithstanding that special leave to appeal appears to have been given to enable its correctness to be considered, and, although Kirby J considered
Brickenden still represents the law, his Honour none-the-less set out the basis on which some relationship between the breach and loss was to be established.

In Bristol and West Building Society versus Mothew, in which judgment was delivered on 24 July 1996, Millett LJ, who delivered the principal judgment, said, at p.449, in a passage I have quoted, but which it is convenient to have in this portion of my reasons:- "Although the remedy which equity makes available for breach of the equitable duty of skill and care is equitable compensation rather than damages, this is merely the product of history and in this context it is my opinion that it is a distinction without a difference. Equitable compensation for breach of the duty of skill and care resembles common law damages in that it is awarded by way of compensation to the plaintiff for his loss. There is no reason in principle why the common law rules of causation, remoteness of damage and measure of damages should not be applied by analogy in such a case. It should not be confused with equitable compensation for breach of fiduciary duty, which may be awarded in lieu of rescission or specific restitution." (My emphasis.) 
Otton LJ said, at p.456:- "From a practical point of view in some cases it may be more expedient to establish the causal link between the negligent act or omission and the reliance by the plaintiff on the course of action which he was induced to take. The Judge may find as a fact that there was no reliance or that the plaintiff would have behaved in the same or substantially the same manner if he had been given accurate information; in either event the negligence had no causative potency. That is the end of the matter. The chain is broken, there is no loss at all and there is no need to consider or determine the kind of loss." 
Staughton LJ said, at p.457:- "That is said to make all the difference, because Mr Mothew then became under a fiduciary duty to the building society. And the argument is that for breach of fiduciary duty the remedy does not depend on causation or remoteness; all that is necessary is that the loss would not have occurred but for the breach of duty.

It seems to me wrong that a breach of contract or tort should become a breach of fiduciary duty in that way. I am glad to find that the authorities relied on by Millett LJ show that it is wrong. In my judgment Mr Mothew was in breach of a duty of care and nothing more. True he was in a situation where he owed duties to two clients, and those duties might conflict with each other. But he did not prefer the interest of one client to that of another; at most he was guilty of negligence which had that unintended effect." (My emphasis.) 
This passage points up an essential distinction to which I have referred.

In Swindle & Ors versus Harrison & Anor (17 April 1997) The Times Law
Reports 197, in which judgment was delivered on 25 March 1997, the English
Court of Appeal, in following Target and Bristol and West Building
Society, are recorded as saying:- "Even when the stringent test applied, the chain of causation could be broken by some independent and untoward event. The test of causation remained one of commonsense on whatever basis it had to be applied." 
In my opinion these authorities lead inevitably to the conclusion that the correct principle to apply, in assessing loss, is to have regard to an assessment of it caused by the breach on a commonsense view of causation:
Greater Pacific Investments, or considering whether there is "an adequate or sufficient connection between the equitable compensation claimed and the breach of fiduciary duty": Maguire. I also think that the authorities are pushing towards a recognition, in a case such as the present, of rules of apportionment if that is appropriate. Logically it would seem a sound approach.

Accordingly, I reject the submission of Mr Kelly that it is only necessary for
Beach to prove that there was a breach of fiduciary duty and loss, and that it is not permissible for the Court to consider whether causation, viewed on a commonsense basis with the benefit of hindsight, demonstrated the loss would have occurred by consequence of the breach, rather than by consequence of some other relevant factor. In the present case, it is the submission of the defendants that there was no breach of fiduciary duty and that, if there was, the loss to Beach was caused by the fraudulent conduct of its directors, who were involved in the fraud, and that, irrespective of any act or omission by
ATRK, the directors would have pursued that fraudulent course of conduct to its conclusion. In my view this is the proper inference to be drawn from the whole of the facts. I have not the slightest doubt that the only cause of
Beach's loss, when viewed from a common sense viewpoint with hindsight, was the fraud of the directors involved. They were absolutely determined to perpetrate a fraud on Beach. Even if ATRK had discussed a conflict of interest and advised "Beach" to obtain independent advice, the directors would have, none-the-less, pursued the fraud successfully.

I have said "Beach" because, Mr Kelly submitted, a distinction must be drawn between the fraudulent directors and the company. There are at least several problems with this submission. Firstly, ATRK had no reason to suspect that the directors were engaging in fraud. Therefore the occasion to refer the matter to other directors, the company secretary or the chief executive officer never arose. Secondly, even if ATRK had had reason to suspect fraud I am not satisfied that if the matter had been referred by them to the Chief Executive
Officer, Mr Worthington, he would have disclosed the matter. His evidence was that he was suspicious of the Burbank acquisition over a long period, concerned because the directors were not keeping executive officers advised, and generally unhappy with the situation. Yet he was prepared to accept explanations offered by the directors, even though he appears to have had little confidence in them. I shall review his evidence, which, in my opinion, leads me to the conclusion that he would not have referred the matter to any regulatory authority.

Mr Kelly's written submission of 19 November 1997 was that the way in which the breach of fiduciary duty by ATRK "is connected to the loss suffered by
Beach" is that ATRK:- "... accepted conflicting engagements when advising in relation to the structure and funding of Burbank in that Abbott Tout helped the acquisition to proceed; deprived Beach of the opportunity to obtain independent skilled advice; and permitted the loss to occur." 
By "helped" Mr Kelly said he meant "giving positive advice that there was no impediment, as distinct from walking away". He submitted there was a direct link between the breach of fiduciary duty and the loss and that, accordingly, the position was indistinguishable from Commonwealth Bank versus Smith;
Greater Pacific Investments versus ANI and Stewart versus Layton, but was distinguishable from Camson Enterprises versus Boughton & Co and Target
Holdings versus Redferns. He submitted that as a matter of principle, a plaintiff is entitled to relief where the breach of fiduciary duty is "a" cause of loss, "even if there are more weighty causes operating at the same time".

At the risk of repetition the facts of this case satisfy me that even if there had not been breaches of the fiduciary duties for which Mr Kelly contended, i.e. even if ATRK had done all the things that Mr Kelly submitted they should have done by virtue of the retainers for which he submitted, none-the-less the fraudulent directors, assisted by Mr Brooke and Mr Cordell and by Rahn &
Bodmer would have perpetrated the fraud on Beach. The evidence further satisfies me that those perpetrating the fraud would not have given ATRK any information which would have disclosed what they were doing and, further, that any complaint to Mr Worthington would not have led to any independent investigation. Mr Worthington had ample material before him, for a long period, to raise concerns with regulatory authorities or others if he had been minded to do so. His failure to act on the information satisfies me that he was not prepared to and would not have taken that course even if ATRK had voiced any concern to him.

Mr Kelly submitted that Maguire is authority for the proposition that "a" cause is sufficient. As I have suggested causation was not really in issue in that case. However, the High Court propounded a wider test, which enables the
Court to have regard to the real cause. Mr Kelly submitted that I was not permitted to "speculate" on other causes. I do not believe that I have. The evidence of this determined and deliberate fraud was overwhelming.

The submission that it would be very strange if a party in breach of fiduciary duty would be in a better position if that breach allowed fraudulent activities to be perpetrated than if some lesser wrong had occurred had some prima facie attraction. But the finding of fact to which I have come is that even if there had been a breach of fiduciary duty that would not have allowed the fraud to continue: the fraud would have gone ahead in any event in my view.

The Evidence Of Mr Evan John Worthington 
The evidence in chief of Mr Evan John Worthington is his witness statement,
Exhibit B, which was made on 30 July 1997. Mr Worthington had various accounting degrees and expertise and, in March 1988, he joined Claremont as
General Manager, Finance and Administration and, in December 1988, he was appointed its Managing Director and, in April 1989, its Chief Executive
Officer. This led to increased communication with Mr Fuller and Mr Cummings in their capacity as directors of Claremont. Mr Worthington did not become a director or alternate director of Claremont or Beach, and he did not attend
Board meetings except to answer queries as required. He said Mr Fuller had the day to day management of the business and affairs of Beach "in his capacity as an Executive Chairman". He resigned from Claremont in February 1990. He gave as his reasons for doing so a failure to receive data in relation to Burbank to satisfy the auditors and himself and other staff in relation to closing off the accounts for the financial year ended 30 June 1989 and the suspension of
Claremont and Beach for failure to file audited accounts in November 1989; the non-receipt of cash for the shares Beach owned in Spargos, which had been sold; and an inability to carry out the tasks as Chief Executive Officer as he was not receiving the information he required. He said he had a number of discussions with Mr Fuller and formed the opinion that the Board was happy to work "in a closed environment and that they were not going to let any of the key employees know full details of certain transactions". In those circumstances he considered he could not perform his duties. His response to this highly unsatisfactory state of affairs was not to report the matter to regulatory authorities or shareholders, but to resign.

He became aware of the Burbank acquisition in mid-September 1988 when Mr
Hilton gave him instructions to remit US$150,000, which he was told was to secure a first option for Claremont in respect of an oil interest in the
United States, which had been offered to IRL but which the Board thought better suited Claremont. Thereafter Mr Worthington flew to the United States to attend a Gas and Oil Manager's Course, and he met Sir Cecil Burney. Whilst overseas in October 1988 he received an advice from Mr Sam Yue that Mr Fuller had requested Mr Yue to remit US$4.1m in regard to the Burbank matter, and Mr
Worthington advised Mr Yue as to how that should be done.

Mr Worthington received little information from Sir Cecil and Mr Main about the matter and, on returning from overseas, he was told by Mr Fuller that the funds remitted were "in the nature of a refundable option which will accrue interest at commercial rates to Claremont". Mr Fuller said they were under the control of reputable legal firms in the United States and the United Kingdom.
Some further information was received by Mr Worthington, including "technical data", which was sent to Sydney for review by Claremont's technical experts.
The result of the review was that Mr Worthington was told further information was needed, which he conveyed to Mr Fuller, who told him "it will be coming".

Mr Bailey made a presentation in December 1988 in the presence of Mr Main and
Mr Johnson, inter alios, and, thereafter, Mr Dene Rogers made an evaluation, which Mr Worthington received and discussed with Mr Fuller. He told Mr Fuller that on the basis of that report the maximum value that could be placed on the whole of the oil field would be US$35m. An earlier report by Mr Rogers of 24
November 1988 placed a figure of US$19.5m on the purchase of the whole oil field.

Mr Worthington recalled Mr Cordell was in Sydney in February and March 1989 and that he had a draft Loan Agreement and a draft Charge and Option
Agreement. Mr Worthington had discussions with Mr Cordell "which touched upon a number of potential problems with the proposed acquisition". Mr Worthington was concerned that an overall analysis of the proposed purchase from a financial, taxation and accounting point of view should be undertaken before any commitment was made, which he discussed with Mr Cordell. He was also concerned that it was intended to purchase Mazeley "a company which I knew nothing about".

In March 1989 Mr Fuller said to Mr Worthington that he would like him to become Managing Director of Beach and Claremont. Mr Worthington said he would only become a director "once the Group has been restructured and all of the
NCSC requirements arising out of the Petrogulf takeover for Claremont have been adequately dealt with". He said that he also wanted an assurance that he would be privy to all information on the company matters that Mr Cummings and any other directors were receiving. Mr Fuller said he was disappointed that Mr
Worthington would not become a director, as he was keen to have in-house people as directors of the companies. Subsequently Mr Worthington became the
Chief Executive Officer of Claremont and Beach, but not a director of either.

On 17 March 1989 he received a facsimile transmission from Mr Fuller instructing him to remit A$5m to the trust account of Messrs Gardner Weller.
He asked Mr Fuller why it was necessary to make the payment and another senior officer, Mr Zillman, said that the payment would adversely affect "our cash flow and our exploration commitments". Mr Fuller said that exploration was not the only way to replace depleting resources and, after a heated discussion as to the strategic future of Claremont, Mr Fuller said that the payment was a refundable deposit. Mr Worthington said it was strange that there was a need to pay a further option fee and he generally questioned the advisability of the course being taken. He was referred to Mr Main, who gave evasive answers.

On 18 April 1989 Mr Fuller sent a facsimile transmission to Mr Worthington instructing him to arrange for further funds of A$100,000 to be sent to Messrs
Gardner Weller, and he was told by Mr Fuller that it was an additional deposit to secure the option.

In October or November 1989 Mr Worthington received a balance sheet and revenue statement for BPC and BOG and he saw the carrying value of the interests in the Burbank Oilfield was between $3m and $4m. He told Mr Fuller that that did not reflect the amount "we are paying", to which Mr Fuller replied that that did not mean much as "they are not complete". He said the documents did not reflect all of the transactions and that the assets were acquired by Burbank over a long period "so the cost does not necessarily represent current value. In any event they have not been audited".

Earlier, in April or May 1989, Mr Fuller told Mr Worthington that only 47 per cent of the oilfield may be available for purchase, and Mr Worthington asked the experts to carry out an evaluation of that percentage interest. This caused Mr Worthington to advise that the purchase should not go ahead unless more favourable information was available and Mr Fuller told him to speak to another person and the information would become available. Although Mr
Worthington sought further information, he did not receive it and, basically, he was fobbed off by Mr Fuller. It is clear Mr Worthington was aware that this is what was happening. Although Mr Worthington and other senior officers of
Claremont were advising that the purchase should not go ahead, Mr Fuller was adamant that it should and, in early May 1989, he said:- "Don't worry about it, we have other information that we are not able to make available to you and the other senior executives at this time. However, this data indicates that the deal is still favourable to Claremont." 
Commencing at paragraph 79 of his witness statement Mr Worthington commenced to deal with the currency swap. Mr Fuller told Mr Worthington that the money would have to be withdrawn from ELFIC as it was required for cash expenditures, which had previously been budgeted for and of which he was aware.

Mr Worthington said that he received the letter of 16 May 1989 from Mr
Bateman, which surprised him as he was not aware that Beach was entering into a currency swap arrangement with Spargos.

Mr Worthington thought that ATRK had acted for Beach "upon the instruction of the Beach directors" and, as the matter had been completed and as he was unaware of any conflict he did not engage any other firm of solicitors to consider the matter. He referred to communicating with Mr Bateman, and asking him whether the US Dollar deposit was hedged. Mr Bateman said he did not know and that Mr Worthington should speak to Mr Fuller, who told him that the Board had been offered an attractive rate of interest.

In response to a request from Messrs Joelson Wilson and instructions from either Mr Fuller or Mr Cummings, Mr Worthington furnished to Mr Cordell details of deposits made by Claremont in connection with Burbank taken from
Claremont's accounting records. There was some attempt made to reconcile the payments.

Mr Worthington said that after the May evaluation of the Burbank oilfields by
Mr Rogers, Mr Fuller and Mr Main each told him at various times that he should not concern himself about whether the transaction should proceed, and he was not informed that it had. He learnt of that in about mid-July 1989 when he received various documentation. He raised a number of concerns he had with Mr
Fuller, Mr Cummings, Mr Main and Mr Cordell.

Mr Worthington said that the SCAFA was arranged by the Board of Directors and that he questioned Messrs Fuller, Cummings and Main about the loan on a number of occasions, but he was told not to worry about it as ATRK were "doing the documents". Mr Worthington was concerned about his absence of any knowledge as to how the titles were secured or identified. He was also concerned to know how Beach would meet the various commitments referred to in the SCAFA.

It became clear to Mr Worthington that he was not going to receive the information he required and he said that in those circumstances he would resign, which he did.

It was quite obvious from his statement that he was being fobbed off by the directors of which fact he was aware, and that, for a quite lengthy period, he took no action, notwithstanding that he was not receiving information he considered was essential for him to carry out his duties properly.

Mr Worthington said, Tp.253, that he was not privy to the Burbank transaction "not being on the Board, so I had limited knowledge of the transaction". He was taken through much of what he said in his witness statement and, basically but sufficiently for present purposes, he said that he made payments as instructed by the directors in relation to the acquisition. He confirmed that the Board refused to furnish him with information and gave various reasons why the matter was solely under the control of the directors. He considered the position was "utterly confusing" to his mind, Tp.261, but he said that he was not concerned because it was "a Board-originated deal", and he did not have access to original documents and was proceeding on instructions from the Board that they would be forthcoming. This was the position in late 1988. He said the Board were duly elected by the shareholders and he had no reason to question their governance principles. He said, Tp.262, there was sufficient evidence from the Board to satisfy the external auditors and him that it was a refundable deposit secured by legal advisers in the United States and the
United Kingdom.

Mr Worthington agreed that in mid-October 1988, when he was shown the draft loan agreement, he had a duty as an officer of Claremont to act with due diligence in relation to its affairs from which he could not be absolved, and that to discharge that duty he needed to have "better than a confused picture of what was going on in relation to this proposed Burbank deal", but he did not.

He agreed he was always told that the documents would be forthcoming: Tp.265, and that it was his duty to seek and insist upon clarification. He disagreed he and his co-executives were being fobbed off and he repeated that Mr Fuller, principally, said that it was a Board-initiated deal, and that due to the confidentiality of it the executives would be given documentation "as required" and "it would be forthcoming". He said this sounded confused, but not unconvincing. He agreed, in hindsight, that he and the other executives were being kept in the dark, although he disagreed that was how it appeared to him at the time. I do not accept that that was how it appeared to him then.

The general tenor of Mr Worthington's evidence was that although he was not furnished with information he was requiring, he was being assured by the Board that the transaction was in order and that the funds were in reputable hands.
However, on the other hand, he was receiving information which indicated that the interest in the oilfields was not worth a great deal.

By March 1989 Mr Worthington had formed the view that the Board was "inept in this matter", Tp.277, and the way in which they were proceeding seemed an unusual way "to go about it". He thought the formulation of the whole transaction "was highly irregular", by which he meant "the documentation".
Other executives held the same view and it occurred to him, by March 1989, that the time had come to make his concerns known to people other than the
Board, so that the irregularity could be checked. He said that everywhere he turned he met a brick wall and the Board was keeping him in the dark over many months. However, he said he had no knowledge of any illegal activities and although the process of the transaction was irregular, he did not know if the nature of it was irregular. None-the-less he was caused concern, but, on the other hand, he did not know what the Board was considering as he was told the
Board had its own advisers doing "the due diligence, the financials and the technical work". Mr Worthington was concerned about the outflow of money having regard to the financial position of Claremont, and said that he discussed a number of the problems with the auditors.

At Tp.291 Mr Worthington said that in October or November 1989 he became aware that the value of the Burbank assets was in the order of US$3m to $4m, which came as a shock to him. He knew, at that stage, the purchase price was US$28m for 47 per cent of the Burbank oilfield, which was "very disquieting". He said it did not give rise to a fair suspicion of fraud, because there was no explanation in the accounts as to when the oilfields were purchased. An attempt was made to get up-to-date audited financial statements without success.

Mr Worthington said he was familiar with the SCAFA, which he obviously read.
He said the SCAFA was part of the funding facility for the Burbank transaction, and that notwithstanding "constant action" on his part to try to find out what was happening he met with no success: Tp.302. Mr Worthington said, Tp.303, that whilst the whole transaction did not reek of fraud he was suspicious about its propriety.

At Tp.306 Mr Worthington said that having regard to the disparity between $3m or $4m, on the one hand, and $28m, on the other, he may have suspected fraud, but he said he had no knowledge or evidence of it, and the disparity between the figures was "very, very disquieting". He also said he may have suspected
Mr Fuller of being involved in the fraud, but the situation was not one which "shrieked for some action on" his part as a senior executive, and he did not perceive it to be his duty to speak to the NCSC people, which was investigating matters about it. He said it was not a matter he should have done. Mr Worthington persisted that having become alarmed by the price disparity he approached Mr Fuller. In my opinion, he was not prepared to initiate any investigation.

At Tp.333 Mr Worthington repeated that he accepted the transaction was "inept", which he defined as:- "Sloppy administration, inability to put the documents together correctly or to gain the proper information required, proper evaluation - matters of that nature ..." 
Mr Worthington did not conclude that the Board was not doing its duty by its shareholders, although he had described "a most disturbing condition of ..
ineptitude on the part of the Board", which fell far short of the exercise of due diligence: Tp.334. Mr Worthington said it was a matter of incompetence on the Board's part "for such a huge deal".

At Tp.336 Mr Worthington said that he saw the price increase from draft to draft and he was confused by that. He asked Mr Fuller why that was happening, and Mr Fuller told him that the deal was being amended by the purchase of other interests, or simply that the price was rising, which was an alarming piece of information because if there was an option arrangement in 1988 "it presumably had then fixed a fixed exercise price".

At Tp.338 Mr Worthington agreed that the behaviour of the directors, whether it was due to dishonesty or to a lack of diligence, was very alarming and that he commenced to become alarmed about the end of 1988. He subsequently amended "alarm" to "frustration". If Mr Worthington was not alarmed one could be forgiven for thinking, on the information before him, that he should have been. I think he described his state of mind correctly the first time.

Mr Worthington said that he had suspicion, but not proof, and that if he had had "sufficient information" that Beach was being defrauded he would have approached the regulatory authorities. He agreed he had a suspicion of mismanagement of some serious magnitude, and that he may have had a suspicion of fraud. He said part of the fraud may have involved obtaining a clear title and he had a deal of correspondence in relation to working that matter out, but he repeated that the directors told him that their own advisers were completing due diligence checks throughout the transaction.

Ultimately Mr Worthington gave the Board a list of questions to which he required answers, and advised them that if the questions were not answered he would resign, which he did. That was the extent of the final action he took, and in his view it was not appropriate to approach the NCSC because he said there were numerous firms of legal companies acting on behalf of Beach and he assumed his suspicions were unfounded. This was even though they were "never allayed": Tp.353.

Mr Hughes submitted that the attitude evidenced by Mr Worthington was such that even if he had been told by ATRK of any problems that would not have caused him to take any action, other, perhaps than to resign. He submitted that Mr Worthington was "supine" in his attitude and that even if steps had been taken to advise the Chief Executive Officer, in the form of Mr
Worthington, of any problems ATRK perceived, that would not have led to any action by him, other than his resigning. In my view, having regard to the evidence given by Mr Worthington of his knowledge of unsatisfactory aspects over a long period and his concern about them, I think that this submission must be accepted. I say this without being unduly critical of Mr Worthington, but my distinct impression is that he was not concerned or prepared to bring the very real problems he saw to the attention of any authorities or the shareholders.

Conclusions As To Breach Of Fiduciary Duty 
In the result I am not satisfied that Beach has established that ATRK ever came into a fiduciary relationship with it in relation to a number of matters raised, nor, to the extent to which they did, that they breached that duty.
There is no evidence of relevant conflict or of ATRK favouring any party to the detriment of Beach. ATRK, in my opinion, acted with propriety in relation to the instructions they received. If I am wrong in these conclusions I am satisfied, on the tests propounded, that there was no relevant nexus between any breach of fiduciary duty and the losses Beach sustained. The losses flowed from the deliberate and determined fraud perpetrated on Beach and from no other cause. ATRK were, admittedly, unaware of the fraudulent conduct.
Informing Mr Worthington would not have changed the position. In this context
I have dealt with actual and assumed responsibility.

Beach's Claim Based On Accessory Liability 
Beach pleaded in paragraphs 165 and 166 of the Further Amended Statement of
Claim that ATRK knowingly assisted Messrs Fuller, Cummings, Main and Johnson in their breaches of trust and fiduciary duty with regard to the currency swap, the second acquisition of the Burbank Oil Field interests and the SCAFA, and that in the circumstances ATRK are liable as constructive trustees for the damage thereby caused to it. It relied on the second limb of Barnes versus Addy [(1874) LR 9 Ch App 244], namely:- "But, on the other hand strangers are not to be made constructive trustees merely because they act as the agents of trustees in transactions within their legal powers, transactions, perhaps which a court of equity may disapprove, unless those agents receive and become chargeable for some part of the trust property, or unless they assist with knowledge in a dishonest and fraudulent design on the part of the trustees." 
Mr Kelly submitted that the only issue was that of knowledge, because there could be no doubt that ATRK assisted the directors in the breaches of trust and fiduciary duty with regard to those transactions. The case was put that even if ATRK's case that they did not act for Beach, nor have a duty to it in respect of any of those transactions, was accepted, none-the-less ATRK acted on the instructions of the directors for Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic to effect the currency swap and the SCAFA and to ensure that the Charge and
Option Agreement was in a proper form in the interests of the lenders under the SCAFA and that, in doing so, ATRK acted with the knowledge that Messrs
Fuller, Cummings, Main and Johnson "were themselves acting in conflict and had not eschewed that conflict".

This submission, as I understand it, did not assert that the conflict arose because of the fraudulent activities of Messrs Fuller, Cummings, Main and
Johnson, but rather from the conflicting nature of the transactions into which the companies were entering. If that understanding is wrong the submission can be dealt with shortly, viz that the evidence does not satisfy me that ATRK had any knowledge of, or reason to suspect, the existence of the fraudulent activities.

The second basis on which the submission was put leads to a consideration of whether, and in what circumstances, common directors can allow companies to enter into contracts without being in conflict and, perhaps, what it is necessary for them to do to "eschew" that conflict. It also raises an issue as to the circumstances in which solicitors may be fixed with knowledge of conflict and a failure to eschew it.

The currency swap transaction, ex facie, did not involve any conflict. It was an explicable commercial transaction, which only became exceptional when the full facts were known long after the event. I have discussed it in detail and I do not consider that it can be said that it was a transaction which put
ATRK on notice that the directors were, or might be, acting in conflict, which they had not eschewed. In saying this I also have regard to the extent of
ATRK's retainer.

The Charge and Option Agreement and the SCAFA do not give rise to any such notice. ATRK were aware that in relation to each Beach had other solicitors acting for it and, once again, the transactions in themselves, viewed at the time they were entered into, did not, in my opinion, fix ATRK with any relevant knowledge.

If Mr Kelly's submission be correct it may lead to the conclusion that companies with common, or substantially common, directors could never enter into transactions with each other, even though engaging separate firms of solicitors to act for each party, without it being said that there was a conflict and a failure to eschew it on the part of the directors. I do not accept this, at least in circumstances where, firstly, ex facie there is no suggestion of any impropriety in the transaction, and secondly, where the separate solicitors have the various duties to their clients. Thirdly, it will be necessary to consider the effect of s68A of the Corporations Law.

However, for present purposes, ATRK can only be liable if it is established that they, and in this context the relevant members of ATRK were Mr Bateman and Mr Ferguson and, perhaps Mr Thomas in his then role as an employed solicitor, were dishonest. Mr Kelly submitted that what must be established is "objective dishonesty" rather than "subjective dishonesty" and it was this which led to the disputation between him and Mr Hughes as to the case being presented by Beach.

Mr Kelly submitted that the proper approach was stated by the Privy Council in
Royal Brunei Airlines Sdn Bhd versus Philip Tan Kok Ming <case>; [[1995] 2 AC .] As
Lord Nicholls of Birkenhead, who delivered the opinion of the Privy Council, observed, at pp.381-2:- "The proper role of equity in commercial transactions is a topical question. Increasingly plaintiffs have recourse to equity for an effective remedy when the person in default, typically a company, is insolvent. Plaintiffs seek to obtain relief from others who were involved in the transaction, such as directors of the company, or its bankers, or its legal or other advisers. They seek to fasten fiduciary obligations directly on to the company's officers or agents or advisers, or to have them held personally liable for assisting the company in breaches of trust or fiduciary obligations." 
At p.387 his Lordship said:- "Given, then, that in some circumstances a third party may be liable directly to a beneficiary, but given also that the liability is not so strict that there would be liability even when the third party was wholly unaware of the existence of the trust, the next step is to seek to identify the touchstone of liability. By common accord dishonesty fulfils this role." 
At p.389 his Lordship considered what was meant by "dishonesty" in the context and he said it was a lack of probity in not acting as an honest person would in the circumstances based on an objective standard. He continued:- "At first sight this may seem surprising. Honesty has a connotation of subjectivity, as distinct from the objectivity of negligence. Honesty, indeed, does have a strong subjective element in that it is a description of a type of conduct assessed in the light of what a person actually knew at the time, as distinct from what a reasonable person would have known or appreciated. Further, honesty and its counterpart dishonesty are mostly concerned with advertent conduct, not inadvertent conduct. Carelessness is not dishonesty. Thus for the most part dishonesty is to be equated with conscious impropriety. However, these subjective characteristics of honesty do not mean that individuals are free to set their own standards of honesty in particular circumstances. The standard of what constitutes honest conduct is not subjective. Honesty is not an optional scale, with higher or lower values according to the moral standards of each individual. If a person knowingly appropriates another's property, he will not escape a finding of dishonesty simply because he sees nothing wrong with such behaviour." 
After a consideration of dishonesty his Lordship said, p.392:- "Drawing the threads together, their Lordships' overall conclusion is that dishonesty is a necessary ingredient of accessory liability. It is also a sufficient ingredient. A liability in equity to make good resulting loss attaches to a person who dishonestly procures or assists in a breach of trust or fiduciary obligation. It is not necessary that, in addition, the trustee or fiduciary was acting dishonestly, although this will usually be so where the third party who is assisting him is acting dishonestly." 
It was submitted on behalf of Beach that ATRK acted dishonestly in that objective sense in assisting the directors in those transactions and that, in considering that submission, I can take into account all the knowledge of ATRK to which the submissions made reference, and to the experience of Messrs
Bateman, Ferguson and Thomas. Further, it was submitted, I may have regard to the knowledge each had of the companies in the IRL Group, to the instructions they received and, finally, to Mr Bateman's knowledge that the deposits of
Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic purportedly held at Rahn & Bodmer could not be drawn upon by those companies. This submission was put on the basis that if Mr Main was not believed, as has occurred, none-the-less Mr Bateman knew that those deposits were term deposits and could not be readily accessed.
It continued:- "Mr Bateman should have known that there was a problem with the deposits as if there were not they would have been used to pay the pressing debt problems of the Group and in particular the Spargos deposit would have been used to pay for the Inspar/Petrogulf takeover." 
The submission continued on the basis of "inaccessible deposits".

In relation to the currency swap it was submitted that Mr Thomas took it upon himself to engross and deliver letters on behalf of Beach, which had the effect of dealing with its money, knowing Beach had no independent advice and that the resolution authorising the transaction had been passed by Messrs
Fuller, Cummings and Main. The evidence does not establish that Mr Thomas knew, in relation to the totality of the transaction, that Beach did not have independent advice, and the parties to the resolution only become a matter of significance when the fraudulent conduct was disclosed. It was submitted that on an objective basis his dealing with Beach's money in the currency swap "must be seen as dishonest", and that he deliberately closed his eyes in respect of that transaction as he did not know if Beach received the equivalent in Switzerland, nor if Beach was separately represented. I merely repeat that the retainer did not extend to the Swiss side of the transaction and, on the face of the resolutions, a benefit was conferred in Switzerland.
It was submitted he took "the extraordinary step" of engrossing pre-signed letters, delivering letters on behalf of Beach and taking instructions from Mr
Fuller and Mr Cummings, without asking them if they had eschewed the conflicts, which he knew they had. In the circumstances the engrossing of the letters was not "extraordinary", and the submission about conflict depends on some knowledge in Mr Thomas that there was a conflict, which I do not accept.

There are many assumptions in this submission. I have dealt with, and do not propose to re-visit, the steps taken by Mr Thomas. All I propose to say is that in my opinion he followed instructions from directors obviously well qualified to furnish them. He only acted in respect of one part of the transaction. There was no retainer to look into any other part of it. Even if he had he would not have been told the truth not only by the fraudulent directors, but also by Rahn & Bodmer. He was unaware that there was any conflict so far as Mr Fuller and Mr Cummings were concerned in relation to their dealings with Spargos and Beach. I reject the submission that, viewed objectively, Mr Thomas acted dishonestly.

It was further submitted that Mr Bateman exacerbated the dishonest conduct when Mr Worthington telephoned him to enquire about the transaction in that he did not say that ATRK were not acting for Beach, did not tell Mr Worthington that Mr Fuller and Mr Cummings had effected the transaction in breach of duty to Beach, and "instead he referred Worthington to the very person he knew had a conflict of interest". Once again there are certain assumptions in this submission which, in my opinion, are not made out, namely the assertion that there was knowledge of a breach of duty to Beach and that the directors had a conflict of interest. I am not satisfied that the conduct of Mr Bateman, viewed objectively, was dishonest.

In relation to the SCAFA it was submitted that it was known that there was to be a loan; that ATRK knew that moneys were repaid by Beach almost as soon as the loans were made; that there was no written agreement nor security; and that the Burbank acquisition as at 5 July 1989 was "an incomplete transaction". At the risk of repetition I note that ATRK were only acting on behalf of the lenders and it is not asserted that they suffered any loss in consequence of anything ATRK did. ATRK were aware that Messrs Joelson Wilson were acting for Beach and they had no reason to suspect that they were not doing so competently and with propriety. The reference to the "incomplete transaction" is a reference back to the [s.12](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/s12.html) notices, and I have stated why I do not accept Beach's submissions in relation to it.

Once again there is reference to the conflict between the lenders, on the one hand, and the borrower, on the other. However, once again, that does not overcome the difficulty that Beach was represented by separate solicitors, although it was submitted that Mr Cordell had similar conflicts to ATRK's knowledge. It was submitted that the whole conduct of ATRK was "objectively dishonest" in assisting Mr Fuller and Mr Cummings in effecting the SCAFA in breach of their fiduciary duties. I am not satisfied that the conduct of ATRK in relation to the SCAFA was objectively dishonest.

In response Mr Hughes submitted that ATRK were not aware, as was ultimately conceded by Mr Kelly, that the accounts of Rahn & Bodmer were "blocked", and that it was conceded that ATRK were not aware that the Burbank transaction was a fraud. Once these two fundamental propositions are appreciated there was no basis, so it was submitted, for ATRK being put on notice, in circumstances where they were not acting for Beach in either the Charge and Option Agreement or the SCAFA and, arguably, were not acting for Beach in the currency swap transaction, of any conflict or irregularity in the transactions.

It was further submitted that once it was established that Mr Bateman was not aware that the funds at Rahn & Bodmer were "blocked", "a large chunk" of the allegations of dishonesty relied upon disappeared, as Mr Kelly conceded.

I am not satisfied that any of Mr Bateman, Mr Ferguson or Mr Thomas acted dishonestly on the objective test I am required to apply. They acted, in my opinion, conformably with their instructions and, in relation to each of the transactions, with propriety. They did so in circumstances where each was totally unaware, as is conceded, that any fraud was being perpetrated on
Beach, and where each was aware that instructions were being received from directors of Beach and other companies in the Group, who had legal as well as commercial training. For these reasons I reject the claim based on accessory liability.

A further claim was made in relation to accessory liability under statute, it being submitted that pursuant to s.38 of the Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, ATRK aided, abetted, counselled or procured or was by act or omission directly or indirectly knowingly concerned in the breaches by Messrs Fuller, Cummings, Main and
Johnson of s.229 of the Companies Code in relation to the transactions to which I have referred. In these circumstances it was submitted that ATRK became liable in damages under s.229(7) of the Companies Code for the full amount of the loss sustained by Beach.

It was submitted that ATRK either had knowledge, which I reject essentially for the reasons to which I have referred, or was wilfully blind to the facts:
Giorgiannia versus Reg <case>; [(1985) 156 CLR 473.] Once again, essentially for the reasons to which I have referred, I do not consider this allegation is made out. However, I would add to those reasons that the evidence satisfied me that Messrs Bateman, Ferguson and Thomas were and are totally reputable solicitors, who would not have turned a blind eye to any conduct which was unlawful or inappropriate.

The Application of Section 68A Of The Companies Code 
Mr Hughes submitted that ATRK were entitled to rely upon s.68A of the
Companies Code and, relevantly for present purposes, upon those parts of the section which entitle a person having dealings with a company, subject to sub-s.(4), to make, in relation to those dealings, the assumptions referred to in sub-s.(3) and that, in any proceedings in relation to those dealings, "any assertion by the company that the matters that the person is so entitled to assume were not correct shall be disregarded". The assumptions that the person is entitled to make include that, at all relevant times, the memorandum and articles of the company have been complied with; that a person who is held out by the company to be an officer or agent of it has been duly appointed and has authority to exercise the powers and perform the duties customarily exercised or performed by an officer or agent of that kind; and that directors, the principal executive officer, the secretaries, the employees and the agents of the company properly perform their duties to the company. The proviso disentitles a person to make any of those assumptions if the person has actual knowledge that the matter is not correct, which, but for this sub-section he would be entitled to assume; or if his connection or relationship with the company is such that he ought to know that the matter that, but for this sub- section he would be entitled to assume, is not correct.

Mr Hughes submitted that ATRK were entitled to assume the matters in sub- paragraph, (3) including that the directors were acting conformably with the constituent documents of Beach; that they had authority to exercise the powers and perform the duties customarily exercised or performed by them; and that they had properly performed those duties. He submitted that the disqualifying provisions of sub-s.(4) did not apply.

The section was considered by the Court of Appeal in Story versus Advance Bank
Australia Limited & Anor [(1993) 31 NSWLR 722] in circumstances where one of the issues was forgery. It was decided that the respondent bank was entitled to the protection afforded by ss.68A and 68D. The section was also referred to by McLelland AJA in Greater Pacific
Investments, in circumstances which lead to the same conclusion.

Mr Kelly submitted that the reliance on s.68A was in an attempt to answer the allegation that ATRK "ought to have known" that the Spargos, Enterprise and
Jingellic deposits were "blocked", as opposed to having actual knowledge thereof, on the basis that the section entitled them in "dealing" with Beach "as solicitors to Beach (with a retainer or having assumed duties)" to assume that the Beach and Spargos resolutions of 10 May 1989 had been passed in compliance with the articles; that Messrs Fuller and Cummings were each duly appointed to do the specified acts; and that each of them properly performed their duties to Beach in relation to those acts. It was further submitted that
ATRK claimed an entitlement to make the same assumptions in relation to their conduct in acting for or assuming duties to Beach in the currency swap transaction, the Charge and Option Agreement, the SCAFA, and the s.12 notices.
The submission continued that there was an attempt to erect the claimed assumptions into a positive defence "of the obtaining of Beach's informed consent for ATRK to act as Beach's solicitors on each of the matters said to be dealings".

The first submission raised was that ATRK were not "having dealings with"
Beach, but by acting as the solicitors for Beach. The reasoning in Story and the decision in Australian Capital Television Pty Limited versus Minister for
Transport and Communications [(1989) 86 ALR 119] lead me to the conclusion that ATRK were "having dealings with" Beach, at least in so far as they were retained to act for it. Similarly, so it seems to me, ATRK were having dealings with other companies in the Group for which they were to act.

Beach's submission was that a "dealing with" implied contact with a company "from the perspective of an outsider who is not involved in the processes by which the company acts". The submission was that ATRK's conduct in relation to the various transactions "was that of a solicitor assisting with the dealings
Beach had in those instances with ELFIC, the NCSC, Firstway and with Spargos,
Enterprise and Jingellic", and that ATRK "were at all relevant times part of the inner circle". This submission, if I may say so with respect, seems to me to have transposed the word "dealing" and the word "dealings". In my opinion the proper analysis is that one must firstly determine whether a solicitor retained by a company is, within the terms of the legislation, "dealing with" the company. In my opinion the ordinary meaning of those words indicates that there must be an affirmative answer to that question. In "dealing with" the company there may be further "dealings", but it is those subsequent "dealings" which attract the protection of the section by virtue of the "dealing with". I therefore reject the submission that ATRK were not "dealing with" Beach in so far as they were retained to act as its solicitors.

Mr Kelly nextly submitted that s.68A(4)(b) precluded ATRK's reliance on the section. He referred to the decision of the Court of Appeal in Bank of New
Zealand versus Fiberi Pty Limited [(1993) 4 ACSR 736] and, firstly, to the rejection by Kirby P that the section did not incorporate the concept of "being put on inquiry". His Honour considered it was expressed sufficiently broadly to indicate that a person dealing with a company will be taken to know that certain assumptions are not correct where the circumstances of any connection or relationship with it put that person on inquiry.

Priestley JA required that a Judge, considering whether the sub-section applied to the facts of a case, should look at the person in question, consider the full factual circumstances of his or her connection or relationship with the company in regard to the particular matter in question, and then decide whether, in those circumstances, "that person acting reasonably would know the true position about the matter assumed".

Mr Kelly submitted that whichever approach was adopted the facts in this case "amply show" that ATRK's connection or relationship with Beach was such that they ought to have known that none of the assumptions on which they relied were correct. It was submitted that the relevant evidence included the evidence concerning Mr Bateman's knowledge of the situation at Rahn &
Bodmer. Under that general heading there was reference to a number of more specific matters.

I think the proper approach is that if ATRK were acting as the solicitors for
Beach that gave rise, prima facie, to a fiduciary duty and constituted a dealing with the company. The existence of such a duty, in turn, gave rise to a connection or relationship from which, assuming the existence of the duty,
ATRK, by complying with the obligations imposed by the duty, ought to have known that they were not entitled to make the assumptions. Therefore, if ATRK had a fiduciary duty arising in those circumstances, they could not rely on the assumptions, because that duty created the necessary connection or relationship. If they did not have such a duty the issue does not arise in the sense that they did not have dealings with Beach arising from a retainer.

In the course of these submissions there was some analysis of the articles of
Spargos and Beach and the submission was made that these indicated matters calling for inquiry, and that in acting for Spargos on the currency swap transaction ATRK "must have had a duty to see that Spargos' corporate process had been properly exercised". Submissions were also made as to the effect of
Beach's articles, and it was submitted that given the obvious conflict and "the ex facie problems in respect of the resolutions Thomas should have made checks".

Whilst these submissions were made, there was no cross-examination directed to
Mr Thomas, which would found them. In my view it was incumbent on Mr Kelly to put to Mr Thomas, if this was the case Beach wished to make, that to his knowledge there had not been compliance with the articles of the various companies from which he ought to have known that he was not entitled to make the assumptions upon which ATRK relied. The various submissions mounted in relation to this aspect of the matter only have to be considered to appreciate that they could have been susceptible of appropriate explanation if Mr Thomas had ever been afforded the opportunity of providing it. Whether Mr Thomas would have had such an explanation is, of course, something I would not assume. However, I am not prepared to accede to submissions which depend upon findings of fact, where the necessary facts have not been put to the relevant witness to enable the witness to deal with them: Browne versus Dunn (1894) 6 R and Allied Pastoral Holdings Pty Limited versus Commissioner of Taxation [[1983] 1 NSWLR 1.] 
It was nextly submitted by Mr Kelly that a solicitor, acting in a fiduciary capacity, could not presume, in his or her own favour, "that things are rightly done when it is his duty (as Spargos' and/or Beach's solicitors) to enquire as to the state of affairs in acting on the Spargos `circular resolution' and the Beach resolution". For the reasons I have given, I agree with this submission. One is thus remitted to ascertaining the nature of the relationship.

The defence, which raises s.68A, makes it very clear that it is raised in the context of a finding, which ATRK denied should be made, that they owed and breached fiduciary duties to Beach. However, it was submitted, that to allow the operation of the assumptions would be contrary to the policy of equity to hold the fiduciary to, and vindicate, the high duty owed, because it is the fiduciary's duty to enquire as to the state of affairs. In somewhat different terms, or, perhaps, for different reasons I agree with this submission and, in my opinion, the correct analysis is that s.68A is directed to the situations in which a person dealing with a company is entitled to make, subject to the operation of sub-s.(4), certain assumptions. My view is that the person dealing with the company, who is entitled to make those assumptions, cannot be a person who has an independent duty to it, by virtue for example of the fiduciary relationship created by the retainer as a solicitor. Unless this were so a solicitor would be able to avoid the consequences of the fiduciary duty in circumstances where this would be contrary to its very assumption.
Therefore, the solicitor/client retainer, relevantly for present purposes, creates the dealing and the connection or relationship.

In these circumstances I consider that the defence based on s.68A fails.
However, I make it clear, that in coming to that conclusion I am not to be taken as having found that ATRK were aware of the relevant facts. The basis upon which I make the finding is on the hypothesis that in so far as ATRK were acting for Beach, it is not open to ATRK to assert that by virtue of the fiduciary relationship thereby created they ought not to have been aware of them.

Negligence 
Beach's case in negligence provided a number of particulars, which are dependent upon findings favourable to it on the issue of breach of fiduciary duty. Of course, if such a breach had been found it would have been necessary to consider these allegations, but as it was not they do not require further consideration. In addition to those allegations some separate ones were made.

It was alleged that in relation to the Burbank acquisition ATRK were negligent in that:- they advised in relation to the structure and funding of it without taking any steps, or any sufficient steps, to be fully acquainted with the nature of the transaction, the identity of the intended vendor, and the merits of the acquisition; and they failed to fully investigate it to determine the identity of the proposed vendor, to ascertain that it was not an arm's length transaction, and to advise that the requirements of the Listing Rules of ASX were complied with.

In my opinion these allegations have not been established. ATRK did not act on behalf of Beach on the acquisition. Nor, in my opinion, did they advise as to the funding. Their role was confined to acting for the lenders in the manner I have described. The allegations of negligence, which were made, would be more appropriately made against the solicitors who acted for Beach on the transaction, namely Messrs Joelson Wilson.

Nextly it was submitted that ATRK were negligent in relation to the currency swap transaction, in that they acted in relation to it as though they had no duty to Beach, as its solicitors, and were entitled to act without regard to its interests, and failed to check with Rahn & Bodmer and to obtain confirmation that Spargos had a US Dollar deposit equivalent to A$5m available to be swapped. It was also pleaded that ATRK failed to warn Beach that it was at risk of loss unless that check was made, and to make known to Beach that
Spargos had no access to funds on deposit at Rahn & Bodmer as recorded in the memorandum of 10 February 1989. It was further particularised that ATRK failed to advise Beach to obtain advice in relation to Swiss law so that its consideration for the currency swap may be assured, and failed to fully investigate the transaction "which the currency swap was intended to finance" to determine the identity of the proposed vendor, and to ascertain that the transaction was not an arm's length transaction, and to advise that the requirements of the Listing Rules of the ASX had not been complied with.

I have found that ATRK were not retained to act for Beach in relation to that aspect of the transaction, which involved the assignment in Switzerland, and that if they were retained by Beach at all to act in respect of the assignment in Australia their retainer was extremely limited. For these reasons, with which I have dealt at some length, I do not consider that there was any negligence by ATRK.

I should also add that the particular asserting that there was a failure to identify the proposed vendor, proceeds on the basis that as at May 1989 it was the intention that the money should be used in respect of the Burbank acquisition. That was not a situation which arose, on the evidence before me, until very much later when it was necessary to seek to disguise the unavailability of the deposit in Switzerland.

The third series of allegations of negligence against ATRK relate to the
SCAFA. It was particularised that ATRK prepared powers of attorney for the purpose of having it forwarded to Canberra for execution without taking any steps to ensure that Beach had been advised to obtain independent legal advice "in relation to the merits of the SCAFA and the transaction which was intended to be funded by the SCAFA". It was further particularised that ATRK failed to fully investigate this transaction to determine the identity of the proposed vendor, to ascertain that the transaction was not an arm's length transaction, and to advise that the requirements of the Listing Rules of ASX had not been complied with.

As I have pointed out Mr Cordell was acting for Beach, as borrower in this transaction. It was, in my opinion, his duty to take the various steps particularised. The particulars have proceeded on what I consider to be the incorrect assumption that ATRK were acting on behalf of Beach.

It was alleged that ATRK were negligent in relation to the Charge and Option
Agreement in various ways, which proceeded, as I read the particulars, on the assumption that ATRK were acting for Beach in relation to this transaction. In my opinion they were not. One of the particulars pleaded is a failure to advise Beach that it should co-operate with the NCSC and ensure that there were no transactions, which were the subject of the s.12 notice, of which there was not a full and proper disclosure to the NCSC. As I have said this proceeded on the assumption that there was no such disclosure. However, there is no evidence of that. Rather the evidence is that there was a disclosure by both Beach and Claremont and that the documents were not analysed by the NCSC.
There is no evidence that a full and proper disclosure was not made.

Finally, it was alleged that ATRK were negligent in relation to the s.12 notice in that they advised Beach that it was invalid, and failed to advise it that the s.12 notice required the production of all books and documents which referred to or related to the currency swap. In my opinion there is no validity in these allegations for the reasons I have given.

Even if, contrary to the view to which I have come on this issue, it is found that ATRK were guilty of any negligence the further question as to any damage sustained by Beach arises. This would require a consideration of causation conformably with the principles specified in March versus E. & M.H. Stramare
Pty Limited & Anor <case>; [(1990-1991) 171 CLR 506];
Bennett versus Minister of Community Welfare <case>; [(1992) 176 CLR 408]; Medlin versus The State Government Insurance Commission <case>; [(1994-1995) 182 CLR 1] and
Trust Co of Australia versus Perpetual Trustees WA & Ors (McLelland CJinEq - 9 July 1997 - unreported), which require the causal connection to be resolved, on the probabilities, as a matter of fact, common sense and experience. The issue, of course, in the present case is whether the fraudulent conduct was the cause of Beach's loss, irrespective of and notwithstanding any breach of duty, which the present submission necessarily assumes, as a matter of common sense and experience. In the present case, for the reasons I have given, I am satisfied that the cause of the loss was the fraudulent activities of those directors involved in them.

I accordingly reject Beach's case based on negligence.

Contributory Negligence 
In paragraphs 108 and 109 of the Second Further Amended Defence ATRK pleaded that in so far as the claim was based on negligence or breach of contract, which negligence or breach of contract were denied, the real, effective and proximate cause of the loss was the conduct of Beach; and that the loss was wholly or partly suffered by reason of its "fault" within the meaning of [s.10](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1965404/s10.html) of the [Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1965404/) and s.27A of the Wrongs Act 1936 (SA). The particulars furnished were:- "(i) At all material times in 1989, Fuller, Cummings and Main constituted the whole of the Board of Directors in relation to all relevant decisions of the plaintiff and were its directing mind and will. Their conduct, in acting as the Board of Directors of the company, is the conduct of the plaintiff or is identified with, or attributed to, the plaintiff.

Further, the management of Beach caused or permitted the Burbank Oil Interests to be purchased; * notwithstanding that they were aware, or should be deemed to have been aware, of the contents of the letter dated 24 February 1989 from Lidstone to Brooke at BBR; * without obtaining any, or any adequate financial data in respect of Mazeley; * notwithstanding the recommendation made to it by Mr Rogers on 4 May 1989 that Beach ought not to acquire such interests; * without conduct any adequate or elementary inquiries and due diligence relating to the value of the Burbank Oil Interests." 
It was then pleaded that in so far as Beach's claim was based on breach of fiduciary duty, which breach of duty was denied, the breach of duty was not causally connected with the loss in a legally material or significant way; the loss and damage did not flow from the breach and would have been suffered even if any breach of fiduciary duty had not occurred; and, alternatively, the equitable compensation to which the plaintiff might otherwise be entitled should be reduced or apportioned to reflect the extent of Beach's responsibility. ATRK repeated the particulars, which I have quoted.

These matters give rise to very substantial issues which, having regard to the conclusions to which I have come, it is not strictly necessary for me to consider. I do not, in those circumstances, think it appropriate to delay the resolution of these proceedings by dealing with and coming to final conclusions on the submissions. The issues involved are whether the directors, who were acting in fraud of Beach, can, for present purposes, constitute its "directing mind and will" such as to be guilty of contributory negligence, and whether the "management of Beach" can be guilty of contributory negligence. It is also necessary to consider, in the context of this pleading, whether there can, as a matter of law, be any reduction in or apportionment of any equitable compensation to which Beach would have been entitled. I have already noted in these reasons difficulties which arise in relation to this latter point.

The submissions made by the parties have been reduced to writing. However, I think that it is appropriate that I should express some views on the factual issues, which proceed on the assumptions that ATRK were in breach and that their pleadings set forth the correct legal position.

I have made it clear that in so far as the directors are concerned my opinion is that their fraudulent conduct was the sole cause of the loss Beach sustained. Accordingly, if their conduct is attributable to Beach there would not be, in my opinion, any room either for the application of considerations of contributory negligence or reduction in or apportionment of equitable compensation. On the other hand, if the view were taken that there was a breach of fiduciary duty by ATRK, which was "a" cause of the loss, the further problem arises as to whether had ATRK acted in the way it should have, on the hypothesis now being explored, the loss would have occurred. I have expressed the view, to which I adhere, that so determined and deliberate was the fraud that, in all probability, it would have. In those circumstances I would apportion the loss as to ninety per cent to the directors and ten per cent to
ATRK.

If there was negligence on the part of the management, which is attributable to Beach for present purposes, that was a failure not only to act on the information before management, but to make adequate enquiries and to conduct due diligence. A further problem arises as to whether, had those things been done, the loss would have been sustained by Beach. I think the proper approach to the matter is to say that, in the first instance, management failed to carry out the necessary enquiries and to make the adequate checks. If those things had been done, which on the evidence I am satisfied they were not because Mr Worthington was content to be fobbed off by the directors and to treat the matter as a director-originated transaction, the further question would have arisen what he should have done with the information he would thereby have obtained. That point was never reached in this case. Once again I am of the opinion that the failure of management, if it was under an obligation to take these steps qua Beach, was the major contributing cause to the loss, in the way in which the case was conducted, and, in those circumstances, I would make the same apportionment as I did in relation to the directors.

I would only add, on the questions of principle, that when one has regard to the fact that equitable compensation is now a form of remedy being sought in relation to commercial transactions, as Lord Nichols of Birkenhead point out in Royal Brunei, it seems to me strange that questions of apportionment are not made applicable to damages for equitable compensation, where the equitable compensation arises through breach of retainer and in the absence of any breach of fiduciary duty flowing from personal gain or breach of trust. I have referred to the recent authorities on this point and to certain extra curial writings, which would suggest that this point of view is likely to find more favour in the future. In my respectful opinion that would be a logical extension of the law in dealing with compensation in commercial circumstances.
I appreciate, of course, that there are views to the contrary.

Conclusions On Liability 
In the result I am not satisfied that Beach has established any of the causes of action upon which it seeks to rely against ATRK and I propose, therefore, to order that its proceedings be dismissed with costs.

Damages 
A General Consideration 
In view of the conclusion to which I have come it is not strictly necessary for me to consider the issue of damages. However, as a number of aspects of it were litigated I think it appropriate that I should express some views. The submissions did not go to all issues of damage, which may be because some were agreed by the parties with the assistance of their experts. Thus if the matter goes further there will be a statement of some of the issues and some attempt at analysing them and the facts, but I shall only consider the matters on which I received submissions. As the evidence was essentially from accountants, who prepared reports which are exhibits, and no issue of credit was raised, and many of the submissions were either in writing or are recorded in a full transcript, it is not necessary for me to deal with every point. I should also add that the accountants conferred and this assisted in narrowing the issues.

The principal accountant called for Beach was Mr Brian Thomas Morris of Messrs
Edwards Marshall & Co, who has had a long association with the litigation, including G53. His reports are Exhibit AR. On one issue Beach called Mr Martin
H. Bloom, a director of Howarth Pty Limited. His report is Exhibit AS.
ATRK called Mr Wayne R. Lonergan of Coopers & Lybrand (Securities)
Limited, whose reports became Exhibit 17. Each of these gentlemen were extremely well qualified and experienced.

The Option Fee 
The first figure with which I shall deal is $10,067,638, which it is agreed was paid by Claremont initially either to Messrs Gardner Weller or to solicitors in the United States. Part was used to fund the acquisition of the oil interests and the rest went to various parties, including IRL. On 30 June Beach's loan account with Claremont was reduced by this amount on the basis that Beach was indebted to Claremont for the amount Claremont had paid to Firstway.

Mr Pembroke submitted that the loss occurred not because Claremont paid the money, but because of an accounting entry whereby Beach's loan account was debited, as at 30 June 1989, with that amount. That, if I may say so with respect, begs the question, viz whether the payment by Claremont entitled it to claim that credit. Mr Pembroke submitted that that debit could only take place by virtue of the entry into the Charge and Option Agreement and the exercise of the option, and by virtue of the statement in Recital D to the
Charge and Option Agreement providing, in effect, that Beach had procured the payment by Claremont of that amount on its behalf to Firstway by way of loan for the grant of the option. It was submitted that this recital purported to provide a legitimate basis for debiting Beach, but that it was false and disguised the true situation. The submission was that Claremont did not pay the moneys by way of loan to Firstway for the grant of the option described in clause 7.1 of the Charge and Option Agreement.

However, the submission depends upon its being established, in my opinion, that Beach did not procure Claremont to lend money on its behalf to Firstway.
I have stated that I have doubts as to whether this proposition is correct.
There is no reason, as I have already suggested, why loan moneys cannot be paid by the lender to a third party at the direction of the borrower. It is inherently probable that as the loan moneys were paid to solicitors, who, in respect of these transactions, were clearly acting in accordance with instructions received from Mr Johnson, that the proper inference is that they were then used as Firstway directed. I have pointed out that under the Charge and Option Agreement there remained an obligation on Firstway to repay the money if the option was not exercised, and I have referred to the evidence of
Mr Morris at Tp.1107. In the result I am not satisfied that Beach did not become liable to repay Claremont that amount for the reasons thus far advanced.

The point Beach was making was that if ATRK had acted properly in its interests it would never have entered into the Charge and Option Agreement. If
ATRK had been acting for Beach in that transaction, which I am satisfied they were not, they would have assumed certain duties to Beach, which would have required them to advise Beach properly. This submission as to damages, as with all the others, requires consideration to be given to the matter on the hypothesis that I found that ATRK were in breach of duty. On that hypothesis I think the proper finding is that the moneys would not have been paid out if
ATRK had given the proper advice, but subject to a most important qualification, viz that, in my opinion, even if such advice had been given the directors would have ignored it and implemented their fraudulent plan. This would have been the cause of the loss.

It was also submitted that Recital D in the Charge and Option Agreement was a sham in that it was a means of disguising "an improper payment by Beach i.e.
the reduction of Claremont's debt to Beach by" the amount in issue. Reference was made to Sharrment Pty Limited versus Official Trustee <case>; [(1988) 18 FCR 449.] I do not think it necessary to pursue this matter. There is no doubt that money was paid by Claremont, the issue being whether it was paid by way of a loan on behalf of Beach. Prima facie that is what the agreement provided and, in those circumstances, it would be necessary to show, in my opinion, that there was no such payment, which could be so characterised, to make good this submission.

The Costs Of Other Proceedings 
Beach claims $11,168,241.83 in respect of legal costs paid by it in relation various proceedings particularised in Exhibit 21. The costs include those of
G53, appeals from that decision, execution of the judgments, recovery actions by Beach against Messrs Joelson Wilson, and an amount headed "Miscellaneous" said to relate to Rahn & Bodmer. Beach's submission was that in consequence of the breaches of fiduciary duty by the fraudulent directors and the other companies it had causes of action against those it and Claremont sued in G53, and other causes of action which it pursued, and that whilst it conceded that it is obliged to bring to account the amounts recovered in those proceedings, it submitted that it is entitled to set off against those amounts the full costs of recovery.

It was submitted on behalf of ATRK that there is a principle that, subject to hurdles of remoteness and causation, a plaintiff may recover against the defendant in current proceedings taxed solicitor and client costs of earlier successful proceedings. Reference was made to "McGregor on Damages" (14th
Edition) at paragraph 560.

At paragraph 528 the authors stated:- "Where the costs that the plaintiff now claims as damages from the defendant have been incurred in previous proceedings between the now plaintiff and some third party, whether the third party be a civil litigant or the Crown as prosecutor, the position is totally different, and since the leading case of Hammond versus Bussey costs in such actions have been recoverable as damages subject to the rules of remoteness of damage." 
At paragraph 546 the authors stated:- "Where the now plaintiff has been a successful party in the previous proceedings, it can hardly be said that costs were incurred by him unreasonably, and he will therefore recover in respect of them. He will be held to have acted reasonably even although he does not succeed in all the courts through which the proceedings are taken, provided that he succeeds in the final court to which the original claim is taken ..." 
At paragraph 560 the authors stated:- "On the other hand, in the sparser cases of a now plaintiff who was successful in the prior proceedings, the amount of costs recoverable as damages will naturally be different. Where the now plaintiff has successfully brought or successfully defended an action, the amount recoverable will be his costs taxed as between solicitor and client less his costs taxed as between party and party which will generally be recovered by him from the other party to the prior litigation." 
It would seem that this statement is made on the assumption that the successful plaintiff has recovered or will recover his taxed costs from the unsuccessful defendant, because subsequently in the paragraph it was said that the successful party was entitled to recover his full costs taxed as between solicitor and client without any deduction in respect of the party and party costs "awarded but practicably irrecoverable". Thus the nett costs are recoverable. It was also suggested that the costs on appeal should be awarded.

On behalf of ATRK it was submitted that at paragraph 550 there was authority for the proposition that if the costs of the earlier proceedings would have been incurred by the plaintiff, even if the current defendant had not committed a breach of duty, the plaintiff cannot claim damages in respect of the earlier costs from the current defendant. This, obviously enough, must be correct. But the present argument proceeds on the assumption that ATRK did commit breaches of its duty.

Nextly it was submitted that ATRK did not foresee fraud. Once again these submissions proceed, as I understand them, on the basis that there is no causation, or that ATRK did not contemplate the general nature of the loss and the general manner of its occurrence. However, it seems to me that in the present case if a breach was established it is sufficient that having regard to the facts of the case it is shown that damage of the type for which Beach sued may have been incurred, although the precise nature of the damage may not have been foreseen. In truth, the argument is that the damage flowed from the breach, rather than from the fraudulent conduct. In the present case that submission has failed for a number of reasons but, had I found that there was a breach of duty by ATRK then, in my opinion, but for the absence of a relevant causative link, certain, at least, of the costs would have been recoverable.

Thirdly, it was submitted that there is no basis for ATRK paying as damages the costs of appeals by the earlier defendants, or the costs of executing judgments against them. In my opinion this submission should be rejected, save in relation to an original relevant, causative link. The reason is that Beach was clearly entitled to seek to retain the judgment it had recovered, just as it was entitled to pursue the claim in the first place.

Fourthly, it was submitted that if ATRK have any liability in respect of the costs of the earlier proceedings it is only for solicitor/client costs. The submission continued that the costs set out in items 2 to 11 of Exhibit 21 "appear to represent 100 per cent of Beach's costs". It was further stated that no attempt appeared to have been made to assess a reasonable sum and that there was no evidence of any form of taxation or assessment. In these circumstances the submission was that the plaintiff had not satisfied its onus of proof. In my opinion this submission raises a question of mitigation, on which ATRK carried the onus of establishing that the costs claimed were unreasonable, if that is the basis of the objection. This is particularly so where it is not in issue that the costs stated were in fact incurred and paid.
In these circumstances one commences with the position that to recover the amount for which credit has to be given Beach paid out the amounts set out in
Exhibit 21. ATRK cannot, in my view, have it both ways. If they wish to claim a credit for the full amount recovered then, in principle, I see no reason why they should not pay the full amount of that recovery. The exception to this would be if it was shown that the costs of recovery were unreasonable and, as
I have said, ATRK have not attempted to establish that. Once again ATRK have the benefit of the submission as to the relevant and causative link.

Finally it was submitted that no attempt had been made by Beach to demonstrate the connection in fact between the conduct of ATRK and the costs set out in items 9, 10 and 11 of Exhibit 21. This is so, in my opinion, in respect of items 9 and 11. Item 10 relates to proceedings brought by Beach against Messrs
Joelson Wilson. I was informed that that resulted in a substantial recovery by
Beach in consequence of the proceedings being settled prior to any hearing. I shall assume, for not having been taken to the pleadings I am not prepared as
I indicated earlier to go to them myself, that the claims were in respect of breach of retainer, negligence and breach of fiduciary duty. The difficulty I have with this part of the claim is that the cause of action against Messrs
Joelson Wilson existed because of their alleged failure to act on behalf of
Beach in a proper manner. It has not been demonstrated that such breaches as they may have committed, or, more accurately, were alleged to have committed, arose from anything ATRK did or failed to do. It seems to me, on the information available, that any breach by them was not causally related to any breach by ATRK, or, in so far as the distinction is thought relevant, related in any way to any breach of fiduciary duty by ATRK. Rather it was a breach of the same type, but pursued independently of any breach by ATRK. Accordingly, even if I had been satisfied that ATRK were guilty of breach and that questions of causation were overcome, I would not have been satisfied that
Beach was entitled to recover the costs of its proceedings against Messrs
Joelson Wilson.

In the result I would, but for my view about the relevant causative link, allow the amounts claimed in paragraphs 1 to 8 of Exhibit 21 if I were satisfied that Beach was entitled to recover damages from ATRK.

The SCAFA Payments 
The next submissions in relation to damages related to the SCAFA repayments.

ATRK's submissions noted that Recital A of the SCAFA referred to a loan from
Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic to Beach of $13,813,228.21. The submission continued, correctly, that there never was any loan; that the recital was false; and that the SCAFA was a cloak, entered into after the majority of supposed repayments were made, to disguise the direct transfer of the amounts standing to the credit of Spargos, Enterprise and Jingellic at Rahn &
Bodmer to an account in the name of Firstway at Rahn & Bodmer, and the provision of cash flow, in the form of purported repayments, to Spargos,
Enterprise and Jingellic from Beach, which could not be obtained from Rahn & Bodmer, IRL or IRAG.

It was submitted that the only thing that connected the supposed "repayments" of $10,288,922 by Beach was the artificial characterisation, which those payments acquired, by the description given to them in the SCAFA. None of this was greatly in issue. Nor was the submission that if the SCAFA had not been entered into the payments by Beach of those amounts could not have been connected with the Burbank acquisition, nor characterised as loan repayments.
It was submitted that, in the result, the correct characterisation of the payments by Beach, and their connection (if any) with the Burbank acquisition, fell to be determined by reference to the circumstances of each individual payment, and that the SCAFA was "a sham" and should be disregarded.

The difficulty I have with this submission is that it proceeds on the basis that ATRK were not liable. The claim for damages, obviously enough, proceeds on a contrary basis. If I had found that they were in breach of their fiduciary duty to Beach it seems to me that it could not be submitted that these payments under the SCAFA were not recoverable from ATRK as damages relating to ATRK's breach, which I shall assume for the purpose of this submission, to act properly for Beach in relation to the SCAFA, save on the basis that there was no relevant or causative link, as to which I am satisfied.

Currency Swap 
Mr Pembroke submitted that the "mere assignment" of the $5m at ELFIC from
Beach to Spargos on 10 May 1989 and the transfer of funds on 15 May 1989, did not cause loss to Beach. This was because Beach received the right to an interest in an equivalent amount in an account of Spargos at Rahn &
Bodmer. It was submitted that it was clear this was a valuable right because on 14 September 1989, but backdated to 30 June 1989, Beach was credited in an account with Rahn & Bodmer with the amount of the assignment and interest from 10 May to 30 June 1989 and, on 18 September 1989, but backdated to 1 July that amount, including interest, was transferred to an account at Rahn & Bodmer in the name of Firstway. This operated as a credit towards the purchase price of Burbank and, but for that credit, Beach would have been required to find an equivalent amount to discharge, pro tanto, its obligation to Firstway.

It was submitted that the loss to Beach occurred not because of the original transfer, but because of the decisions to enter into the Charge and Option
Agreement, to exercise the option and to credit the amount to the Burbank purchase price. It was submitted that Beach could not have it both ways in the sense of contending that it lost $5m on 15 May 1989 by virtue of the transfer, and that it lost it because it formed part of the purchase price for Burbank.
It was submitted that there was no loss because the moneys were ultimately used for the benefit of Beach as part of the purchase price.

I have several difficulties with this submission, which flow from my findings of fact on liability. Beach submitted that ATRK were acting for it on both the assignment from Spargos and the Switzerland assignment to it. I have rejected those submissions. However, if I had found that ATRK were so acting the failure to ensure that there was money available at Rahn & Bodmer to complete the swap would have been the cause of the loss. The subsequent transactions in September, which were aimed at disguising the true position, did not deal with actual money and had Beach's submission been accepted about the Charge and Option Agreement would have demonstrated another loss.

In the result, and subject to the important exception that I am not satisfied that a relevant and causal link was established by Beach, I am of the view that whichever transaction one considers had Beach made out is case against
ATRK, in it various forms, it would have been entitled to recover this amount but for the fact that I do not consider that there was a relevant and causal link.

The Solvency Of Claremont 
The solvency of Claremont was raised in the context of a submission by ATRK that the reduction of Beach's loan account did not cause any loss to it because Claremont would never have been able to repay the full amount of the loan, which otherwise would have stood to its credit. At Tp.1599 Mr Pembroke submitted that ATRK wished "to preserve" their position and that "it may be an issue which needs to be ventilated more fully in another place" i.e. on appeal. This was a somewhat satisfactory approach. Mr Pembroke put his submissions commencing at Tp.1600. He pointed out differences in the approaches of Mr Morris and Mr Lonergan. However, as Mr Kelly submitted at
Tp.1640, in my view correctly, the evidence of Mr Lonergan did not go further than asserting that there would be at least 63 cents in the dollar available on the basis of all the assumptions he made. He further submitted that as soon as one introduced the position in which there is a pre-Burbank financial position, as distinct from a post-Burbank financial position "the 63 cents in the dollar goes up and the proof of suggested devaluation of the debt evaporates in its entirety". I am not satisfied, on the evidence and as the case has been presented, that the debt owed to Beach by Claremont would not have had its prima facie value.

The Value Of The Spargos Takeover To Beach 
Mr Pembroke made submissions in relation to the benefit of the takeover of
Spargos by Beach. Having recovered its large judgment against Spargos, Beach, on 16 December 1993, entered into an agreement with it by which it effectively gave up its judgment and received, in return, Spargos' consent to its making a bid for all the issued shares in Spargos on the basis of one Beach share for every eight Spargos shares conditional upon the receipt of acceptances of sixty per cent of the issued capital of Spargos. The submission continued that
Beach has included, as part of its damages, the costs of proceedings brought by it against various defendants arising out of the Burbank transaction and, where Beach has made monetary recoveries from any of those defendants, it has given credit. The submission was that in the case of Spargos, although Beach had given up a judgment for $44.45m and taken the company over by issuing shares in itself, Beach had given no credit for the financial benefit ATRK asserted it derived from that transaction, and Beach contended that it had obtained no economic benefit and that, in effect, it received nothing of value in return for giving up its judgment.

The submission was predicated on Beach neither paying cash for the Spargos shares, nor transferring valuable property, but creating rights in itself by issuing shares in itself, which cost it nothing, in exchange for the Spargos shares. However, the accountants did not suggest that the Beach shares did not have a value in the hands of the shareholders of Spargos, who accepted the offer. The question was what that value was, although ultimately the point was made that if the Beach shares were, in law, valueless the economic benefit to it was the greater. The submission was that Beach issued part of its uncalled capital and thus parted with nothing of value: Ord Forest Pty Limited v
Federal Commissioner of Taxation <case>; [(1974) 130 CLR 124]; Federal Commissioner of Taxation versus St Helens Farm Pty
Limited (1981) 146 CLR 337; and Health & Life Care versus Price
Waterhouse (Olsson J, 7 July 1997, unreported). In these circumstances it was submitted that the economic benefit which Beach obtained from the takeover was the fair value of the nett assets of Spargos, which also gave rise to a conflict between the accountants.

Consideration was then given to the Spargos assets and, in paragraph 116 of his report of 16 September 1997, Exhibit 17, Mr Lonergan formed the view that it ranged from A$16.04m to A$18.74m, and that the unaudited book value of
Spargos as at 31 December 1993 was A$12.25m. He said that based on that valuation it was clear that Spargos was acquired by Beach for a consideration that was significantly below the value of the assets, which, in his opinion, led to an economic benefit for Beach. He estimated that as between $9.5m and $12.2m, depending on which valuation of Spargos one took, and based upon the number of shares issued by Beach at a discounted price of 15 cents having a value of $6.5m. He was of the opinion that this was supported by the fact that an independent merchant bank, Grant Samuel, recommended that Spargos shareholders should accept the Beach offer on the basis that Spargos shares would be worthless if the appeal brought against the judgment obtained by
Beach in G53 failed and, even if it were successful, it was possible that
Spargos shares would not be re-quoted on the ASX for up to two years. Mr
Lonergan provided a cross-reference and, in paragraph 125, stated the view that in his opinion Beach obtained an economic benefit from its acquisition of between $6.9m, based on the Grant Samuel assessment, and $9.5m to $12.2m based on his own assessment. He also expressed the view that if no value was to be attributed to the shares issued by Beach, conformably with the authorities to which I was referred, then the gain to it would be equivalent to the whole of the nett assets of between $16m and $18.7m.

In a report dated 8 October 1997, Exhibit AS, Mr Bloom stated that he had been asked to examine the conclusion reached by Mr Lonergan in paragraph 129 of his report that he had recalculated the economic loss suffered by Beach taking into account the benefit of the Spargos takeover, and concluded that there was an economic benefit equivalent to a recovery of $10,850,000 as at 18 February
Mr Bloom adopted the same starting point as Mr Lonergan had in paragraph of his report, and he then analysed the value of the consideration paid by
Beach and the value of the Spargos nett assets and concluded that based on those analyses Beach received no significant economic benefit.

In considering the value of the consideration paid by Beach Mr Bloom noted that Mr Lonergan attached a value of 15 cents per share to each share and referred to the necessity to ascertain "the fair value". He dealt with this at some length and quoted from AAS21 paragraph 16, which provided that where the purchase consideration comprised shares or other securities of the acquiring entity, which are listed publicly on a stock exchange, the price at which they could be placed in the market "will usually be an indication of their fair value". He noted that at that time the Beach shares were valued at 24 cents per share and that the audited accounts valued the Beach shares, which were issued, at $3,879,000 higher than the valuation ascribed to them by Mr
Lonergan of 15 cents. He also noted the value ascribed to the shares by Grant
Samuel in the range of 21 to 32 cents each.

Mr Bloom then considered the discount applied to the value of a Beach share by
Mr Lonergan and noted the latter's comment that the economic benefit of 21 - cents per share was not the "full amount" as it did not include any discount to issue so many shares and, in Mr Lonergan's opinion, included a premium over the market price of Beach shares at the date of the offer to the extent of 4 cents per share. Mr Bloom referred to Mr Lonergan's attempt to reach a fair value and to the uncontested evidence that the ratio of one Beach share to eight Spargos shares was arrived at by arm's length parties in the course of commercial negotiations, and in circumstances where Spargos shares were suspended so that there was no ready indication of their value. He said:- "Effectively, therefore, the Spargos shareholders were selling Spargos' shares, and hence their interest in its nett assets, for a purchase price expressed in Beach shares, but able to be computed in monetary terms." 
He suggested that because of the effect an adverse decision would have on the unsuccessful party to the appeal it made commercial sense for both sets of directors, given their fiduciary duty to their companies and shareholders, "to accept a deal which brought certainty, rather than an all or nothing gamble".
He continued:- "The proposed deal enabled Beach to proceed with its business, and gave Spargos shareholders a liquid asset in the form of listed shares, while enabling them to share in any benefit that would be experienced by Beach shareholders gaining unfettered access to the Spargos assets." 
Mr Bloom expressed the opinion that once there was a fair commercial deal between two knowledgeable, willing parties, he could see no justification for attempting to calculate a value for the Beach shares by reference to a totally hypothetical possibility, which was not under consideration. He continued that the share price between when the date for settlement was announced, namely 17
December 1993, and 18 April 1994 was well above 21 cents per share and that
Beach shares were stated by Grant Samuel to have "substantially out performed the market". In these circumstances he was not prepared to discount the value.
He also noted that on 21 February 1994 Resolute Resources Limited, which held through its subsidiary some 19 million shares in Beach, sold 17 million of them, which represented approximately 11 per cent of the expanded capital of
Beach and was "clearly a substantial parcel". His instructions were that the million shares were disposed of in one line at 21.6 cents per share, and he compared this with Mr Lonergan's view that the discount required on placements "of this nature would be between 10 per cent and 40 per cent, and settles on per cent as being appropriate in this case". Applying this logic and a 10 per cent discount Mr Bloom said the value before placement of the Beach shares was 24 cents each and that if one used a 30 per cent discounting figure the value would have been in the order of 30.86 cents per share.

In these circumstances Mr Bloom considered that it was neither theoretically sound nor supported by the facts to discount to 15 cents. Mr Bloom also expressed the opinion that it was not clear to him how Mr Lonergan could maintain that Beach derived a benefit from the takeover, and that that benefit was not to be taken to account in valuing the Beach shares offered as consideration to Spargos shareholders. In these circumstances he considered the appropriate value was 24 cents per share.

He then turned to consider the value of the Spargos assets and said that he was able to consider that question with the benefit of hindsight knowing the actual values at which the assets were realised. He said, in those circumstances, he was able to calculate the discounted cash flow valuation of the assets with substantial accuracy, unlike those attempting that task at 18
February 1994 and, in calculating the values of the assets realised after the takeover date, he utilised the actual amounts realised as evidence of what those assets were actually worth at that date. He concluded that the realised value of the nett assets acquired from Spargos was $10,793,500, and that when a discount of 8.25 per cent per annum was applied to the assets and liabilities comprising this figure to adjust for the time value of money in the period between 18 February 1994 and the actual date on which the assets were realised or the liabilities were discharged, the value of those assets, as at 18 February 1994, was computed at $10.36m. He believed that to be a more accurate reflection of the true value of the Spargos nett assets than the value adopted in the Grant Samuel report, which had been substantially adopted in Mr Lonergan's report.

In these circumstances he concluded there was no benefit to Beach and he made certain cross checks, which he said confirmed this.

Mr Lonergan responded in a report of 30 October 1997, which is part of Exhibit
He dealt firstly with the value of the shares, and noted the price of 24 cents was determined from the market value of the shares in the four days prior to the takeover offer. He said that financial statements did not represent to be a statement of value and that AASB1015 had been interpreted to allow a wide divergence in practice as to what price is recorded in the accounts. He said that given the range of acceptable prices for accounting purposes "the one recorded in the accounts is not definitive as to value" and various other prices might, in practice, have been recorded.

Mr Lonergan noted Mr Bloom's reference to the independent report value of 21 to 25 cents per share, which he said was to be "in the foreseeable future", and that the shares "settled down to trade in the range of 14 cents to 17 cents" once "the immediate post takeover period was over". He was of the view that the true value of those shares was indicated by the longer term stock market trading value, rather than undiscounted prices that were achieved for just a very few days during the takeover period, and:- "Therefore although the shares were recorded as having been issued at 24 cents, for accounting purposes, in my view, this is not indicative of their value for purposes of assessing the benefit obtained by Beach." 
He formed the opinion that Grant Samuel was telling the shareholders of
Spargos that the Beach offer, even though significantly lower than the value
Grant Samuel put on Spargos, was the best alternative for them as there was little chance for them to recover any money by any other means. He considered that Grant Samuel was stating that the offer was not a commercially fair offer, whereas he said Mr Bloom stated, without offering any reasons, that it was "a fair commercial deal". He also made the point that if the shares were worth 24 cents Mr Bloom did not explain why they traded in the range of 14 to cents both before and after the takeover offer.

Mr Lonergan was not impressed by the price of 21.6 cents received for the 17 million shares, firstly, because it was the value to one particular recipient, which is not necessarily the same as the value to the issuer, and, secondly, because the date of the transaction was after the takeover offer, and therefore included the effect of the benefit received by Beach as a result of the takeover, which Mr Lonergan thought to be significant. Mr Lonergan compared the 11 per cent parcel of shares against the 40 per cent issued by
Beach "to a wide spread of shareholders for the Spargos takeover". Mr Lonergan also argued that the 11 per cent parcel may have had a strategic, i.e.
premium, value, rather than a discounted value for blockage, which possibility he suggested Mr Bloom appeared to have overlooked.

Mr Lonergan then considered Mr Bloom's view that there was a conflict between two conclusions, namely that Beach derived a benefit and that that benefit should not be taken into account in valuing its shares offered as consideration. He said that Mr Bloom was effectively saying that the value of what was issued or paid as consideration must include any benefit obtained by the acquiror in making the acquisition. He considered that logic was incorrect, which incorrectness could be demonstrated by considering a situation where an acquiror pays cash for shares in the target company and acquires the value of the underlying nett assets at a discount. He said:- "In this situation the fair value of the cash, being the purchase consideration, would not be increased to account for the benefit of the discount on underlying asset value." 
Mr Lonergan was of the view that the benefit only arose after the takeover, and did not form part of the cost to Beach of acquiring the Spargos assets. He continued:- "It is the cost of acquisition, in the form of shares issued, that is being measured, not the value of those shares to the Spargos shareholders after the takeover and including the benefits of the bid." 
Mr Lonergan then considered Mr Bloom's assessment of the value of the Spargos assets. He noted that Mr Bloom commenced from the statement of Mr Yue, who set forth figures showing the nett present value of those assets as at 18 February , at $10m.

This may have overstated what Mr Yue said in paragraph 6 of Exhibit E, which is referring to Exhibit "PSY 7" to his affidavit, which became part of Exhibit
L and which he described as a schedule he produced "in relation to the assets and liabilities of Spargos as at 18 February 1994". The schedule compared the values attributed to the assets and, after applying a discounting factor of .25 per cent for present value, showed the Grant Samuel value of between $16.04m and $18;.47m; the value after having regard to note 22(c) of the 1994
Beach accounts; the realisation dates; and the present value discounted by .25 per cent. Note 22(c) showed that the consideration for the acquisition was $10.560m and that the fair value of the nett assets of Spargos and its controlled entity was $14.804m from which there was a deduction for discount on acquisition, described as an off-set against the value of the non-monetary assets acquired, thus reducing the amount to $10.560m. Therefore Beach was not asserting any financial benefit.

In my opinion Mr Yue was setting forth various figures, rather than independent valuations. The consideration comprised, mainly, 43,080,475 ordinary 50 cent shares each fully paid and discounted to 24 cents each. Mr
Lonergan then sought to argue that the figures were not correct for various reasons. It was submitted that as Mr Yue's evidence was not challenged I should accept it. However, relevantly, it only set forth the figures of others, which were not otherwise proved.

Mr Lonergan applied what he said was a more realistic discount rate of between per cent to 20 per cent and he offered further justification for that approach.

Mr Lonergan argued that Beach was faced with two alternatives, namely to await the outcome of the appeal, which would mean it would receive in about two years time, taking the mid-point of Grant Samuel's range for convenience, $16.95m less the extent to which the assets were dissipated in the meantime; or taking over Spargos and receiving the benefit then, in which case they would make a gain of some $10.85m. They chose the latter course and, at a discount rate of 15 per cent based on $16.95m, and after adjusting for losses,
Mr Lonergan valued the assets, as at 31 December 1995, at $12.17m, which discounted to its present value at February 1994 was $9.2m, and after "dissipation" reduced to $7.75m.

Although the experts were cross-examined in some detail about the matter it became clear to me that there was a genuine and valid issue, based on their expertise, between them on this point. That, of course, does not acquit me of determining which view, I am satisfied, I should accept. In doing so there is no matter of credit to be taken into account. Rather it is necessary to determine which approach provides the more intellectually satisfying response.

The telling point, so far as I am concerned, is that rather than allow the appeal to go to a final decision Beach determined that it would make a takeover offer to seek to obtain the assets of Spargos, at a point where the
Spargos shareholders were not in any sort of a bargaining position and Grant
Samuel advised the offer was not fair. I do not think that I can assume that the directors of Beach did not take the view, in all the circumstances, that it was in the interests of Beach, from a financial point of view, to act as they did. In these circumstances the benefit to Beach must have been foreseen as a monetary difference between the "cost of acquisition" and the assets being acquired. Essentially for this reason, I have come to the view that the methodology adopted by Mr Lonergan is more likely to be correct because, if it were not, it is very difficult to see why, from a commercial point of view, the directors of Beach were undertaking this exercise at all. On the other hand, as Mr Bloom pointed out, the accounts did not purport to reflect the value of the Spargos assets acquired, but rather their cost, measured with reference to the fair value of the shares issued.

I am certainly satisfied that the value attributed to the shares by Mr
Lonergan is the more preferable and should be applied and, after giving the matter the best consideration I can, I am also of the opinion that his valuation of the assets is more likely correct. In those circumstances I would adopt the approach and conclusion for which Mr Lonergan contended. I do so on the basis that the onus of proof rests on ATRK.

Some Further Matters 
At the conclusion of the hearing the parties said they would consider whether agreement could be reached on some further matters. My Associate received a facsimile transmission from the solicitors for Beach on 8 December 1997. This referred to the following matters:- "1.1 Whether an error had been made by the experts in apportioning the costs of recoveries in the proceedings against Joelson Wilson between Beach and Claremont, by applying the terms of an agreement that was made in relation to G53 to the Joelson Wilson proceedings.
 .2 Whether credit should be given for a recover of $458,000 referred to in the 1997 Beach accounts, on account of the Garaweh transaction.
 .3 Whether further credit should be given for dividends totalling $106,080 in the bankrupt estate of Cummings." 
In response the solicitors for ATRK furnished written submissions to my
Associate in a letter dated 9 December 1997. I will leave both of these letters with the papers.

In relation to paragraph 1.1 Beach agreed an error had been made, as indicated by Mr Lonergan, and provided a revised schedule, which it asserted corrected the error. ATRK responded that it agreed with the revised total of $56,085,793 as assessed by Mr Morris after apportionment of costs.

In relation to paragraph 1.2 Beach acknowledged that the sum of $458,000 referred to in its 1997 accounts comprised $130,000 received on 26 September and $327,584.40 received on 23 October 1996. It asserted that the former sum was lent by Beach to the liquidator of Cortaus to fund the liquidation and that it was repaid on 26 September 1996. In these circumstances it was submitted this was not a "recovery". As to the latter sum, Beach conceded this was a recovery for which credit should be given.

ATRK agreed that the larger sum should be treated as a recovery and did not submit, as seems to me must be correct, that $130,000 should be treated in that way.

In relation to paragraph 1.3 it was submitted that dividends of $96,000 and $10,080 were due to Beach on 30 September 1994 and 8 December 1995 from the bankrupt estate of Mr Cummings and that they were paid into the trust account of his trustee in bankruptcy to enable further investigations to be carried out into the affairs of Mr Fuller and Mr Cummings, which occurred but without any beneficial result to creditors. Beach has submitted that as the funds were used in pursuit of further dividends they should not be set off in favour of
ATRK.

ATRK submitted that the use of $106,080 to investigate further the affairs of
Mr Fuller and Mr Cummings was "a matter entirely for" Beach, and did not change the status of those funds as recoveries of the G53 judgment. I think both positions are put too simplistically. Before I could determine the issue
I would need to know the reasonableness of pursuing those further investigations, which, prima facie, was dependent on the assessment of the likelihood of them producing more money in the bankrupt estates.

In the circumstances it is not necessary for me to assess interest, although I agree that if that had become necessary the sensible course would be to request Mr Morris and Mr Lonergan to do so.

Orders 
I order that:- 
The plaintiff's proceedings be dismissed; 
The plaintiff pay the defendants' costs; and 
The exhibits be returned at the expiration of twenty-eight (28) days unless within that time an appeal against this decision has been brought.
 * * * 
