

Ledgerwood versus Perpetual Trustee Company Limited (No 2) Matter No 3818/95 [1997] NSWSC 330 (25 August 1997) ` 
Ledgerwood versus Perpetual Trustee Company Limited (No 2)` `3818/95` `25 August 1997` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` /95 LEDGERWOOD versus PERPETUAL TRUSTEE COMPANY LIMITED (NO 2) 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: On 4 April 1997, I gave reasons as to why the plaintiff was entitled to have held on trust for her the property mentioned in clause 3 of the Will of Marion Pollock Bentley. Short minutes were brought in to carry out what I had decided and on 17 April 1997, I made orders 1, 2 and 3 in the short minutes, stood over the balance of the proceedings for further consideration and reserved my decision on the question of costs until after I had received written submissions. 
The submissions as to costs arrived in due course. Some of these submissions were accompanied by further affidavits, two from the residuary beneficiaries dealing with hardship they might suffer if an order for costs were made against them, and a third by the Trustee Company defendant explaining the circumstances in which a distribution was made.

Because there was no consent to this further material being read, my Associate notified counsel and the matter was relisted today. The admissibility of the further material was argued. I held that the material in the affidavits of the two beneficiaries was irrelevant, but I read the affidavit of the Trustee
Company officer, Mr Lapin, and I will take that into account in these proceedings.

The contents of the two affidavits which I rejected can be summed up by quoting Miss Anastasi's submission based on them: "Both residual beneficiaries are mature-aged people who, but for the legacy received, would not have expended the monies [distributed]. Had the 
Plaintiff commenced proceedings at an earlier time, the residuary beneficiaries would not have spent their legacy, to their detriment, ie if required to sell their house to pay it back." 
If this is true it is unfortunate, but I cannot see how hardship caused to a person who should pay costs is a relevant matter in declining to make an order for costs that is otherwise appropriate.

In my earlier judgment, I said that my predilection was to order that the costs of all parties on the appropriate basis come out of the estate, though there might be some argument as to from which part of the estate the costs should come. The way the suit was formulated was that the plaintiff, for whom
Mr Willmott appears, sued the Perpetual Trustee Company Limited, for whom Mr
Blackburn-Hart appears. The plaintiff also sued the persons originally named in the will as executors, the Messrs Osborne. The Trustee Company then lodged a cross claim naming the plaintiff as first cross defendant, the residuary beneficiaries, for whom Miss Anastasi appeared, as the second and third cross defendants, and the next of kin, for whom Mr d'Apice appears, as the fourth and fifth cross defendants.

The evidence of Mr Lapin, in his affidavit of 13 May 1997, is that a problem is about to occur because on 30 October, 1995 the Trustee Company made a distribution of the whole of the residuary estate except for $33,000. That was the sum estimated by Mr Lapin as being appropriate, but as things have turned out, it is not sufficient to pay the entire costs of all the parties to these proceedings as well as miscellaneous costs of the defendant Trustee Company.

The affidavit further shows that the plaintiff claims $23,410 costs plus the costs of the argument concerning costs. However, considering the relevant annexure to Mr Lapin's affidavit, part of those costs may be outside what would be allowed in any event. The residuary beneficiaries' costs are approximately $6,000 and the solicitors for the next of kin are also claiming $6,000 to $7,000 and the defendant Trustee Company itself is said to have incurred $24,000 in legal costs.

I must confess that I find the total bill of $60,410 for a case that was heard in half a day in the short notice list without any cross-examination or oral evidence is disturbing but there may well have been a lot of preparation and, indeed, no barrister or solicitor has made any submission to the effect that the quantum of costs is out of proportion to what might be expected.

Furthermore, it must be remembered that the plaintiff's success turned on Mr
Willmott, her counsel, preparing the case with so much care that he was able to find Irish decisions which made me come to the view that I should not follow the decision of the English court in Re Keen [[1937] Ch 236.] The matter is an extremely awkward one and there is no result that is going to be entirely satisfactory. This, however, does not relieve the court from dealing with the matter according to law and the guidelines which have been laid down for the exercise of discretion.

Mr Willmott submitted that, as the plaintiff had succeeded, she should be safeguarded as to costs so that if the proper order is that costs should be paid out of the estate, no part of those costs should be charged on the part of the estate which is referred to in paragraph 3 of the will.

Mr Willmott puts that it was the defendant Trustee Company who determined to make a distribution to make itself deficient as to funds, and it should be noted that the proceedings had already been begun when this distribution was made. Not only did the defendant fail to retain sufficient funds, it also did not ever allege that it had insufficient funds by way of any special plea. As the defendant is entitled to obtain the appropriate indemnities, there is no justification in making any order other than that the defendant pay the plaintiff's costs of the proceedings.

Mr Willmott also says that the extent to which the defendant relies on an advertisement of intended distribution of 1 July 1995 published pursuant to [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/s60.html) of the [Trustee Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/), <case> of the Wills [Probate and Administration Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/paaa1898259/) and [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/paaa1898259/index.html#p70) r 91 of the Supreme Court Rules, such advertisement could not protect the defendant from claims of which it had notice and the defendant did have notice of the present claim.

Mr Blackburn-Hart says that the general rule for this type of proceeding is that the costs come out of the general estate. He cites Pohlner versus Pfeiffer <case>; [(1964) 112 CLR 52], 71. He says that without notice at the hearing the plaintiff argued for the first time that the testatrix had created a half secret trust. This argument removed the suit from being a mere construction suit and displaced the ordinary rule that all costs should come out of the general estate. The proceedings were, thus, virtually adversarial proceedings.
Mr Blackburn-Hart acknowledges that ordinarily, in such circumstances, costs would follow the event.

However, he says that this would mean that, but for the failure to plead and but for the arrangement made between the Trustee Company and the solicitor for the next of kin, the next of kin and the residuary beneficiaries would be liable to pay the costs of the plaintiff and the Trustee Company to the extent that there may be a shortfall in the residuary funds held by the Trustee
Company. He says that when the main point in the case became the allegation of a half secret trust, the proceedings were really between the plaintiff and the residuary beneficiaries and the Trustee Company could, had it known, have filed a submitting appearance and let the parties fight out that issue between themselves. As a consequence, the fund in dispute should bear the burden of the costs and not the Trustee Company personally nor the residuary estate.

Even assuming (which Mr Blackburn-Hart asks me not to assume), that the
Trustee Company made a mistake in distributing too much, that would still not be a reason to deprive the Trustee Company of its costs; see Re Jones [[1897] 2 Ch 190], 197-8 and Turner versus Hancock [(1882) 20 Ch D 303], 305.

Mr Blackburn-Hart puts alternatively that if his submissions fail the residuary estate in the defendant's hands should pay first the Trustee
Company's costs, then the costs of the next of kin and then the plaintiff's costs. Once the residue is exhausted, the costs in that order should come out of the fund the subject of the proceedings.

Miss Anastasi submitted that, although the plaintiff was threatening litigation, she did not actually commence her proceedings until 5 October
This occurred after the notice of intended distribution was published.
On 13 September 1995, the Trustee Company had told the plaintiff that unless proceedings were commenced within 14 days, it would distribute the property in clause 3 as well and it was only this that moved the plaintiff to commence the proceedings.

She also submitted that, as things have turned out, the dispute was not over the estate but over the trust. The dispute was whether the defendant Trustee
Company held the property on trust for the plaintiff and these costs ought to come out of the trust.

Mr d'Apice submitted that his clients, the next of kin, should receive their costs on an indemnity basis from the residue of the estate and, indeed, they only consented to be joined on the basis that the defendant would consent to an order for the payment of their costs on the trustee basis. Mr d'Apice does not really mind out of which fund his clients get their costs.

In reply, the defendant Trustee Company says that any indulgence the defendant and the cross defendants gave the plaintiff by not insisting that the matter be adjourned at the cost of the plaintiff when the plaintiff changed her tack should not prejudice their rights. Had the half secret trust argument been pleaded or forecast when the summons was originally issued, the Trustee
Company could have sought judicial advice or an indemnity or filed a submitting appearance. Mr Blackburn-Hart reminds me that the Trustee Company did not distribute the fund in question, but distributed the residuary estate only and refers to Jacobs, Law of Trusts 6th ed. (Butterworths Sydney ) para 2104 at p 630.

One starts consideration of all questions of costs with <case> of the [Supreme
Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/), which makes costs in the discretion of the court. That discretion is, however, one to be exercised in accordance with the guidelines that have appeared in the cases over the last century because the court is a collegiate court and individual judges exercise discretions not according to their own feelings but according to the collective wisdom of the judges. Furthermore, this sort of case cannot be decided by appeal to some catch cry or by some precise classification of a case as a construction suit or adversarial proceedings.

There are some guidelines, which provide the start to the way to solve the problems in this case. One of the strongest guidelines is that successful plaintiffs almost never have an order for costs against them. The second is that successful plaintiffs usually are ordered to pay their own costs only where there has been conduct on the part of the plaintiffs which has induced the other parties to participate in the litigation to a greater extent than might otherwise have been the case.

In this case the only possible matter of this nature is the plaintiff's delay.
That has not been regarded as sufficient in the past and I do not believe that it is sufficient in the instant case.

Some play was made of the fact that the plaintiff had delayed making the claim until after a notice under <case> of the Wills [Probate and Administration Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/paaa1898259/) was published. It is true, as submitted by Mr Willmott, that publication of such a notice does not protect a trustee from claims of which it had notice. Mr
Willmott quoted as authority for that proposition Guardian Trust &
Executors Co of New Zealand Ltd versus Public Trustee of New Zealand <case>; [[1942]
AC 115.]
That, however, was a case where there was notice of an application to revoke the grant, rather than a claim against the estate. However, the proposition is correct. This is because [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/paaa1898259/s92.html) itself only protects the executor against claims of which he had no notice and a claim of which he has notice includes: "... not only claims received in response to the advertisement, but all claims of which the executor has notice up to the time of parting with the assets." 
Geddes Rowland & Studdert, Wills Probate and Administration Law in NSW (LBC Sydney 1996) p 605, and that proposition is well supported by authorities. 
If a trustee wishes to bar a claim of which it has notice, then it must proceed under <case> of the Wills [Probate and Administration
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/paaa1898259/), or as
Geddes Rowland & Studdert say at the same page, distribute the estate leaving claimants to pursue claims against the distributees. However, if this course is taken, the trustee would be wise to ensure that the distributees know that there is a possibility that they will be sued by the claimant and the trustee needs to plead plene administravit or plene administravit praeter.

In the instant case, the Trustee Company did neither of these things. It proceeded without, and it distributed without, taking the precaution of obtaining a barring order under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/paaa1898259/s93.html) and it distributed without putting on the special plea and, it would appear, without warning the beneficiaries who have spent the money which was distributed to them. Indeed, the fact that the Trustee Company's own costs and expenses exceed $20,000 would suggest that there was at least a clerical error in retaining only $33,000 in respect of the claim, but the Trustee Company's officer says that he made a proper assessment and there is not sufficient evidence to make a definite finding on this matter the other way.

The Trustee Company here is a professional trustee and so it must have known of the ordinary provisions of the law with relation to distribution in these circumstances.

The Trustee Company says, however, that the plaintiff changed tack at the last moment and converted what was a construction suit into adversarial proceedings. It says that had it had warning that this was to occur, it could have obtained judicial advice as to whether it should contest the matter or obtain an indemnity from the beneficiaries.

Various points can be made about that submission. The first is that the overall costs in any change of tack of the plaintiff were not increased.
Secondly, had the Trustee Company at that stage claimed an indemnity, the probabilities would have been that the monies given to the beneficiaries would have already been exhausted, and, thirdly, any judicial advice given in the light of the decision of Re Keen would be that the Trustee Company was justified in defending the proceedings. With professional trustees, courts do not adopt a "c-a-t" spells cat approach and point out to the trustee that it would be prudent to obtain an indemnity.

Thus, even accepting that the plaintiff changed tack at the last moment, it would not seem to me that this course radically alters what I should do in the case. It seems to me, in any event, that both the terms of the original summons and the amended summons are wide enough to cover the secret trust argument. It is one of the downsides of the summons procedure that often there can be trial by ambush, so I will accept that the defendants' counsel, and thus the defendants, were not attuned to the fact that the case was based on a half secret trust.

Ordinarily when there is a dispute as to the ownership of property and one person succeeds in that dispute and the other fails, there is an order that the winner gets his or her costs and the loser pays them. Where the property is in an estate and the reason for the dispute can be laid at the feet of the testator, then it is often appropriate that the representative of the testator pays everybody's costs and indemnifies itself out of the assets. Where the dispute is over a particular piece of property of the testator's, then often it is appropriate that the indemnity come out of that particular piece of property.

It is put in the instant case that the property in question never was the property of the deceased because it was held in trust for the plaintiff. This is incorrect. The property remained the property of the deceased but the beneficiaries to whom it was bequeathed held it on trust for the plaintiff.

The general guidelines having pointed me in the right direction, it is clear that the plaintiff must get her costs and Mr d'Apice's clients, the next of kin, must get their costs. The real question is against whom should they obtain their order? 
Miss Anastasi says that the costs should come out of the assets of the trust, not the assets of the estate. This is because she classifies the secret trust as never having been part of the estate. For reasons I have already given, this is not the correct way of looking at the matter.

Mr Blackburn-Hart, for the Trustee Company, puts that [s (3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/s93.html) of the [Trustee Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/) gives the court a discretion to charge that part of the trust property as in the opinion of the court, is the real subject matter of the proceedings. He then says that if there had been no residuary estate, the Trustee Company would have been entitled to its costs out of the items regardless of the outcome and that as a consequence, the fund in dispute should bear the burden of the costs of all the parties in the dispute. He referred to Elders Trustees Executors &
Agency Co Ltd versus Eastoe [[1963] WAR 36]; Moran versus House <case>; [(1924) 35 CLR 60] and the authorities referred to in paragraphs 1506 and 1508 in vol 17 of Halsbury's
Laws of England 4th ed.

With respect, these cases do not establish the proposition. The High Court in
Moran's case was dealing with an originating summons concerning realty only and by a two to one majority, it held that as the disposition of realty caused the difficulty, the real estate should bear the cost of clearing itself (p 67). This case has never been applied outside that situation; see eg Re
Mulcahy <case>; [[1969] VR 545], 554.

The ordinary guidelines are set out in the judgment of this court per Maughan
AJ in Perpetual Trustee Co Ltd versus Paling <case>; [(1924) 25 SR 56] at 60, where, having analysed all the cases, the court said: "I think that the whole trend of modern English decisions is in favour of the view that the costs should come out of residue ... and this, according to my experience, has been the rule applied in this Court in many unreported decisions and in at least one reported case ... . In several of these cases the subject matter was a pecuniary legacy, but the principle seems to me to be the same." 
See also Re Mulcahy at 555.

Once I have put hardship to one side, there is nothing in the circumstances of this case preventing application of the normal guidelines.

Accordingly, in my view the residue should bear the proper costs.

Thus, on the summons, the only order I make is that the costs of the plaintiff be paid by the defendant, the Perpetual Trustee Company Limited. The defendant
Trustee Company is entitled to indemnify itself out of the estate with respect to those costs and has sufficient monies to be able to do so.

So far as the cross claim is concerned, the costs of the next of kin, that is the fourth and fifth cross defendants, on the indemnity basis, and the costs of the plaintiff should come out of the retained fund, and if there is not enough in the fund, then should be paid by the second and third cross defendants, the residuary beneficiaries.

I would agree with Mr Blackburn-Hart's submissions that the defendant Trustee
Company is entitled to be indemnified for its proper costs out of the residuary estate. So far as its costs of administration are concerned, it would be entitled to charge commission under <case> of the [Trustee Companies
Act 1964](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/tca1964208/), subject to the court making an order to the contrary under <case> or <case> of that Act. If the Trustee Company cannot recover its fee from the residuary beneficiaries because they have spent what they have been given, then the
Trustee Company really only has itself to blame for not barring the claim under <case> before it distributed or making proper provision for the costs before it distributed. If the situation is that the residuary beneficiaries need to mortgage their homes in order to pay what is due to the Trustee
Company, then I am afraid all I can say is, so be it. But that may be a matter which needs to be considered if an application is made by the residuary beneficiaries under the [Trustee Companies
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/tca1964208/).

I believe I should order that the Trustee Company's costs come out of the residuary estate in respect of both the claim and the cross claim, but as it was the Trustee Company who had control over the fund and could have indicated the present problem well before it did, its costs should take priority after the plaintiff and the fourth and fifth cross defendants.

As the residuary beneficiaries are bearing the order for costs, there is no need to make any provision for their costs.
 * * * 
