

Tnt Australia Pty Ltd versus Janice Horne, Executrix of The Estate of The Late
Douglas Horne Nos. Ca 40258/94; Cc 5434/92 Workers' Compensation - Succession - Statutes [1995] NSWSC 99 (24 October 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
KIRBY P(1), PRIESTLEY JA(2) AND ROLFE AJA(3)
HRNG
SYDNEY, 7 June 1995 #DATE 29:6:1995 #ADD 24:10:1995 
Counsel for the Appellant:   J Poulos QC and R S Sheldon 
Solicitors for the Appellant:
Ebsworth and Ebsworth 
Counsel for the Respondent:   F L Wright QC and T M Rowles 
Solicitors for the Respondent: McClellands
ORDER
Appeal dismissed with costs
JUDGE1
KIRBY P This appeal from the Compensation Court of New South Wales (Duck CCJ) raises a short, but important question of law. It is whether the estate of a deceased worker is entitled, where the worker has survived but later died as a result of a compensable injury, to recover an award under [s 66](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) of the [Workers
Compensation Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/). Duck CCJ answered the question in the affirmative. The employer, a self-insurer, contests this conclusion. It has appealed to this
Court.
 
The agreed facts
For the purposes of the hearing at first instance, and the appeal to this
Court, there was no dispute concerning the relevant facts. Mrs Janice Horne (the respondent) was the applicant for compensation in the Compensation Court.
She is the widow of the late Mr Douglas Horne (the worker). He suffered injury in the course of, or arising out of, his employment with
TNT Australia Pty Ltd (the appellant) on 27 September 1990.
The subject injury resulted from the worker's fall either from the back of a truck or from a loading dock (it matters not) directly onto his head. The worker was taken to the Western Suburbs Hospital in Sydney. He there came under the care of Dr Peter Burke. Upon admission he was found to have no feeling below his neck. He was unable to breath without mechanical assistance.
Dr Burke diagnosed a transection of the spinal cord at the high cervical level. The worker was transferred to the Royal North Shore Hospital. In that hospital a final diagnosis of "C2-3 quadriplegia" was made. In consequence of his injuries and this condition, the worker was totally incapacitated for employment with the appellant from the date of his injury until the date of his death just short of five weeks later on 1 November 1990. During this time, the worker had a total loss of the efficient use of both arms and both legs consequent upon the quadriplegia.
On 28 May 1991, the Compensation Court found, by consent, that the worker had died as a result of his employment injury. No question ever arose that the worker had duly made a claim under the Act, within the time limited. It was found that the respondent was partially dependent upon the worker for support.
No other person was found to have been dependent. The amount of compensation payable under the Act for death benefits was found to be $120,000. That sum was paid.
However, by application for determination dated 12 May 1992, the respondent brought a claim in the Compensation Court in her capacity as executrix of the will of the deceased worker. By this application, she claimed a lump sum of $92,450 "in respect of total loss of function of both arms and both legs", together with interest. The appellant raised two defences but the only one ultimately pressed was that "the entitlement to benefits under [ss 66](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) and 67 of the Act do not accrue to the estate of the deceased worker".
 
The decision of the primary judge
Duck CCJ recited the facts. He considered the submissions of the appellant that the cause of death of the executrix did not pass to the worker's estate on the latter's death but died with him. He examined the scheme of the [Workers
Compensation Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/), as well as the provisions of the [Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1944](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1944404/). He mentioned previous authority of this
Court, particularly Schlenert versus H G Watson Contracting Co Pty Ltd [(1979) 1
NSWLR 140 (CA)] He pointed out that Schlenert had, in effect, affirmed the applicability in this jurisdiction of the approach of the House of Lords in United Collieries
Limited versus Simpson [(1909) AC 383 (HL).] He concluded that the answer to the appellant's submission was contained in the judgment of Hutley JA (with whom
Reynolds JA and
Samuels JA concurred) in Schlenert. Far from displacing the rule established in Schlenert, the substitution of the [Workers Compensation
Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) for the 1926 Act considered in Schlenert, had reinforced the holding in that case: "Under the 1987 Act an award pursuant to s. 66 is for substantially objective matters oven Building Company Pty
Ltd versus Burns. Court of Appeal 8 February 19-93). Subjective matters related to a loss claimed pursuant to s.66 are substantially dealt with in an award pursuant to s.67 provided the threshold is met. Section 67(5) expressly prohibits the recovery of an award for pain and suffering after the worker's death. That provision seems to me to echo the provisions in the [Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1944404/)
Furthermore, the express provision prohibiting the recovery of an award for Pain and suffering after the death of the worker leaves untouched the general law relating to s.66 benefits. This fact reinforces the approach foreshadowed in these reasons that the benefits under s. 66 survive."
In the light of this analysis Duck CCJ concluded that the executrix was entitled to bring the proceedings and to recover an award under <case> of the
Act. This is the conclusion which the appellant challenges in this Court. No procedural disqualification of the respondent executrix was suggested. No objection was taken to the final form of
Duck CCJ's award. The issue presented by the appeal was the substantive one, viz, whether the worker's undoubted entitlements to s 66 benefits before his death survived to his estate (and thus to his widow as executrix) or whether they were personal rights which had died with the worker. The appellant's arguments
The appellant' <case>, stripped to their essentials, were as follows:
The particular problem before the Court was not expressly dealt with by the [Workers Compensation Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/). Accordingly, the basic task before the
Court was to endeavour to derive the purpose of Parliament to be imputed to the legislature in the absence of clear statutory provisions. In doing this, the Court would have regard, in the usual way, to the express language of the
Act and to other relevant legislation as well as principles of the common law applicable by analogy. The Court would also take into account the arguments of legal principle and legal policy which favoured the competing approaches of the parties. But the starting point was that Parliament had not clearly provided for transmission of the worker's right to the worker's legal personal representative. it was suggested that, had Parliament intended such substantial rights to be transmitted upon death, it would have so provided; 
At common law personal actions for damages died with the deceased victim of a civil wrong. In order to reverse this common law rule, it was necessary to enact legislation. A United Kingdom Act of 1934 was eventually copied in this jurisdiction by the [Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1944](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1944404/). That
Act provided for the survival of "causes action" but upon conditions, and subject to exceptions, one of which was critical to the present case. The relevant terms of <case> of the 1944 Act read: "2(1) Subject to the provisions of this section, on the death of any person after the commencement of this Act all causes of action subsisting against or vested in him shall survive against, or, as the case may be, for the benefit of, his estate:...
 where a cause of action survives as aforesaid for the benefit of the estate of a deceased person the damages recoverable for the benefit of the estate of that person: -
 ...
 where the death of that person has been caused by the act or omission which gives rise to the cause of action, shall not include any damages for the pain or suffering of that person or for any bodily or mental harm suffered by him or for the curtailment of his expectation of life." 
The right which the worker enjoyed in his lifetime under the [Workers
Compensation Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) was a "cause of action" within the broad and undefined meaning of that term in <case> of the 1944 Act. See eg Green versus Lord Penzance [(1881) 6 AC 657 (HL)], 195; [(1953) 2 All ER 1296 ], 1298. But the claim for benefits under [s 66](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) of the [Workers Compensation
Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) was not included because, properly characterised, it was in the nature of a claim for "damages" of the kind excluded from survival by <case> of the 1944 Act. Haines versus Bendall <case>; [(1991) 172 CLR 60], 70 was referred to in order to emphasise that the "same purpose" was served both by payments under the Act and damages at common law. Each involved recompense or requital of the injured person. Each involved highly subjective determinations. See Jones
Brothers
Bus Company Pty Ltd versus Baker [(1991) 26 NSWLR 322 (CA)], 335. Each was within the purpose of the reforms introduced by the [Workers Compensation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/). Thus, where <case> of the Law Reform Act excluded "damages" of the defined type from survival to the benefit of the estate of the deceased person, it excluded benefits under <case> of the Act. Adopting such a construction did not do violence to the survival legislation.
On the contrary, it gave effect to its purposes. These included the exclusion from survival of the obligations of a person, otherwise liable, for wrongs personal to the injured party. Cf Haines, 71; Skelton versus Collins <case>; [(1966) 115 CLR 94], 130; 
Adopting this approach was also more consonant with the overall scheme of the [Workers Compensation Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/). It was an Act which provided for the compensation of workers and, upon their death from a compensable injury, specified compensation to their dependants. It was not an Act for the compensation of estates nor for the benefit of the variety of persons who might be nominated by the will of a deceased worker to receive his or her bounty. Such persons might, or might not, be dependants of the worker.
They could no more gain the benefit of [s 66](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) payments than they could other lump sums or weekly payments reserved to the worker and the worker's dependants. To compensation the estate in such a way defied the overall objectives of the
Act; 
To the extent that the Act did expressly provide for the transmission of rights from a deceased worker to the worker's estate, it strictly limited the rights that would survive. Thus <case> provides, relevantly: "273 (1) Compensation under this Act or the former Act: ...
does not pass to any other person by operation of the law, nor shall any claim be set off against that compensation.

Subsection (1) has no effect to the extent to which (but for this subsection) it would operate to prevent: ...
the passing of accrued vested rights of a deceased worker to the legal personal representative." 
The appellant placed emphasis upon the double adjectival expression "accrued vested rights". Only if "accrued" rights of a deceased worker had "vested" could they survive and pass to that worker's legal personal representative.
The use of "vested" imported a notion additional to "accrued". It implied an actually ascertained and enforceable right which was not conditional or uncertain in any way. It thus excluded any accrued right of the deceased worker in this case because, prior to his death, no action had been taken by the worker to have the exact quantification of his "accrued rights" under [s 66](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) ascertained, quantified and thus "vested" by the procedures contemplated by the Act, viz the making of an award by the Compensation
Court. See the Act, s and [Compensation Court Act 1984](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/cca1984225/), [s 15(1).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/cca1984225/s15.html) Thus, even assuming that otherwise "accrued" rights might pass to a deceased worker's legal personal representative (contrary to argument 2 above), the rights presently claimed under <case> of the Act could not pass because they were not "vested" at the date of the worker's death; 
In addition to the foregoing, various arguments of legal principle and policy were urged to suggest the inconvenience of the conclusion to which the primary judge had come:
It would involve double compensation, at least in most cases, to the dependants of a deceased worker. Not only would they receive death benefits (as the widow had here) but they would also be entitled, if beneficiaries, to <case> sums surviving from the worker to his or her estate;
Such sums, of their nature, were intended to be a "comfort" for living workers and not a benefit for those taking under their estates.
Although in the instant case the legal personal representative, and beneficiary of the will, was the worker's widow, the ruling sought had to be tested by its applicability to a case where a worker left no dependants and by will disposed of an estate in favour of idiosyncratic charities.
Why, it might be asked, should such bodies take under a [Workers
Compensation Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) designed generally for workers and their dependants?
Death rarely, if ever, results instantaneously from an employment injury. Death is normally a process. A worker might survive one day, one hour or less. The notion of excluding the worker's estate from recovery of [s 66](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) benefits if death from the compensable injury were exactly instantaneous but permitting recovery if death followed one day, one hour or less after injury pointed up the unsuitability of accepting the survival of such causes of action based on "accrual".
Had Parliament meant them to survive it would have expressly said so; 
To the extent that the previous decision of this Court in
Schlenert appeared to stand in the way of the appellants argument, it put two propositions. The first was that the decision in Schlenert and other cases before and since which have followed or assumed a similar principle were distinguishable.
Two bases of distinction were suggested.
The first was that, in Schlenert, the deceased worker did not die as a result of the employment injury but from a cause independent of that injury. The second was that under the
Workers' Compensation Act , <case> the definition of "worker" included: "(2) Any reference to a worker who has been injured shall, where the worker is dead, include a reference to his legal personal representative or to his dependants, or other person to whom or for whose benefit compensation is payable." 
No such provision appears in the 1987 Act, suggesting that the right defined by reference to the use of the word "worker" died with the worker and did not survive to the benefit of his legal representative. Alternatively, the appellant sought leave to reargue the correctness of the decision in Schlenert and of cases which have followed it or assumed it to be correct. It was acknowledged that the decision had stood for a significant interval of time during which the 1926 Act had been replaced by the 1987 Act. The latter arguably accepted the correctness of Schlenert and certainly desisted from an express change in the law. But the appellant urged that Schlenert was wrongly decided, had failed to consider important arguments of basic legal principle and had resulted in a distortion of the Act which this Court should now, belatedly, repair. The addition of <case> benefits in the 1987 Act afforded the opportunity to rethink the principle in Schlenert in circumstances of great practical consequence with very large economic implications if the holding in
Schlenert could not be distinguished. The Court was asked to overrule it.
 
A lone line of authority supports the award
I hope that the foregoing summary of the submissions for the appellant will demonstrate the arguability of this case. If the Court were approaching the question upon a completely blank page of legal authority, the appellant's case would be even more powerful than I have indicated. However for a number of reasons I am not persuaded that the appellant has shown that Duck CCJ erred in entering his award in favour of the executrix. My reasons are as follows: 
First, it is necessary to trace the long line of authority which supports the fundamental principle of survival of accrued rights to statutory workers' compensation benefits in favour of the worker's estate. The principle was first accepted as long ago as 1909 in a Scottish appeal to the House of Lords.
The case concerned the Workmen's Compensation Act 1906 (UK). See the United
Collieries Ltd versus Simpson [(1909) AC 383 (HL).] Mr Simpson, employed by the appellants, was knocked down by a wagon in the course of his employment on 9
July 1907. He died of his injuries on 14 July 1907. His mother asserted dependency on him. But she also died on 16 October 1907 without making any claim on the appellants. Her executrix made a claim in December 1907 as representative of the mother's estate. The appellants raised the defence that the personal action arising from the worker's injuries had died with the deceased. The Scottish Court of Session held that the claim was to be admitted in law. The House of Lords, with Lord Dunedin dissenting, agreed. 
Lord Macnaghten, at 391, rejected the attempt to introduce into the claims to entitlements under workers' compensation legislation the common law maxim actio personalis moritur cum persona: "The application of that maxim is limited to actions in which remedy is sought for a tort, or for something which involves, at any rate, the notion of wrong-doing. Liability under the
Workmen's Compensation Act has no connection with any wrong-doing on the part of the employer. It does not result from any neglect or any default on his part. Indeed, in the case of death or 'serious and permanent disablement' the event may be the consequence of 'serious and wilful misconduct' on the part of the workman while the employer is wholly free from blame, and yet compensation may be recoverable all the same." 
The employer being wholly without fault his Lordship complained that it was not altogether satisfactory to his mind that compensation should be payable.
He considered the amount of compensation to which she became entitled (and to which her executrix was now entitled) of at least L150 (which sum might possibly be increased to L300) to be "a large measure" involving "a startling result". These very expressions of misgiving, even mortification, indicate that his Lordship was not exactly favourable to the merits of the claim by the mother's legal personal representative. It implies that he was driven to it by his understanding of the worker's accrued legal right which passed to his mother and, upon her death, to her estate. This followed simply from the plain words of the
Act and the operation of the law of succession to property. one gets the distinct impression that if Lord Macnaghten could properly have reached the contrary view, he would have readily done so. His speech was concurred in by Lord James of Hereford. Lord Loreburn
LC and Lord Shaw of
Dunfermline reached the same result. In doing so, they disagreed with the
Irish Court of Appeal which, in O'Donovan v Cameron, Swan and Co(1901) 2 IR (CA), had applied the actio personalis principle to statutory workers' compensation benefits.
There is therefore no doubt that their Lordships considered, and rejected, the foundation principle urged upon this Court by the appellant. This decision has stood for nearly a century;
The workers' compensation legislation of this Sate was substantially modelled, both in the 1926 Act and in its predecessors, upon the United
Kingdom Act which was the subject of the House of Lord's decision in Simpson.
In 1930, a question arose as to when a right under the Workers' Compensation
Act 1926 accrued to a worker. The answer to the question was important because of an amendment to the Act governing entitlements to compensation and damages.
The Full
Court of the Supreme Court of this State held, in Stevens versus The
Railway Commissioners for NSW <case>; [(1930) 31 SR 138 (FC)], that the worker's right "accrued" immediately upon the happening of the injury. At that instant, the worker had an accrued entitlement to have compensation determined in accordance with the then existing law. A later amending Act, not retrospective in its terms, did not interfere with the accrued right of the worker. He or she was entitled to be paid the amount which had already accrued. The argument recorded in the report (see ibid 138, 139) shows the alternating use by counsel of the verbs "vest" and "accrue" when describing the acquisition by the worker of his entitlements under the Act. Ferguson J (with whom James and
Stephen JJ concurred), at 143 observed: "In my opinion ... there was an accrued right to the workman immediately on the happening of the injury to have his compensation determined in accordance with the then existing law, and the Court should not interpret the amending Act as interfering with that right unless the words are so framed that no other reasonable interpretation is possible." 
Upon this reasoning, the deceased worker in the present case likewise enjoyed an "accrued right" immediately on the happening of his injury to have his compensation determined. The fact that, by pre-occupation with his medical problems, he did not live long enough to enforce that "accrued right" (as theoretically he might by high expedition of his claim and an urgent hearing) did not affect the character of the right. It had "accrued" to him, in the sense that it was available. It had "vested" in him as a legal entitlement. It had simply not been quantified and enforced. But these deficiencies were unimportant to the nature of the "right" for succession law. The right which had "accrued" was a right of property which passed upon the worker's death, as any other right in the nature of a statutory chose in action, to the legal personal representative. It would require clear disentitling legislation to take that right away from the estate to which it had passed;
The line of authority was extended and applied in Schlenert (above) in a short and clear judgment written by Hutley JA. It is proper to say that his
Honour was an acknowledged expert in the law of succession, a subject which he taught to generations of lawyers at the University of Sydney. He was not, therefore, likely to overlook the fundamental principles of this branch of the law. In Schlenert, at 142, Hutley JA dismissed the suggestion that the definition or provision in s 6(2) of the 1926 Act (see above) provided the answer to the question of survival of a worker's right there in issue. Hutley
JA held, in effect, that the section had no apparent purpose. I consider that this statement, rather than any intended withdrawal of the rights of legal personal representatives, to be the true explanation of the deletion of <case> from the 1987 Act. Hutley JA explained (at 142): "Rights given to legal personal representatives are construed as though they were derivedfrom the deceased, and such representatives are made accountable as such; National Trustees
Executors and Agents and Co of Australia Ltd versus Federal
Commissioner of Taxation <case>; [(1954) 91 CLR 540] 
The vested rights given by the Workers' Compensation Act are transmissible on death, except where the statute otherwise provides, eg <case>. Their nature was authoritatively determined by the House of Lords in United Collieries Lid v
Simpson [(1909) AC 383], Lord Dunedin dissenting. Of them,
Lord Shaw said: 'I have already stated my opinion that the right of the dependant is correlative lo the liability of the employer, and if the liability of the employer be of the nature of a debt, the right of the dependant is that of a creditor in such debt ... It would be strange if a liability is so little personal in the employer's case that it transmits against his insurers and against his bankrupt estate, and yet that the corresponding right should be so completely personal to the dependant of the workman that is forms no part of the dependant's executory estate"' 
It is clear that Hutley JA approved the principle so stated in Simpson. He adopted it for workers' compensation law in this State. Schlenert is a holding of this Court binding upon us. It has stood for sixteen years. In the interim the Act has been wholly rewritten and a new statute enacted. This is a reason to withhold leave to reargue the point for it will generally be accepted that
Parliament, in rewriting such legislation, would have acted upon the basis that the law on succession to accrued compensation rights was as stated in this Court in Schlenert. Against the background of Simpson and Stevens, such a
Parliamentary presumption might reasonably be accepted in a case such at this.
 
Statutory amendments and other considerations support the award
Specific provisions of the 1987 Act tend to affirm that Parliament acted upon the basis that accrued rights to compensation did vest in and pass to a worker's legal personal representative. Thus Parliament re-enacted the one case where the statute provided otherwise under the 1926 Act, to which
Hutley
JA referred in Schlenert (at 142). The equivalent provision of <case> in the Act is <case> of the 1987 Act. In effect it precludes dependants from recovery who die before a claim is made: "29(7) If a dependant dies: before a claim under this Division is made, or if a claim has been made, before an agreement or award has been arrived at or made, the legal personal representative of the dependant has no right to payment of compensation, and the amount of compensation shall be calculated and apportioned as if that dependant has died before the worker." 
The expressio unius rule of statutory construction must be applied with caution. See eg Houssein and Anor versus The Under Secretary, the Department of
Industrial Relations and Technology
NSW and Anor <case>; [(1982) 148 CLR 88], 94.
However, the assumption upon which <case> appears to have been written is clearly enough that, but for its terms, the legal
Personal representative of the dependant would have the right referred to, a consideration mentioned by
Hutley JA in Schlenert. This is not all. Critically, the claim of the executrix to the deceased's accrued entitlement to benefits under <case> of the Act is dealt with by <case> of the Act. It will be remembered that <case> is the equivalent to the former <case> under the 1926 Act, although substantially enlarged and changed. Section 67 is a wholly novel provision entitling workers to compensation for pain and suffering.
Section 67(5) expressly provides: "67(5) Compensation under this section is not payable after the death of the worker concerned." 
There is no such equivalent provision in <case> of the Act. By juxtaposition of these sections with their differentiated provisions, it is difficult to escape the conclusion that claims of the kind referred to in <case>, being highly personal and subjective to the worker concerned, are extinguished at the worker's death. Claims of the more objective kind provided by <case> survive the worker's death - just as they have for a very long time before the 1987 Act under the authority of Simpson, Stevens and Schlenert. 
The foregoing argument is also confirmed by the terms of <case> of the 1987
Act, set out above. This provides an exception to the passage by operation of law of compensation rights under the Act. It provides that "accrued vested rights" of the deceased worker do pass to the legal Personal representative.
This express provision is fundamentally inconsistent with the basic proposition of the appellant that rights under the Act are wholly personal, akin to damages, and thus extinguished by the worker's death. It is true that the addition of the word "vested" creates a difficulty for it must be assumed that it was intended to add something to the adjective "accrued". But, like "accrued", it is an adjective qualifying "rights". It describes the character of the "rights". 
It is not convincing to suggest that such "rights" change their character according to whether they have, by the accidents of litigation, been heard, computed and determined by an award. There is no clear provision to that effect in the Act. The logic of Simpson, Stevens and Schlenert is that the rights of the workers accrue at the moment of happening of the "jurisdictional fact" of injury. Quantification and precise calculation may take time. But the right is then "accrued and vested". 
Clearly, the word "vested", where used in s of the Act is not used in a technical sense. Originally, that word was confined to a reference to real estate only. But as applied to estates in land, to "vest" signified the acquisition of a portion of the actual ownership or feudal possession of the land. Later, in the language of conveyancers, to "vest" connoted indefeasibility of the acquired interest. See eg Re Ware [(1890) 45 Ch D 269.]
In other contexts, "vest" has been taken simply to mean "payable immediately".
See eg Re Norton [(1949) LJR 568.] But generally in statutes it is taken to mean no more than "to give the property in". See Coverdale versus Charlton [(1879) 48
LJQB 128 (CA)], 132 (per Brett MR). By this standard, the worker certainly had an accrued proprietary interest in his <case> entitlement at the time of his death. Thus, it had accrued to him and also "vested" in him. 
The importance of the disqualification in <case> for the transmission of the deceased worker's entitlement to benefits for pain and suffering was emphasised by this Court in Bresmac Pty Ltd versus Starr [(1992) 29 NSWLR 318 (CA)],
That case had some parallels to the present. The employment injury in
October 1988 caused the worker to suffer quadriplegia.
He later died in
January 1991. The primary judge awarded the executor what he took to be the worker's entitlement under ss 60, 66 and 67. The employees appeal to this
Court succeeded, in part, in relation to the claim under <case>. This was deleted. But the other entitlements were confirmed. The opinion of Priestley
JA was, in this respect, concurred in by Handley JA and Sheller JA (at 334).
In reaching his conclusion that the executor could recover under the sections named, Priestley JA (at 327) relied upon Stevens and on Kraljevich versus Lake View and Star Ltd <case>; [(1945) 70 CLR 647], 202f,
In Fisher (at 202) Kitto and Menzies JJ emphasised two principles of a general character which support the approach of the primary judge in this case. The first is a presumption against construing legislation so that it interferes with accrued rights and liabilities. This principle has two aspects, each applicable to the present case. The first is that the worker, having survived for a time and having made a claim which is disputed, undoubtedly had an accrued right in his lifetime to benefits under the [Workers
Compensation Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/), including under [s 66.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) In order to be deprived of those rights, so that they would not pass to his estate, some provision of the law (either a specific statutory exemption like [s 66(5)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) or a general disqualifying provision of the Act or of the common law) would be needed to take that accrued right away. It was a right in property, which like any other chose in action passed to the legal personal representative. There being no clear provision in the Act to disentitle the worker's estate of that accrued right, nor any rule of the common law, the general presumption would be that it passed, to his executrix, as other property interests did, upon the worker's death. See Maxwell versus Murphy <case>; [(1957) 96 CLR 261], 637f. Secondly, if this was the position established under workers' compensation law prior to 1987 by the long line of authority to which I have made reference, it might have been expected, were the intention of Parliament to deprive workers of such rights, that such intention would have been expressed clearly. It was not. On the contrary, several provisions in the Act (mentioned above) suggest Parliaments intention to affirm the survival of at least some compensation rights and their transmission after the worker's death to the worker's estate. Generally, although not always, in the case of "workers" under the Act, the beneficiaries of the estate would be the dependants of the worker. In response to the suggestion that this might sometimes amount to a "windfall" to charities which are strangers to the objects of workers' compensation statutes, the answer comes back. Why should the employer secure a "windfall" of the accrued property interests of the worker? At least why should the worker's property rights be lost in the absence of clearly stated disqualifying provisions under the 1987 Act? and
Several final general considerations might be mentioned. All of them support the respondent's case:
Having regard to the amendment of the legislation and the passage of the 1987 Act, if a new disqualifying entitlement is to be produced, reversing in effect the law which has stood on the subject since the House of Lords spoke in 1909, it is the work of Parliament and not of the Court. If Parliament is to reverse such a long line of legal authority it should do so clearly;
Generally, workers' compensation legislation is to be construed beneficially to uphold, in case of ambiguity, the entitlements of the worker and not to take such entitlements away;
Although not a precise parallel, the conclusions reached by the primary judge in respect of rights conferred by this statute is more consistent than is the submission of the appellant with the approach taken by this Court in respect of the survival of rights conferred by other beneficial statutes.
See eg Managing Director, New South Wales Technical and
Further Education Commission v Fines and Anor [(1993) 32 NSWLR (CA):] a case concerning survival rights of a deceased appellant under the [Government and Related Employees Appeal
Tribunal Act 1980](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/gareata1980458/). Cf Felton (formerly Oser) versus Oser [(1969) SR 24 (CA)], 101.
 
The estate receives deceased worker's accrued vested rights to <case> benefits
Upon the foregoing analysis, it is not strictly necessary to consider whether leave should be given to reargue the holding in Schlenert. Nor is it really necessary to consider the applicability of <case> of the Law Reform
Provision Act 1944. Schlenert was, in my view, rightly decided. It has stood for a long time. It reflects a much older principle which has been regularly applied. Without authority of legislation, its holding should not now be reopened. Section 2 of the 1944 Law Reform Act does not need to be considered because, on the authority of Schlenert the "cause of action", if it may be so described, passes to the legal representative by force of the general law attaching to the accrued and vested rights of the worker under the [Workers Compensation Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/). Those rights, not having been extinguished by the actio personalis principle, they are in no need of statutory survival provisions under the 1944 Art. Upon this view, it is not necessary to determine whether the "cause of action" of the worker was, or was analogous to, "damages", excluded from survival by [s 2(2)(d)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s2.html) of that Act. If it had been necessary to decide the point, I would not have been inclined to assimilate statutory workers' compensation entitlements, which have accrued and vested, with damages as referred to in <case>(d) of the 1944 Act. Whilst there are some similarities, there are important differences. Amongst others, those mentioned by Lord Macnaghten in Simpson and quoted above stand out. The statutory rights which accrue are distinct from the common law right which they were intended to replace and exclude. The same result might thus have been arrived at by the application of <case> of the 1944 Act. But I will not consider whether this is so. I prefer to rest my conclusion upon the bases set out above.
I acknowledge that, in cases of very short survival of a worker (shorter even than in this case), the accrual and vesting of rights which pass to the worker's estate present certain apparent anomalies. Yet, there would be equal anomalies in the deprivation of accrued rights which may have accumulated over the year and more before the worker's death and be pending the final resolution of disputed claims before the Compensation Court, and perhaps beyond. The suggestion that an award of that Court is necessary for a "vested" right is unconvincing. Although many claims under <case> of the 1987 Act must be determined by the Compensation Court, this is not universally so. The Act does not universally require it. To the contrary, the [Workers Compensation Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) confers rights. Those rights are merely enforced by proceedings in the
Compensation Court.
Some claims, such as the total loss of an eye (or one might say cases similar to the present) involve no necessity of litigation at all. The provision of a court and of an award constitute machinery for the quantification and enforcement of disputed claims. But the "right" rests upon the entitlements expressed in the [Workers Compensation Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/). For a very long time it has been held that such right accrues to the worker upon the happening of the injury. I would also hold that it is at that time that the right "vests" for the purposes of <case>(b), at least in a case such as the present. The accrued and vested right is therefore available to pass to the worker's legal personal representative upon the worker's death. The passage of s 273 (2)(b) of the Act suggests acceptance of this proposition by the drafter and particular attention to the rather esoteric legal problem of succession law mentioned by Hutley JA in Schlenert at 142F. Once again, this confirms the conclusion that in enacting the 1987 Act, with its provisions for lump sums under <case>, Parliament should be taken to have operated on the basis of the law expressed in Schlenert. Cf Public Service Association of New South Wales and Anor versus Industrial Commission of New South Wales and Anor [(1985) 1 NSWLR (CA)] 640.
If for economic or other reasons to do with the limitation of recovery under workers' compensation law, Parliament now wishes to take away such a long established right of workers it and not the Court, should do so. And it should do so clearly.
 
Orders
The appeal should be dismissed with costs.
JUDGE2
PRIESTLEY JA I agree generally with what Kirby P has written in this appeal, but since there is one point on which I wish to say something and since that requires a little explanation of United Collieries Limited v Simpson [(1909) AC ], I will briefly state the essentials of my own opinion.
In United Collieries the House of Lords considered a question concerning the transmissibility to the estate of a dependant of a deceased workman of the right to make a claim under the Workmen's Compensation
Act for compensation the dependant was entitled to claim during her lifetime. The answer to the question depended upon the terms of the United Kingdom legislation. A majority in the House of Lords held the right was transmissible, Lord Dunedin dissenting. In arriving at this decision each judge (except Lord Dunedin) took essentially the same view as Lord Macnaghten about the question when it was that entitlements in general arose under the legislation: "... the liability falls upon the employer on the happening of the accident. It is the accident and nothing else which creates the liability. Is the liability contingent upon a claim being made? ... I do not think it is." (at 393)
Workers' compensation legislation in New South Wales, although not identical with the United Kingdom legislation, closely followed it in many respects. Appellate courts in this State, after considering United
Collieries, reached the same position on the New South Wales Workers' Compensation Act on the time of liability question as the House of Lords had done in United
Collieries : Stevens versus Railway Commissioners for New South Wales <case>; [(1930) 31 SR (Full]
Consideration of <case> of the New South Wales [Workers Compensation Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) in the light of those decisions, together with <case>, [s 151A(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s151a.html) and s (2)(b) of the 1987 Act, leads me to think that Duck CCJ's decision in the present case was correct.
The particular point I wish to mention concerns the use in <case>(b) of the words "accrued vested rights". I agree with Kirby P's interpretation of the words. It is apparent from the use of the word "vested" by Lord Loreburn
LC at 389 in United Collieries Limited and the reference by Lord Macnaghten at to the word "accrued" in <case> of the United Kingdom Act, that those judges were treating the words as, in the context, interchangeable: see also the use of the word "vested" in the reported argument at 386.5, 387.3, 387.6, 387.8, and 388.2.
Another example of experienced lawyers using the words as if they bore substantially the same meaning appears in the argument reported in
Stevens at 138-9.
When these references are taken together with another way that Lord
Macnaghten put it, also at 393: "The Act itself treats the liability as a subsisting liability from the very moment of the accident and as a present right.", it seems to me that the best explanation of the use of the two words "vested" and "accrued" in <case>(b) is that it was an adoption of the language of lawyers used over the years in relation to such rights, with no intention of adding some additional characteristic to the rights transmissible under the Act, beyond what the position was under the earlier Act. I feel strengthened in this opinion by the great difficulty I have in understanding how any significantly different meaning could be ascribed to the two words, except by an arbitrary choice - arbitrary in the sense that no reason can be found either in context or any general usage for any particular distinction, and the only reason for choosing different meanings is that two words are used.
In my opinion the appeal should be dismissed with costs.
JUDGE3
ROLFE AJA On 27 September 1990 Mr Douglas Horne, ("the worker"), fell some distance in the course of his employment with the appellant. He suffered serious personal injuries, which rendered him a quadriplegic as a consequence of which he suffered a total loss of the efficient use of both arms and both legs. He was hospitalised immediately and remained in hospital until his death on 1 November 1990. On 28 May 1991 the Compensation Court found, by consent, that he died as a result of his employment injury; that his wife, the respondent, was partially dependent upon him for support; that no other person was so dependent; and that the amount of compensation payable to the respondent by virtue of her partial dependency was $120,000. That has been paid.

On 12 May 1992 the respondent brought a claim in the Compensation Court, in her capacity as executrix of the worker's will, seeking $92,450 "in respect of total loss of function of both arms and both legs", interest and ancillary orders. The appellant defended the proceedings on the ground, ultimately, that the entitlement to benefits under [s.66](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) of the [Workers Compensation Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/), ("the Act"), "do not accrue to the estate of the deceased worker". Duck CCJ rejected this submission and the appellant appeals against that decision.
 
The Construction Of The Act
The determination of the issue whether the entitlement to benefits under s.66 accrues to the estate of the deceased worker depends, in my opinion, upon a proper construction of the Act.
Section 273 provides:- "(1) Compensation under this Act or the former Act: is not capable of being assigned, charged or attached; and does not pass to any other person by operation of law, nor shall any claim be set off against that compensation.

Sub-section has no effect to the extent to which (but for this sub-section) it would operate to prevent: the satisfaction of an obligation by the worker to maintain another person pursuant to an order of a Court of competent jurisdiction; or the passing of accrued vested rights of a deceased worker to the legal personal representative."
The section is headed "Non-Assignability of Compensation". The purpose of sub-s.(1) is, in my view, clear. It is to prevent compensation passing from a person entitled to it under the Act in satisfaction of financial claims others may have against the injured worker; i.e. compensation is intended to be used for the purpose for which it was awarded, namely to compensate the worker entitled thereto as contemplated by the Act. Sub-section (2) creates two exceptions. Firstly, it provides that sub-s.(1) does not prevent compensation being used to satisfy an obligation of the worker to maintain another person pursuant to a specified order for maintenance and, more relevantly for present purposes, it does not prevent "the passing of accrued vested rights of a deceased worker to the legal personal representative".
Were it not for this exception compensation would not pass to any other person, which would include a legal personal representative, by operation of law.
The meaning of the words "accrued vested rights" are critical to the determination of this appeal because they determine what "rights" pass to the legal personal representative. It is appropriate in considering their meaning to have regard to the whole of s.273, which proceeds on the basis that there will be or has been an award of compensation. If there will not be or has not been an award there is nothing capable of being assigned, charged or attached, nor of passing to any other person by operation of law, nor of satisfying the obligation referred to in s.273(2)(a). Section 273(1)(b), the words "nor shall any claim be set off against that compensation", and s.273(2)(a) particularly suggest that an award has been made. For reasons I shall give I consider s.273(2)(b) creates the same concept. Arguably s.273(1)(a) may apply before an award is made, but it contemplates that will happen.
In the light of these provisions it is appropriate to consider the meaning of the words "accrued vested rights".
It is well understood in the law relating to workers' compensation that upon a person sustaining an injury in the course of his/her employment rights to seek compensation under the legislation "accrue". It may also be said that at that point such rights "vest", the words, in this context, being used interchangeably. At the stage of being injured the worker has an inchoate right to compensation. At the time of a worker's death dependants have a similar right. It may be that there can be little argument in many cases but that the right will fructify into either an enforceable agreement whereby the employer, or its insurer, agrees to pay compensation to the worker or dependant(s), or an award for compensation made by the Court. However, until there is agreement or an award the right remains nothing more than an accrued right. The question then is what the legislature intended by the use of the word "vested". In some circumstances, as I have said, that word may be used as synonymous with "accrued" so that the legislature, perhaps, could have said sensibly "accrued rights" or "vested rights", if it was only intending to refer to the rights which arise upon a worker's injury or death occurring.
However, the legislature chose to use both words, which I agree are adjectival and describe "rights". The word "vested" is apt to describe a right, which was previously accrued in the sense to which I have referred, but which has become vested, in the sense that the worker or his dependant no longer has to rely on the fact of injury or death as providing entitlement to compensation, but may rely on the right to a monetary sum, i.e. compensation, flowing from an agreement or an award, which is enforceable as such. When one bears in mind that the section is talking about "compensation" which, for the reasons I have given, must mean compensation payable to the worker by virtue of an agreement or an award, the words "accrued vested rights", which take their meaning from s.273, sweep up in the one concept those rights which have accrued by virtue of the injury and which have become vested, in the sense to which
I have just referred, by virtue of an agreement or an award. Therefore, in my opinion, what passes to the legal personal representative is the right to enforce the agreement or award the deceased worker obtained in his/her lifetime, and not the right to bring proceedings in respect of the right which accrued to the deceased worker in his/her life-time, but which did not vest in consequence of an agreement or an award.
As it is at least arguable that the circumstances suggested in s.273(1)(a) could apply before the reaching of an agreement or the making of an award, although they could not operate until one of those events the legislature, in my opinion, was stating clearly the situation which would have to obtain before any rights passed to the legal personal representative. I agree that the words "accrued" and "vested" are adjectives qualifying "rights" and describe the character of the "rights". The question is the meaning to be attributed to them. In the draft judgment of the President, which I have had the advantage of reading, his Honour said:- "It is not convincing to suggest that such 'rights' change their character according to whether they may have, by the accidents of litigation, been heard, computed and determined by an award. There is no provision to that effect in the
Act.
The logic of Simpson, Stevens and Schlenert is to the effect that the rights of workers accrue at the moment of the happening of the 'jurisdictional fact' of injury. Quantification and precise calculation may take time. But the right is 'accrued and vested'."
His Honour acknowledges the difficulty of giving the same meaning to the words "accrued" and "vested" in the context of s.273. He resolves it by deciding each means "accrued" in the way I have used that word in these reasons. "Vested", therefore, has no other work to perform. This pre-supposes that the rights change their character depending on when litigation is brought. in my view this is not so. Each right has the character the relevant facts give to it. By that I mean that upon injury or death there is an "accrued" or "vested" right to compensation, and upon the making of an agreement or an award there is a "vested" right to the payment of the monetary compensation for which it provides. Subsequently his Honour reinforced his view that the "rights" vested on the happening of the injury. He also drew attention to the fact that it would be strange, in his opinion, if the right to recover was governed by the fact that prior to the obtaining of an agreement or an award the worker died, bearing in mind that in some cases an agreement or award may be obtained quickly and, in other cases, more time may be taken.
Priestley JA, whose judgment in draft form I have also had the benefit of reading, agrees with the President's interpretation of the words "accrued vested rights" and states:- ".. but I do not share his concern that there may have been a problem to overcome in reaching his conclusion.
It is apparent from the use of the word 'vested' by Lord Loreburn LC at 389 in United Collieries Limited and the reference by
Lord Macnaghten at 393 to the word 'accrued' in s.5 of the
UK Act, that those Judges were treating the words as, in the context, interchangeable: see also the use of the word 'vested' in the reported argument at 386.5, 387.39 387.6, .8 and 388.2.

When these references are taken together with what Lord
Macnaghten said at 393: 'The Act itself treats the liability as a subsisting liability from the very moment of the accident and as a present right' it seems plain that the use of the two words 'vested' and 'accrued' in s.273(2)(b) was simply an adoption of the language of lawyers used over the years in relation to such rights, with no intention of adding some additional characteristic to the rights transmissible under the 1987 Act, beyond what the position was under the earlier Act."
Firstly, as I understand their Honours' reasoning, it does not attribute any different meaning to the two words used, so that they assume the legislature has used two words when one would be adequate, or has used one word, which is unnecessary. I would be slow to make either of those assumptions unless there appeared in the section compelling reasons why the legislature should have followed this unusual course. In my view when one reads the whole of s.273 the legislature was seeking to ensure that the rights to which reference was made were not only "accrued", in the way in which that word is understood in this area of the law and to which I have referred, but also "vested", in the sense that there was an entitlement pursuant to an agreement or an award to the payment of a monetary sum by way of compensation.
If that conclusion is not correct then it seems to me one tends to ignore the context in which the words are used, and one assumes the legislature has used two words when one would be sufficient and when it is not possible to suggest any particular reason why that should be done.
If I may say so with great respect to those who may take a different view the construction which appeals to me gives operation to both words in a manner which is consistent with other provisions of the Act to which I shall refer. It should also be noted that the word used is "rights". This is consistent with at least two rights, not one right described differently. In my opinion it is only rights which are both accrued and vested in the senses to which I have referred that pass to the legal personal representative.
In so far as the President places reliance upon when an accrued right may transform into a vested right as a consequence of the event of death that does not appeal to me as a reason for reading down the words of the section. The fact of death affects many rights and it may occur in many circumstances after a person has suffered a compensable injury, whether pursuant to the Act or common law, with the consequence that the right to compensation or damages is thereby defeated or, in some cases, new rights arise, e.g.
a right pursuant to the Compensation to Relatives Act. In all cases where rights are varied by death that occurs by virtue of the fact of death before the rights have crystallised into a judgment. For judgment, in the present context, one may substitute agreement or award. [Section 2(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1944404/s2.html) of the [Law Reform (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 1944](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1944404/) is but one example of rights which may be lost on death.
The law recognizes instances where rights are lost on death particularly in the area of injuries to the person.
In my opinion there is further support for the view to which I have come in other provisions of the Act. Section 29(7) is to be found under the heading "Apportionment of Payments Between Dependants". Sub-section (1) provides that compensation payable to each dependant of a deceased worker may be apportioned by the Court and sub-s.(7) provides-.- "If a dependant dies, before a claim under this Division is made; or if a claim has been made, before an agreement or award has been arrived at or made, the legal personal representative of the dependant has no right to payment of compensation, and the amount of compensation shall be calculated and apportioned as if that dependant had died before the worker." .
This makes it clear that the legal personal representative of the dependant only has a right to payment of compensation if the dependant dies after a claim has been made and after an agreement or award has been arrived at or made. The right to compensation accrues to the dependant on the death of the worker, but nothing vests, in the sense in which I have used the word, until an agreement or an award has been made. It is at the latter moment that sub-s.(7) gives the legal personal representative the right to payment of compensation.
That is totally consistent with the view that at that stage, i.e. when the right of the legal personal representative arose, the dependant had both an accrued right, i.e. a right accruing on the happening of the event giving rise to the claim for dependency, and a vested right by virtue of the agreement or award having been arrived at or made pursuant to the enforceability of the accrued right. The concepts in s.273(2)(b) and s.29(7) are, therefore, totally consistent and, importantly for the purpose of considering the way to construe "vested" in s.273(2)(b) is the acceptance in s.29(7) that the legal personal representative has no right to payment before the accrued right has transformed into a vested right. There is, accordingly, consistency between the two provisions. One may ask why two sections are needed. The answer is that each is dealing with a different situation but, relevantly for present purposes, each does so in a consistent manner.
Both the President and Priestley JA place particular emphasis upon s.67(5), which is found in the section providing compensation for pain and suffering. It states:- "Compensation under this section is not payable after the death of the worker concerned".
The argument is that as there is no such provision in s.66, therefore compensation for permanent injuries, as provided for by that section, is payable after the death of the worker concerned. That pre-supposes, incorrectly in my respectful opinion, that s.273 does not operate where a claim is made under s.66. I can see no reason for any such assumption.
In my view the proper construction of s.67(5) is that it is creating an exception to s.273(2)(b), perhaps because of the subjective nature of the claim for pain and suffering. The section pre-supposes, by the use of the words "compensation" and "payable", that the accrued right has fructified into an enforceable right by virtue of an agreement or an award prior to the death of the worker or would be capable of doing that but for his death. The section is dealing with the circumstances where the agreement or award either has not been satisfied by payment at the time of death or cannot be made because of the intervening death, and it precludes payment of compensation in either of those circumstances. Therefore it engrafts an exception, in the case of compensation for pain and suffering, on the provisions of s.273(2). The legislature decided no such exception should be applied to a claim for permanent injuries pursuant to s.66. Kirby P is of the view that claims of the kind referred to in s.67 "being highly personal and subjective to the worker concerned are extinguished at the worker's death. Claims of the more objective kind provided by s.66 survive the worker's death - just as they have for a long time before the 1987 Act under the authority of Simpson, Stevens and
Schlenert". However, in my respectful opinion, s.67(5) does not defeat "claims" but the payment of compensation or the ability to obtain an order for the payment of compensation, which has become payable prior to the death of the worker, but which has not been paid, or which has become capable of quantification prior to the death of the worker. That is what the section says.
In Bresmac Pty Limited versus Starr [(1992) 29 NSWLR 318] Priestley JA, in considering a situation where an award had been made to a worker pursuant to s.67 notwithstanding the worker died before the delivery of judgment, said that the Workers Compensation Court Judge had taken the view "that the worker, if alive at judgment, would have received an amount of compensation calculated by reference both to pain and suffering experienced before, and likely to be experienced after, judgment ...": p.329. His Honour continued:- "In my respectful opinion, the words of sub-s.(5) cannot be read in that way. Even allowing for the possibility of different meanings inherent in quite limited sets of words, it seems to me that the meaning which the words in question would convey to the ordinary reader would be the very simple and obvious one: no compensation under s.67 is payable unless the worker who experienced the pain and suffering is alive at judgment to receive it. I cannot see anything in the words themselves, or in their context in the Act (and bearing in mind its history) which gives a plausible foothold to any other meaning."
This pre-supposes there will be an award when the worker is alive, but which has not been satisfied at the date of his death, or, if he has died prior to the making of an award, that no award can be made for pain and suffering.
Further, the Act provides not only for compensation, but also for common law remedies and an injured worker may, by s.151A(2), elect whether to claim for permanent loss compensation or for damages, and that election is made in various ways. [Section 2(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1944404/s2.html) of the [Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1944404/) provides for the survival of all causes of action "subsisting against or vested in him" for the benefit of his estate but:- "(2) Where a cause of action survives as aforesaid for the benefit of the estate of a deceased person, the damages recoverable for the benefit of the estate of that person ...
 where the death of that person has been caused by the act or omission which gives rise to the cause of action, shall not include any damages for pain or suffering of that person or for any bodily or mental harm suffered by him or for the curtailment of his expectation of life."
It would seem very strange if a worker makes an election to proceed at common law if his/her rights are, in certain circumstances, capable of being determined by [s.2](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1944404/s2.html) in a way different from the way in which they would be determined if the person decided to proceed for compensation under the Act.
I appreciate "pain and suffering", on any view, would be treated in the same way, but claims under s.66, which equate, at least, to "bodily harm" would not be. But if the construction for which Kirby P and Priestley JA contend is correct that would seem to be the result. The construction I favour is strengthened when regard is had to the equivalence between compensation and damages: Hains v Blundell <case>; [(1991) 172 CLR 60] at pp.69-70 and 72. I note that s.2 uses the word "vested" in the sense that Kirby P and Priestley JA use it in the present case.
However, I do not find anything odd in the result because
I do not think it in issue that the words "accrued" and "vested" may be used interchangeably. The problem arises where they are used together.
 
Do Any Authorities Preclude My Coming To This Conclusion?
The first case to which reference is made is The United Collieries
Limited versus Simpson [(1909) AC 383.] A worker was injured on 9 July 1907 and died on 14 July 1907. His mother, who alleged she was dependent upon him, died on October without making any claim upon the appellants. Her executrix made a claim on 10 December 1907 under the Workmen's Compensation
Act 1906 as representative of the mother and it was held the claim "must be admitted in law". At p.389 Lord Loreburn LC said:- "Now where the Act says that the employer is liable to make compensation in the event of death in case there are dependants, irrespective of their expectation of life, and they are described as the persons for whose benefit it is to be paid, that certainly looks like a debt arising on the death from employer to dependants. When I turn to the other provisions of the schedule I think they fit this view."
As I have sought to point out s.29(7) of the Act leads to a different conclusion as a matter of statutory construction. Under that section the legal personal representative of the widow would not have been entitled, in my opinion, to compensation on the facts in Simpson.
It is also clear from his Lordship's speech that he treated the word "vested" as meaning when the right arose. Once again that is not a matter which causes me to change the view I have expressed, because, in the statutory context, that word is used in conjunction with "accrued" and both are used in the particular context to which I have referred.
Lord Macnaghten was of the view that the maxim actio personalis moritur cum persona" was not applicable, as that related only to "wrong doing" with which the Workmen's Compensation Act had no "connection". His Lordship continued, at p.391:- "On the other hand, I cannot agree with Lord M'Laren in thinking that a consideration of the policy of the Act leads to the conclusion that the liability of the employer is 'contingent on a claim being made'. Still less can I agree with the view expressed by one member of the Court of Appeal in Ireland, and apparently adopted by all his colleagues, 'that on the construction of the statute it is clear that there must be a living dependent on whose behalf the proceedings are to be taken'."
This statement points up again the inappropriateness of trying to apply
Simpson to the construction of the Act, because in these circumstances, as with Lord Loreburn, his Lordship was looking at the matter in a statutory context, which differs from that provided by the Act. He made this clear at p.391 when he said:- "The answer to the question now in debate must, I think, depend solely on the meaning of the statute itself, gathered from its own language without the addition of anything that is not necessarily implied."
After pondering about the result being "startling" his Lordship returned to a consideration of the Act and, at p.393, said that the liability to the dependant was not contingent on a claim being made.
It is clear that his Lordship founded upon the express words of the statute and, in my respectful opinion, that must be done in circumstances such as these.
Lord James of Hereford agreed with Lord Macnaghten. Lord Shaw of
Dunfermline concluded that the liability of the employer was in the nature of a debt, upon a proper construction of the Act and, accordingly, "the right of the dependant is that of a creditor in such debt": p.398. His Lordship, as with other members of the House of Lords, seems to have been much impressed by the fact that the sum payable was quantified without any reference to life expectancy. The frequent reference to the amount being treated as a "debt", when coupled with statements to the effect that the amount was not dependent on life expectancy, suggests a situation where the accrued right had vested in the sense in which I use that word in contradistinction to "accrued".
Lord
Dunedin dissented. His Lordship also used the word "vested" in the sense of "accrued".
In Stevens versus Railway Commissioners of New South Wales <case>; [(1931) 31 SR ] the issue was whether a right accrued to a worker, immediately on the happening of the injury, to have his compensation determined in accordance with the then existing law, which it was held occurred. Attention has been drawn to the fact that Dr Evatt of King's
Counsel and Mr Lamb of King's
Counsel, in the course of argument, used the word "vested" as synonymous with the word "accrued". It is obvious, in my respectful opinion, that counsel were using the words "vested" and "accrued" as synonyms and, as I have already agreed, there is no problem so far as that is concerned. The problem, as I have said, in the present case, having regard to the terms of s.273(2)(b), is a different one.
That leads to a consideration of the judgment in Schlenert versus H.G. Watson
Contracting Co
Pty Limited [(1979) 1 NSWLR 140.] Issues were raised as to whether the decision is wrong in circumstances where leave should be granted to re-argue it, or whether it is distinguishable. Before these can be addressed it is necessary to determine for what Schlenert stands as authority.
Hutley
JA delivered the judgment in which Reynolds and Samuels JJA agreed.
Relevantly for present purposes it was held that a worker, who was entitled to a payment under s.16 of the 1926 Act, and who died before the statutory amendment was made and before his claim for compensation had been heard, led to his personal representative being entitled to be paid compensation at the higher rate in his or her representative capacity for the benefit of the worker's estate. It was also held this was so by force of the general law, rather than by operation of s.6(2) of the 1926 Act. I have noted that s.273 deals specifically with the operation of the general law in a manner which, but for the exceptions, means, in my opinion, Schlenert does not have application to the Act.
At the date of his death the worker had an accrued right, in the sense to which I have been referring, as a consequence of the loss of an eye. He was entitled to claim a lump sum payment of a specified amount. He died other than from work related injuries prior to making an application and his widow, as his administratrix, made the application. His Honour noted, p.141:- "It is accepted that she has the right to make it."
Whilst in the present case that is the crucial issue, it was not an issue in Schlenert. His Honour's judgment, for obvious reasons, proceeded on the basis of the accepted fact. The legislation as it then stood and the decision in
Simpson made unarguable, in my opinion, that the administratrix did not have the right to make the claim.
His Honour stated that the lump sum entitlement at the date of death was $3,700, which was the amount awarded by the Workers' Compensation Commission, but at the date of the hearing it was $9,800. He recorded the submission that by dint of s.6(2) of the Act and s.5(b) of Schedule of the Workers'
Compensation (Rates) Amendment Act 1977 the applicant was entitled to receive the larger amount. His Honour rejected the submissions founded upon s.6(2) and, at p.142, he said:- "The vested rights given by the Workers' Compensation Act are transmissible on death, except where the statute provides otherwise e.g. s.59(3). Their nature was authoritatively determined by the House of Lords in United Collieries Ltd v
Simpson, Lord Dunedin dissenting. Of them, Lord Shaw said: 'I have already stated my opinion that the right of the defendant is correlative to the liability of the employer, and if the liability of the employer be of the nature of a debt, the right of the dependant is that of a creditor in such debt.
It is true that the creditor's right is not enforceable by action in the ordinary case after six months from the date of the death, but I do not think this limitation of time for a remedy affects the quality of the right. And I think it is a misuse of the term "condition precedent" to apply it, as is attempted, for the purpose of extinguishing the debt, simply because for obvious reasons there is a limitation of the period of a right to sue. On both sides of the account, whether as a liability and debt of the employer on the one hand, or a right and asset of the dependant on the other, I think the principle of transmissibility applies. It would be strange if a liability is so little personal to the employer's case that it transmits against his insurers and against his bankrupt estate, and yet that the corresponding right should be so completely personal to the dependant of the workman that it forms no part of the dependant's executory estate.' "
His Honour observed that the English Act of 1906 was closely followed by the legislature, when it enacted the Workmen's Compensation Act 1916 "so the transmissibility of rights, quite apart from any special provision and by force of the general law, was also adopted. I can see nothing in the 1926 Act in New South Wales, or subsequent amendments, to suggest that any reduction or qualification of those rights was contemplated". He continued, at p.143:- "In my opinion, BY FORCE OF THE GENERAL LAW, Schlenert's right to claim a lump sum for the loss of an eye vested in his adminstratrix in her representative capacity for the benefit of his estate. What vested in her was a right to receive compensation for her husband's injury quantified as provided by the Act. When he died, the monetary nature of the compensation was the sum of money which has been awarded.
For example, if she had to pay stamp duty on the estate, this would have been the figure for which it would have been assessed; but this does not preclude her obtaining a higher figure for his asset, as the legislature has said, in s.5(b) of Schedule 2, that she can. The asset has become more valuable in monetary terms when she realises that by obtaining an award, it seems to me that the object of s.5(b) is to revalue the right which the administratrix acquired; she does not get a new right to compensation, her right to compensation, as representative of the worker, has been given a new monetary content." (My emphasis.)
Section 273 replaced the former s.55, which provided:- "A weekly payment, or a sum paid by way of redemption thereof, or a lump sum payable under this Act, shall not be capable of being assigned, charged, or attached and shall not pass to any other person by operation of law, nor shall any claim be set off against the same."
The reformulation of s.55 has added sub.s.(2), which expressly provides for the passing of rights to the legal personal representative. Kirby P suggests that s.273 may well adopt that to which Hutley JA was referring in
Schlenert. In my respectful opinion it does not. Hutley JA contemplated that the cause of action "vested",, i.e. accrued. He did not suggest it was "vested" in the sense of being an amount certain in consequence of an agreement or an award. In Schlenert his
Honour, in my respectful opinion, was clearly talking about an "accrued" night, but not "accrued vested rights".
Also the section is not consistent with his Honour's reliance on the general law approach.
Hutley JA relied upon Simpson as establishing that the death of the worker did not destroy rights, which passed to his representative and that they passed with all incidents, including the added benefits given by the legislature. This, as the legislation then stood, was in my respectful opinion, correct. But his
Honour held it was a matter, essentially, of statutory construction.
In the result I do not consider it is necessary to either distinguish or over-rule Schlenert. Indeed it may be embraced.
I appreciate that the authorities, prior to the 1987 Act, are consistent with the view that the right was transmissible once it had "accrued". However all the authorities make that subject to any statement in the legislation to the contrary and, in my opinion, s.273 provides such a contrary statement and, for the reasons
I have sought to express, it is consistent with the general tenor of other sections of the Act.
 
Conclusions
In my opinion there was not, as at the date of the worker's death, an accrued vested right, therefore there was nothing which could pass to the legal personal representative and, accordingly, the question posed for the
Compensation Court should have been decided on the basis that the rights to benefits under s.66 did not survive for the benefit of the worker's estate. I would allow the appeal.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/99.html  
