

Regina versus Van Poelje; Regina versus Prater Matter Nos 60156/97 [1997] NSWSC 536 (31 October 1997) 
Regina versus Jerrit Lucien Bram Van Poelje /97 
Regina versus Bradley Peter Prater /97 October 1997 
Newman J, Barr J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal /97 REGINA versus Jerrit Lucien Bram VAN POELJE /97 REGINA versus Bradley Peter PRATER 
JUDGMENT 
NEWMAN J: I will ask Barr J to deliver the first judgment in this matter. 
BARR J: Jerrit Lucien Bram Van Poelje applies for leave to appeal against a sentence imposed on him by Judge Gibson of Queen's Counsel on 28 February .

Bradley Peter Prater applies for an extension of time within which to apply for leave to appeal against sentence imposed on him by his Honour at the same time.

The applicant, Poelje, pleaded guilty to the charge under <case> of the [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) that may be summarised as blackmail by an unwarranted threat to publish. His
Honour sentenced him to imprisonment of two years eight months comprising a minimum term of two years commencing on 6 August 1996 and expiring on 5 August and an additional term of eight months. He recommended that he be deported at the conclusion of his sentence.

Prater pleaded guilty to a charge under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s99.html) of the same Act of demanding money with menaces with intent to steal. His Honour sentenced him to penal servitude for five years four months comprising a minimum term of four years commencing on 7 August 1996 and expiring on 6
August 2000 and an additional term of one year four months commencing on 7
August 2000 and expiring on 6 December 2001. The maximum sentence of each offence is penal servitude for ten years. The applications have been heard together with the consent of the applicants and it is convenient to deal with them together in this judgment.

Mr Tunstall and Mr Herbert, former residents of South Africa, were the proprietors of successful businesses in Sydney. Whilst the applicant, Prater, was living in South Africa in 1996, one, Ross, gave him information about the activities of Mr Tunstall and Mr Herbert in their business and personal lives.
Prater and Ross believed that Mr Tunstall and Mr Herbert would suffer embarrassment and loss if they made the information public and decided to extort money from them by threatening to do so.

As police enquiries later established, those assertions were untrue.

Prater asked Ross to arrange for Poelje to travel from Holland to Sydney.
Prater travelled to Sydney, arriving on 1 July 1996. He kept watch on Mr
Tunstall and Mr Herbert and their families. Van Poelje arrived in Sydney on 20
July 1996. On 2 August 1996 Prater telephoned Mr Tunstall and instructed him to meet him at Waterloo and to take with him a certain colleague.

Mr Tunstall and his colleague went to the place as directed. Prater met them and during the conversation that followed Van Poelje was standing close by.
Prater said that he and Van Poelje were acting for a business associate in
South Africa who knew all about some alleged business and personal misconduct of Mr Tunstall and Mr Herbert. He mentioned names of companies and persons. He said that the associate in South Africa wished them ill and would pursue them and had engaged Prater and Van Poelje to break their legs, but that they did not wish to do so.

He said that Channel Nine, Channel Seven and other news media were ready to publish a story which would ruin Mr Tunstall and Mr Herbert socially, economically and politically. He said that he had been offered $40,000 by the media for the story. He said that the only way that Mr Tunstall and Mr Herbert would solve the problem was to eliminate the source, namely the man in South
Africa, and offered to reveal the identity of that person and "eliminate" him for payment of $200,000.

Mr Tunstall was given to believe that if he did not pay Prater the $200,000 the details would be published in the manner I have described. The conversation lasted about half an hour and was interrupted whilst Prater and
Van Poelje conferred privately.

Mr Tunstall and Mr Herbert reported those matters to the police. Later on the same day the applicants met a producer of the Channel Nine television station and offered to sell the station a story about suspected white collar criminals living in Australia. The offer was declined.

On 7 August 1996, Prater telephoned Mr Herbert and directed him to go to a place near the Sydney Harbour Bridge. Mr Herbert and Mr Tunstall did as he required and a meeting took place. Prater claimed that an associate of Mr
Herbert and Mr Tunstall had told somebody in South Africa about their demands, pretended to be angry about it and said that the amount demanded had therefore been increased to $1,000,000.

Van Poelje did not take part in that conversation but was standing nearby.
Following that meeting, further telephone communications took place between
Prater and Mr Herbert and Prater eventually required that there be a meeting at a shopping arcade in Sydney. Mr Tunstall and Mr Herbert attended. Prater repeated the demand for $1,000,000. He said that he had a team of experienced men to assist him carry out his threats. He told Mr Tunstall and Mr Herbert that he had been watching them for the past month and that if the money were not paid one of them would be killed by the following Monday. Prater made other threats, including one to murder Mr Herbert's daughter and another to burn down the business premises of Mr Tunstall and Mr Herbert.

Police officers were observing the meeting and the conversations were recorded by listening devices pursuant to warrants issued under the appropriate legislation. As before, Van Poelje was waiting nearby. When the meeting ended, police arrested Prater and Van Poelje.

Following further enquiries they searched a room at a backpackers' hostel and found a pair of handcuffs, a return airline ticket to South Africa, surveillance notes taken by Prater about Mr Tunstall and Mr Herbert and three undeveloped rolls of film. The films were developed and the photographs turned out to be of the business premises and vehicles of Mr Tunstall and Mr Herbert.
Prater admitted that the handcuffs were his.

The charge against Van Poelje was based on the threat to publish the stories in the news media if Mr Tunstall and Mr Herbert did not hand over the money.
The charge against Prater was based on his demand for money combined with his threats to kill, injure and destroy property.

It was submitted on behalf of Van Poelje that his Honour erred in assessing
Van Poelje's criminality and gave insufficient weight to special circumstances. His Honour found that Van Poelje came to Australia to be involved in a criminal offence and the submission was that that finding was not available on the evidence. The passage complained of appears at pages 3 and 4 of his Honour's remarks on sentence in the following words: "Nevertheless, the crime to which he has pleaded guilty of blackmail is a very nasty crime. It endeavours to take advantage of people who sometimes are in a position that they can be taken advantage of. He has come over from another country to this country to become involved in a criminal offence, and if he does that it should be known that people who come to this country for that purpose face the real prospect of custodial sentence." 
There was evidence of what Van Poelje had said to the police upon his arrest and of what he had said during a recorded interview. Van Poelje also gave evidence before his Honour. Van Poelje first told the police that he had come to Australia to visit Prater, his friend. That was obviously in all the circumstances less than a forthright answer. Later on, during the recorded interview, he said that two weeks before he came to Australia he had, "a suspicion of what it was ...".

When asked what he meant he said that Prater had made clear or he, Van Poelje, had understood that Mr Tunstall and Mr Herbert were in Australia, that they had committed white collar crimes and that angry people were on their tail.
There was unchallenged evidence that Van Poelje had his air fares paid and was expecting to be paid $20,000 to assist Prater.

The precise manner in which Van Poelje was expecting to be called upon to assist was the subject of questions by his Honour. In a series of questions, his Honour drew attention to military experience in the Dutch Marines and to the Commando training of Van Poelje, and to his experience in the use of weapons. His Honour was clearly inviting Van Poelje to say, if it were the fact, that his expectation was that he would be required to lend assistance for which he was specially trained in that particular way. Van Poelje said that he was not, and there was no evidence that he was expected to behave in any manner like a soldier or a marine or a commando. There was no suggestion in this case that Van Poelje was armed, for example, with a weapon of any kind.

In the end, the evidence about the assistance which Van Poelje was expecting he might be required to lend was quite vague and amounted to an expectation of having to advise Prater if Mr Tunstall should happen to be supported by unexpected visitors at any arranged meeting. There was also evidence from Van
Poelje that he would keep a look out and telephone Prater to warn him in appropriate circumstances. So there was no direct evidence that Van Poelje was expecting to lend what might be described as military assistance. Even so, it seems to me that his Honour was entitled to make the finding that he did make.
It will be noted that his Honour did not find that Van Poelje came to
Australia with the intention of committing the offence to which he eventually pleaded guilty, that is, of extorting money upon the basis of threat to publish. There was evidence from Van Poelje himself, which his Honour may be taken to have accepted, that it had been his idea to approach the news media to try to sell a story.

There was no evidence as to precisely what was in Van Poelje's mind when he left Holland to come to Australia. However, the answer which Van Poelje gave in the recorded interview, and to which I have referred, combined with the circumstance that Van Poelje had his air fares paid and was going to be paid $20,000 for his part in the forthcoming activities, none of which was challenged, was sufficient in my opinion for his Honour to conclude beyond reasonable doubt that Van Poelje had some criminal intent when he left Holland to come to Australia.

To the extent that Van Poelje said anything to the contrary, his Honour was, in my opinion, entitled to reject his evidence. In my opinion the finding of fact was open to his Honour and the challenge to it has not been made good.

The next submission was that his Honour erred by not determining that there were special circumstances pursuant to [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/), having regard to the circumstances of Van Poelje's custody and other matters such as would justify the imposition of an additional term which exceeded one third of the minimum term that was imposed.

It was submitted that his Honour did not use the term "special circumstances", in relation to Van Poelje as he did during the same proceedings in passing sentence on Prater. It is not suggested that that should be taken as any indication that his Honour failed to advert to special circumstances in Van
Poelje's case, but rather to enable the submission that his Honour failed to find special circumstances when he ought, to be put the more strongly.

The Court has been referred to the principles which have been discussed in cases like R versus Moffitt [(1990) 20 NSWLR 114.] A particular circumstance pointed to was the fact that Van Poelje, being a Dutch national and a resident of the Netherlands, would serve the period of his sentence in custody hard because he would be unable to have visits from his family. Attention was also drawn to his Honour's recommendation that Van
Poelje be deported at the conclusion of his sentence. It was pointed out, correctly, by counsel for Van Poelje that that circumstance did not entitle his Honour to regard Van Poelje any differently in his entitlement to have an appropriate additional term fixed as part of his sentence. These were all matters of impression for the sentencing Judge, and the question really is whether in view of the matters pointed to by the applicant his Honour could be said to have erred in structuring a sentence which produced an additional term of parole as low as eight months in a total term of two years and eight months.

It seems to me in all the circumstances that his Honour must be taken to have been well aware of all the circumstances which were put before him in evidence and it seems to me that his Honour was entitled in the exercise of his discretion to structure the sentence in the way that he did. I do not think that the challenge to the structure has been made good.

I would grant leave to appeal against the sentence because of the seriousness of the offence but would dismiss the appeal.

It was submitted on behalf of Mr Prater that his Honour erred in not finding special circumstances justifying an increase in the additional term of one year and four months at the expense of the minimum term. The criticisms were of three kinds.

The first was a criticism of what is said to be a misstatement of principle by his Honour in a passage in his Honour's remarks on sentence. It appears at p 5 and is in the following terms: "There has been put before me a bit of evidence to show that he (meaning
Prater) is a young man who can be rehabilitated as it was suggested and there is available to him work when he is released and a family background who are prepared to stay with him and stick by him. I acknowledge that and it seems to me rather than in the circumstances find special circumstances and extend the period of his parole, he is far better off in those circumstances going out at the end of the period of time when he is eligible for parole to his family." 
It was submitted that his Honour applied a wrong principle. It seems to me that what his Honour was doing was considering whether in view of the term of penal servitude that he had in mind there were circumstances which justified structuring that sentence in a way which would produce an additional term greater than one third of the minimum term.

It seems to me that all his Honour was saying was that Prater was far better off in all the circumstances of the case being able to go and spend a period of time with his family on parole at the end of the minimum term which he proposed to impose, namely a term of four years. I see no error of principle in his Honour's statement.

The next attack made on that passage was his Honour's reference to "a family background who are prepared to stay with him and stick by him". It was submitted that a report of Dr Westmore, a psychiatrist, which was before his
Honour, and extensive references to the applicant's unhappy home life and difficult relations with his father and estrangement from him made this a case in which a finding of a supportive family background was unavailable to his
Honour. His Honour therefore proceeded upon a mistaken conclusion of fact, it was submitted, and fell into error.

Mr Prater himself gave evidence, during the course of which he was asked these questions and gave these answers: "Q. Your family, your mother and your sister, they're in court? 
A. Yeah, they are.

Q. Has your family been visiting you whilst you've been in custody? 
A. Yeah, yeah, they come in every week.

Q. Have you had discussions with your mum in relation to your eventual release if they'll be supportive of you, or your mum'll be supportive of you? 
A. Yeah, they'll be supportive of me, yeah.

Q. What about your sister, your sister's got two young children, is that right? And, are you close to your sister? 
A. Extremely close, yeah.

Q. You've indicated that she also visits you, is that right? 
A. Yeah, she tries to come in more than once a week but I only want to see her once a week.

Q. As far as the two young children that she has, you have affection for those children? 
A. Yeah.

Q. You spoke to your sister and your mother, they've indicating their support for you upon your eventual release? 
A. Yeah, they want me to come home." 
Counsel who appeared for the applicant before his Honour, who did not appear in this application, relied strongly on that evidence and made a submission that Prater had strong family support which would stand him in good stead.

There was evidence on which his Honour was entitled to make the finding under attack.

The last attack upon the sentence was that in any event, this was a case which called for the imposition of a sentence in which the additional term exceeded one third of the minimum term. No attack was made on the overall length of sentence and it was submitted during debate by counsel for the applicant that an additional term of at least two years' parole was necessary.

The applicant set out in his written submissions the material which justified such an approach. The circumstances which were said to constitute such circumstances are as follows: the youth of the applicant, who was only 22 at the time of the offence; this was a first offence; the applicant pleaded guilty and was contrite; he had good prospects of rehabilitation; he had made an immediate confession to the police and had assisted the authorities (though I should add that no submission is made here of circumstances of the kind discussed in Gallagher fall for consideration); he was on protection in custody; he had an alcohol problem which he was trying to solve by attending drug and alcohol counselling in gaol.

These circumstances individually, but particularly in combination, were put forward as requiring the sentencing Judge in the proper exercise of discretion to structure a sentence in the manner contended for. Particular reliance was placed upon evidence of the applicant's psychiatric state. He was said to be psychologically unstable.

Notwithstanding that the circumstances to which I have referred may have constituted special circumstances in another case or in many cases, the question for the sentencing Judge was whether all the circumstances of the case before him amounted to special circumstances. Cases are decided individually by judges, who have to weigh many matters one way and another in the exercise of their discretion.

I am not satisfied that his Honour failed to have any of these matters in mind in structuring the sentence and I am not persuaded that they were of such weight as to require his Honour to construct a sentence in the manner contended for. I see no error in his Honour's reasoning or pronouncement of sentence.

I would grant an extension of time within which to bring an application for leave to appeal and I would grant leave to appeal in view of the seriousness of the offence but I would dismiss the appeal.

NEWMAN J: In both cases I agree with the orders proposed by Barr J and the orders of the Court will be as he proposes. * * * 
