

Mann versus Commonwealth of Australia and Anor [1997] NSWSC 86 (21 March 1997) 
Mann versus Commonwealth of Australia & Anor /94 March 1997 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
MASTER MALPASS 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: These proceedings were commenced on 30 September 1994. On 16 April 1996, I delivered a reserved judgment. I ordered that, inter alia, the First Amended Statement of Claim be struck out. I gave leave to the plaintiff to file an Amended Statement of Claim.

A document entitled Further Amended Statement of Claim was filed on 17 July
In response to that pleading, both defendants have filed a Defence. It seems that, for some time, the case has been the subject of Differential Case
Management.

In the reserved judgment, I made the following observations:- "The plaintiff was made bankrupt on 21 November 1991. The bankruptcy was discharged on 26 March 1995. The question of whether or not these circumstances may be material to the matter of the capacity to maintain any of the claims propounded in these proceedings was not agitated before me." 
On 11 November 1996, the first defendant filed a Notice of Motion. The relief sought in that Notice of Motion includes an order that the Further Amended
Statement of Claim be either dismissed or struck out. The basis of the application is a claim for summary relief pursuant to either Part 13 rule 5 or
Part 15 rule 26.

The application came on for hearing on 19 February 1997. Mr Aldridge appeared for both defendants. The plaintiff appeared in person.

In support of the application, the defendants relied on an affidavit sworn by
Alan Jeffrey Melrose. This is a bulky document containing many annexures.

The defendants seek to advance a number of arguments in support of the application for summary relief (including arguments founded on pleading deficiencies). A principal argument turns upon the circumstances that the plaintiff was a bankrupt at the time of the commencement of the proceedings and that the official trustee has not assigned any of the alleged causes of action to him. By consent, the parties proceeded to deal with this matter only. If the defendants are successful on this question, it is not necessary to consider any of the other arguments.

I should mention that, during the course of the hearing, the Court became concerned that the plaintiff was not legally represented and may have thereby been placed at a considerable disadvantage in dealing with legal submissions made by the defendants (these being submissions which had the potential to defeat his claim). For the purpose of giving him further opportunity to deal with those matters, he was given leave to make written submissions.

This opportunity was exercised by the plaintiff. Submissions were made on his behalf by Counsel. The submissions propound a number of matters (including a submission that the pleading propounds non-pecuniary claims). They also place reliance on the unreported judgment of Von Doussa J in Re: Linklater (29
October 1990).

Subject to other provisions in the Bankruptcy Act, 1966 (the Act), section has the effect of vesting the property of a bankrupt in the official receiver. This takes place forthwith when the debtor becomes bankrupt. Vested property does not revert to the debtor upon a discharge of the bankrupt. It remains vested in the trustee.

Section 116 deals with "Property divisible amongst creditors". Subsection (1) identifies the property that is divisible amongst the creditors of bankrupt.
Subsection (2) identifies the property to which subsection (1) does not extend.

Subsection (2) contains the following provisions:- any right of the bankrupt to recover damages or compensation: for personal injury or wrong done to the bankrupt, the spouse of the bankrupt or a member of the family of the bankrupt; or in respect of the death of the spouse of the bankrupt or a member of the family of the bankrupt, and any damages or compensation recovered by the bankrupt (whether before or after he became a bankrupt) in respect of such an injury or wrong or the death of such a person; 
Section 60(4) contains provisions which are expressed in similar terms.

There is a dispute between the parties as to whether or not such causes of action, as may be alleged in the Further Amended Statement of Claim, fall within section 116(2)(g).

In the earlier judgment, it was necessary to set out many of the matters relevant to this litigation. It is not necessary to repeat that material in this judgment.

The first task involves some analysis of the pleadings. The Further Amended
Statement of Claim was drafted by the plaintiff himself. Whilst this is not intended as a criticism of the plaintiff, it needs to be observed that this document does have pleading deficiencies. It is not easy to either identify or categorise the various causes of action and heads of damage that are intended to be pleaded therein. At times, its content can give rise to some confusion.

Before turning to an analysis of the pleading, I should mention in passing that both defendants have elected to plead to the document rather than first move to have all or part of it struck out. I shall now make reference to certain parts of the pleading.

Paragraph 6 of the Further Amended Statement of Claim pleads wrongful disclosure of private and confidential documents and information and the suffering of damages and loss (including economic loss).

Paragraph 7 on page 6 pleads an entitlement to interest. It contains "Particulars of Damage to His Health" (paragraphs A and B on page 6), "Particulars of Documents" (paragraphs A and B (the "Documents" intended to be referred to in paragraphs 1-36 on pages 7-13)), "Particularized Details of
Errors, Mistakes, Negligence Fraud and Conspiracy by First and Second
Defendants" (paragraphs 1-10 on pages 14-15), "Particulars of Aggravated
Damages" (paragraphs A-E on pages 16-17), "Economic Loss" (paragraphs a-d on page 17) and "Particulars of Pecuniary Loss and Special Damages" (paragraphs
A-D on page 18).

The said paragraph B under the heading "Particulars of Documents" appearing on page 7 is in the following terms:- "B. The Plaintiff will claim that the said documents listed below disclose conduct by both defendants of collusion to damage the Plaintiff and his former company, breaches of confidence, deceit, fraudulent concealments, mistakes, and conspiracy to damage and hinder the Plaintiff personally while he made an application for Special Commonwealth Legal Aid and during his attempts to discover who secretly released files to Mr Rubinstein." 
This material may well contemplate the allegation of a variety of causes of action. Perhaps pages 14 and 15 of the document which purport to set forth "Particularized Details of Errors, Mistakes, Negligence Fraud and Conspiracy by First and Second Defendants" may have been intended as some amplification of such causes of action.

Pages 19 and 20 would seem to be intended to identify various claims for pecuniary loss. Page 21 sets out what would seem to be a summary of claimed damages. These are as follows:- "1. Special Damages.
Damages for Economic loss.
Damages for breach of confidentiality.
Damages for mistakes, deceit, fraudulent concealment, negligence.
Damages for conspiracy.
Aggravated damages.
Punitive or Exemplary Damages.
Damages to the Plaintiff's Health and for future Nursing Home and Medical care." 
Counsel for the defendants has referred the Court to certain decided cases (including Daemar versus Industrial Commission of New South Wales & Ors [(1988) 12 NSWLR 45]; Faulkner versus Bluett <case>; [52
FLR 115] and
Daemar versus Industrial Commission of New South Wales & Anor (No. 2) [99 ALR ).] 
The Court is presently concerned with the meaning to be given to the words "for personal injury or wrong done to the bankrupt". In construing these words, the Court has regard to the scheme and purpose of the Act. The words must be read in the context in which they appear. The property which is vested in the trustee includes choses of action. There are statutory exceptions.
Section 116(2)(g) excludes certain personal actions. In the cases, a distinction has been drawn between claims in respect of a bankrupt's property and certain personal actions. The authorities appear to establish a test as to whether or not the damages or part of them are to be estimated by immediate reference to pain felt by the bankrupt in respect of his mind, body or character and without reference to his rights of property (Cox versus Journeaux & Ors (No. 2) <case>; [(1935) 52 CLR 713] at 721 and Wilson versus United Counties Bank Limited [(1920) AC ] at 111 and 128-133). Examples of rights which remain with the bankrupt include the right to sue for breach of promise of marriage, for criminal conversation, seduction, defamation, battery and injury to the person by reason of negligence.

Whilst there is some certainty in the relevant law on this question, the cases show that there are some areas of doubt.

In Faulkner at pp 118-119, Lockhart J said:- "The rationale of the distinction between earnings of a bankrupt personal to him and those derived from a business carried on by him underlies also the distinction between rights of action that vest in the trustee of a bankrupt's estate and those that do not. Although rights of action generally pass to the trustee of a bankrupt's estate, exceptions have been created by decisions of the courts, including the following: a right of action for slander, Ex parte
Vine; Re Wilson [(1878) 8 Ch D 364]; for seduction of a servant, Howard versus Crowther <case>; [(1841) 8 M and W 601], [151 ER 1179]; for trespass to land or goods in the plaintiff's actual possession, at least where the only substantial damage is for the annoyance and personal inconvenience to him, Clark versus Calvet <case>; [(1819) 8 Taunt 742]; [129 ER 573] and Rose versus Buckett [(1901) 2 KB 449]; for breach after bankruptcy of a contract for personal service made before bankruptcy,
Bailey versus Thurston and Co Ltd [(1903) 1 KB 137]; for personal injuries arising out of certain breaches of contract such as a contract of marriage, Drake versus Beckham <case>; [(1843) 11 M and W 315] The common thread running through these cases is that where the primary and substantial right of action is direct pecuniary loss to the property or estate of the bankrupt, the right to sue passes to the trustee notwithstanding that it may have produced personal inconvenience to the bankrupt: Wetherell v
Julius <case>; [(1850) 10 CB 267]; Wage on
Bankruptcy (1904 ed.), p 201. Where the essential cause of action is the personal injury done to the person or feelings of the bankrupt the right to sue remains with the bankrupt." 
At p 119, Lockhart J further said:- "There is still some doubt whether a right of action passes to the trustee where one and the same cause of action results in substantial damage to the property of the bankrupt as well as substantial injury to his person or annoyance to his feelings: Beckham versus Drake <case>; [(1849) 2 HLC 579]; [9 ER 1213]; Hodgson versus Sidney [(1866) LR 1 Ex 313];
Morgan versus Steble [(1872) LR 7 QB 611.] In
England the accepted view seems to be that such a cause of action passes to the trustee so far as it relates to the property of the bankrupt, and remains with the bankrupt so far as it relates to his person or feelings: Wilson v
United Counties Bank Ltd [(1920) AC 102.] Some of the problems that arise from this notion of a `mixed action' appear from cases such as Wilson versus United Counties Bank Ltd and Beckham versus Drake." 
In Linklater, both of these passages were quoted. Reference was also made to what was said in Wilson and applied by Dixon J in Cox at p 721.

Von Doussa J said:- "15. The reference by Dixon J to the damages `or part of them' in this formulation of the relevant test would appear to recognise that where a cause of action includes several heads of damage, to the extent that part of the damages are to be estimated by immediate reference to pain felt by the bankrupt in respect of his mind, body or character, the right to claim those damages remains with the bankrupt. This is the view which has been adopted subsequently in Holmes versus Goodyear Tyre and Rubber Co Ltd [(1984) 55 ALR ], and Bullock versus Goodluck and The Transport Commission [(1983) 48 ALR ."] 
The defendants are seeking summary disposition of the claim. The granting of summary relief is a matter of discretion. The discretion is exercised so as to ensure that justice between the parties is best served. The authorities make it clear that such relief is granted in plain and obvious cases only. The onus rests with the applicant.

A real difficulty in this case is the uncertainty that attends the question of the identification of the causes of action and heads of damage that are sought to be maintained by the pleading. It is clear that the pleading contains references, inter alia, to health (severe stress followed by a heart attack and a stroke), care and personal hindrance. Damages are claimed in respect of "Aggravated damages", "Punitive or Exemplary Damages" and "the Plaintiff's
Health and for future Nursing Home and Medical Care".

There are equitable causes of action. A substantial component of the claim for damages involves a claim for pecuniary loss. The link between the causes of action and the heads of damage is not always clear. Whatever the position may be, there is certainly some component of a personal nature which may go beyond "personal inconvenience to the bankrupt" in the sense that such expression is used in the cases. There seems to be certain heads of damage which appear to be related to pain felt by the plaintiff.

It would seem that the capacity to sue in respect of at least part of the matter pleaded remains with the trustee. There may well be a part which remains actionable at the instance of the plaintiff himself. I am certainly not satisfied that the position is otherwise.

To the extent that the capacity to sue presently remains with the trustee, he may be willing to effect an assignment of the relevant choses in action to the plaintiff. I understand that some discussions are presently on foot. If such an assignment was effected, the plaintiff may be able to obtain leave to file an amended process. In this respect, the provisions of Part 20 rule 4 of the
Supreme Court Rules may be of help to him.

I should add that, in submissions, some reference has been made to a possible joinder of the trustee as a party. It could not be expected that the trustee would consent to being joined as a plaintiff. His joinder as a defendant would be neither appropriate nor helpful to the plaintiff's case.

The circumstances of this case are somewhat unusual. The question of capacity to sue has been belatedly raised. The proceedings have been on foot since
The delay has seen a number of steps being taken in these proceedings and much expense has been incurred thereby.

At this stage, it seems that justice is best done if the question of the granting of summary relief is deferred until the plaintiff has had a further opportunity to pursue the prospects of obtaining an assignment and making such application as he may be advised. If he does wish to take that opportunity, he should proceed expeditiously. The parties may have liberty to apply.
 * * * 
