

Regina versus Vu Tich Truong [1996] NSWSC 183 (8 June 1996) 
REGINA versus VU TICH TRUONG 
No 60496/95 
MONDAY 22 APRIL 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, ALLEN J, JAMES J 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: In this matter I ask James J to give the first judgment.

JAMES J: This is an application by Vu Truong for leave to appeal against sentences imposed on him in the District Court by Judge JB Phelan on 24 August 1995 on a charge of taking a conveyance without the consent of the owner, an offence under s.154A of the Crimes Act, and a charge of having in his possession an implement capable of being used to drive a conveyance, an offence under s.114(1)(b) of the Crimes Act. His Honour imposed concurrent sentences of two years, consisting of a minimum term of one year to date from 9 June 1995 and an additional term of one year. The applicant had pleaded guilty to both charges.

An offence under s.154A of the Crimes Act carries a maximum penalty of penal servitude for five years. An offence under s.114(1)(b) of the Crimes Act carries a maximum penalty of penal servitude for seven years.

The applicant was legally represented in the proceedings on sentence before his Honour. However, the applicant was refused legal aid for his application for leave to appeal and the applicant has appeared in person before this
Court.

The applicant's notice of application for leave to appeal does not state any grounds of appeal. In a letter written on 4 April 1996 in support of his application, the applicant referred to his aged parents, his wife who he stated had newly arrived in Australia, his remorse and the fact that the sentences were his first time in prison and asserted that his criminal conduct had been caused by his drug addiction, which he claimed he had now overcome.

The applicant was born in Vietnam in 1971 and came to Australia in 1980, with his parents and some of his brothers and sisters.

In his remarks on sentence the sentencing judge adopted a statement of the facts of the offences prepared by the police. His Honour said that on 29
January 1994 at Bankstown the applicant was observed by police driving a motor vehicle in an erratic fashion and when pursued by the police adopted a dangerous course of driving which could have led to the laying of more serious charges. When the applicant was apprehended he claimed to have been given the key to the car by a friend who said the car was his. The key in fact did not fit the vehicle particularly well but could be used to start it. At the time the offences were committed the applicant was on a recognisance to be of good behaviour following a conviction for possessing heroin.

The proceedings on sentence before Judge Phelan extended over a period of 12 months. On 12 August 1994 a sentence indication hearing took place, at the conclusion of which his Honour indicated that if the applicant pleaded guilty he would give the applicant a Griffiths remand. This sentence indication was accepted by the applicant and after he pleaded guilty he was remanded for six months to 10 February 1995 and allowed bail in the meantime, on conditions which included that he refrain from all illicit drugs.

On 14 September 1994, while on the Griffiths remand, the applicant was convicted of supplying heroin and an order that he perform 300 hours of community service was made. By the time the applicant came before Judge Phelan in February 1995, the applicant had performed only 43 hours of community service.

In November 1994 the applicant's wife, a Chinese woman born in Malaysia, arrived in Australia. On 10 February 1995, the date to which the applicant had been remanded, the applicant failed to appear before Judge Phelan and his
Honour directed that a warrant for the arrest of the applicant should issue.

A pre-sentence report of 8 February 1995, which was before his Honour, disclosed that on a number of occasions while the applicant had been on a
Griffiths remand and on bail, the applicant had tested positively for illicit drugs, that is to say, on a number of occasions the applicant had breached a condition of his bail.

On 14 February 1995 the applicant appeared voluntarily before Judge Phelan. He told his Honour that he had not appeared on 10 February because he had not received legal aid and had not prepared his case. His Honour told the applicant that it seemed that the applicant had not been facing up to his drug problem and that unless he did so he would have to go to gaol. The proceedings on sentence were adjourned to April 1995 and then adjourned again to June, to enable the applicant to apply for admission to a residential drug rehabilitation programme, such as that conducted by Odyssey House. By the time of the hearing in April the applicant had obtained legal representation.

On 9 June 1995 the applicant's legal representative informed Judge Phelan that attempts to have the applicant admitted to such a drug rehabilitation programme had not been successful. Although there is no transcript of the proceedings of 9 June 1995 before us, it would appear that on that date the applicant told his Honour that he actually wanted to be sent to gaol because that would be the only way that he could avoid drugs. The applicant was then remanded in custody, bail refused, to enable a report by a psychologist to be obtained.

Not long afterwards, on 6 July 1995, the applicant was sentenced in the Local
Court to concurrent sentences of four months' imprisonment to date from 6 July on charges of larceny, malicious damage to property, stealing and supplying a prohibited drug. All of these offences had been committed in 1995 while the applicant had been on the Griffiths remand and on bail.

On 24 August 1995, a report from the psychologist attached to the Parramatta
Correctional Centre having been received, Judge Phelan finally passed sentence. As I have already indicated, his Honour made the sentences he imposed commence on 9 June 1995, which was the date when the applicant went into custody. Four months of the minimum term of each sentence were thus concurrent with the fixed terms of imprisonment imposed on the applicant in the Local Court on 6 July 1995. The minimum terms of the two sentences imposed by Judge Phelan will expire quite shortly, on 8 June 1996.

It will be observed that the sentencing judge exhibited considerable patience in the task of sentencing the applicant, giving the applicant a Griffiths remand, affording the applicant the opportunity of attempting to gain admission to a residential drug rehabilitation programme and obtaining, in addition to pre-sentence reports, a report by a Corrective Services psychologist.

In his remarks on sentence the sentencing judge set out the facts of the offences, traced the long history of the proceedings on sentence and referred to the subjective circumstances of the applicant, including that he had the support of a close-knit family and that he was married and his wife was prepared to wait for him; his criminal record, which apart from the offences I have already referred to, including a previous conviction in 1991 for possession of implements capable of entering and driving a conveyance, for which he had been given a two year good behaviour bond; the applicant's remorse; and the fact that the applicant's imprisonment as a result of these sentences was the first time the applicant had been in prison.

His Honour would appear to have taken into account and given proper consideration to all the subjective circumstances referred to by the applicant in his letter of April 1996. The applicant speaks in his letter of the desperate need of his aged parents and his wife that he be at liberty to support and care for them. However, the evidence before his Honour established that in the period leading up to the applicant's imprisonment the applicant had done little or nothing to support his parents or his wife.

No error of principle or of fact is to be detected in his Honour's remarks on sentence. His Honour, as I have already observed, exhibited quite extraordinary patience in exploring sentencing options which might assist in the rehabilitation of the applicant.

Nor do I consider that it could be said that the sentences passed by his
Honour were manifestly excessive. The sentences of two years for offences involving the stealing of a single motor vehicle, to which the applicant had pleaded guilty, were not light sentences. However, the sentencing judge was entitled to take into account that the offences had been committed while the applicant was on a recognisance, that the applicant had a previous conviction for an offence of a similar type and that the applicant's behaviour during the period of the Griffiths remand had not been such as to attract leniency. One third of the minimum term of each sentence was made concurrent with sentences passed on the applicant for quite distinct offences.

I would propose that while leave to appeal be granted the appeals against sentence be dismissed.

GLEESON CJ: I agree.

ALLEN J: I also agree.

GLEESON CJ: The orders of the Court will be as proposed by James J.
 * * * 
