

In the matter of Go Electrical Pty Ltd [2013] NSWSC 824 (14 June 2013) 
Last Updated: 25 June 2013 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Case Title: 
In the matter of Go Electrical Pty Ltd  
Medium Neutral Citation: <case>  
Hearing Date(s): May 2013  
Decision Date: June 2013  
Jurisdiction: 
Equity Division - Corporations List  
Before: 
Rein J  
Decision: 
Orders the Statutory Demand to be set aside and the defendant to pay the plaintiff's costs.  
Catchwords: 
CORPORATIONS ACT - application to set aside Statutory Demand pursuant to s
H of the Corporations Act on the basis that there is a dispute as to part of the debt and a genuine claim to an offsetting amount at least equivalent to the amount of the Statutory Demand.  
JUDGMENT
REIN J: On 23 November 2012, GO Electrical Pty Ltd ("GO Electrical"), the defendant, served on the plaintiff a Statutory Demand for the payment of $1, 824, 551.88. The claimed debt was in respect of electrical equipment which the plaintiff Class Electrical Service Pty Ltd ("CES") ordered from GO Electrical in connection with a building project for which CES was the electrical contractor. CES derived its work from two major companies - one of them being Cockram Constructions NSW Pty Ltd ("Cockram").
In these proceedings CES seeks an order under <case>, or alternatively <case> of the [Corporations Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) 2001 (Cth) ("the Act") that the Statutory Demand be set aside. Mr F. Assaf and Ms N. Zerial, appear for CES and Mr D. Pritchard SC and Mr F. Salama appear for GO Electrical.
Section 459H(1) provides: 
H Determination of application where there is a dispute or offsetting claim 
This section applies where, on an application under section 459G, the
Court is satisfied of either or both of the following: that there is a genuine dispute between the company and the respondent about the existence or amount of a debt to which the demand relates; that the company has an offsetting claim.
 and <case> 
In this section: admitted amount, in relation to a debt, means: if the Court is satisfied that there is a genuine dispute between the company and the respondent about the existence of the debt-a nil amount; or if the Court is satisfied that there is a genuine dispute between the company and the respondent about the amount of the debt-so much of that amount as the Court is satisfied is not the subject of such a dispute; or otherwise-the amount of the debt.
 offsetting claim means a genuine claim that the company has against the respondent by way of counterclaim, setoff or crossdemand (even if it does not arise out of the same transaction or circumstances as a debt to which the demand relates).
 respondent means the person who served the demand on the company.
I also set out section 459J: 
J Setting aside demand on other grounds 
On an application under section 459G, the Court may by order set aside the demand if it is satisfied that: because of a defect in the demand, substantial injustice will be caused unless the demand is set aside; or there is some other reason why the demand should be set aside.

Except as provided in subsection (1), the Court must not set aside a statutory demand merely because of a defect.
CES claims that there is a genuine dispute over the debt, the subject of the Statutory Demand, and alternatively, that the debt is appropriately the subject of a set off. CES also claims that GO Electrical's use of the Statutory Demand amounted to an abuse of process but Mr Assaf accepted that to establish abuse of process he must make good one or other of the first two grounds of <case> and if he does so there is no necessity to examine whether there has been an abuse of process.
GO Electrical contends that there is no genuine dispute and that GO Electrical's claim is not, or could not be, the subject of a set off.
CES, in support of its application, relies on three affidavits of Mr Mark Joseph Alati (of 13 December and 14 December 2012 and 19 February 2013) and an affidavit of Mr James Morgan Abbott dated 19 February 2013.
It was accepted by counsel that the principles relevant to determining whether the debt is disputed or the company has an offsetting claim are: 
For a claim to be an "offsetting claim" it must be a genuine claim against the creditor by way of counterclaim, set off or cross demand (even if it does not arise out of the same transaction or circumstances as the debt to which the demand relates).

It can include a claim for unliquidated damages.

The dispute or offsetting claim must have a sufficient objective existence and prima facie plausibility to distinguish it from a merely spurious claim, bluster or assertion and sufficient factual particularly to exclude the "merely fanciful or futile": TR Administration Pty Ltd versus Frank
Marchetti & Sons Pty Ltd <case>; [(2008) 66 ACSR 67], [71].

The claim must rise to the level of a serious question to be tried.

Mere assertion by a plaintiff that there exists a counter claim or dispute is insufficient.

The nature of the counter claim must be sufficiently clear and its quantification explained.

The plaintiff must provide evidence supporting the quantum, but the claim does not need to be particularised to the last dollar and cent.
GO Electrical challenges the admissibility of a number of paragraphs of the plaintiff's affidavits and part of the objection is based on what has been described as "the Graywinter principle" (after Graywinter Properties Pty Ltd versus Gas & Fuel Corp Superannuation Fund <case>; [(1996) 70 FCR 452], [16] - [22] per Barrett J (as his Honour was then). Counsel agreed that I should read all of the CES's affidavits contained in Court Book, Exhibit A, but apply the relevant principles in considering the evidence: see T30.25-29.

Background
CES on 3 August 2006 entered into a contract with GO Electrical by which CES would be able to purchase electrical equipment on credit terms: see pp 333 - 336 of the Court Book (marked Exhibit A). Clauses 11 and 13 of the standard terms are in the following terms: . LIMITATION Of LIABILITY .1 These conditions do not, and no provision o( these conditions will or purports to exclude, restrict or modify or have the effect of restricting, excluding or modifying: the application in relation to the supply of goods and/or services under the [Trade Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) f TPA'); the exercise of any right conferred by any such provision:or any liability of us for breach of conditions or warranty implied by any such provision.
 .2 To the extent permitted by law, all express or implied conditions, warranties, representations or remedies relating to the provision of goods or services pursuant to these conditions are excluded.
 .3 If a law implies or imposes a condition or warranty which cannot be excluded but in respect of which liability can be limited, our liability to you for breach of that condition or warranty is limited to, at our option: in the case of goods: replacing the goods or supplying equivalent goods; repairing the goods; paying for the cost of replacing the goods or buying equivalent goods; or paying for the cost or repairing the goods, and in the case of services; supplying the services again; paying for the cost of supplying the services again.
GOODS RETURNED FOB CREDIT .1 We will net consider a claim in relation to damaged goods or shortage of length, quantity or weight unless notified in writing within three days of delivery.13.2 We may allow credit at our sole discretion, but in any event we will not accept goods for credit after 30 days from the date of original invoice for Account Customers and cash customers 14 days.13.3 "Special buy- ins" wilt be subject to the Manufactures and or Suppliers conditions and fee structure.
 .4 We reserve the right to charge a restocking fee on goods accepted for credit.
 .5 In all cases, you must quote the original invoice or delivery docket and you must prepay return freight.
 .6 Goods retumed for credit must be accompanied by the original invoice or delivery docket and must be in the original pack and in a completely resaleable condition.
Between 11 June 2011 and 15 March 2012, CES placed orders for equipment to a total value of $2, 039, 540.51 (see Exhibit A, p 330). GO Electrical issued invoices for a total amount of $2, 090, 483.20 (see summary of invoice at Exhibit A pp 360-363). GO Electrical claims that all of the goods ordered and invoiced were delivered. In Mr Alati's first affidavit he asserted that an amount of at least $50K worth of goods had not been delivered. In none of the correspondence before the issue of the Statutory Demand had CES ever asserted that GO Electrical had not delivered goods that were ordered and invoiced, other than Famco emergency packs discussed below.
CES ordered the equipment from GO Electrical for installation in a $70M hospital project for which Cockram was the builder and it, CES, was the electrical subcontractor. When CES ordered the goods it indicated the delivery time it required and GO Electrical prepared a schedule which it provided to its suppliers (principally Versalux and Austube). Ms Bryceland of GO Electrical did warn CES that: [t]he Laser Lighting Product comes from Europe and they have their Summer
Holidays coming up which may present a problem for this order however as soon as I receive confirmation I will let you know.
 (see Exhibit A, p 16)
Mr Abbott of CES sent a revised delivery schedule in November 2011 (see Exhibit A p 34) indicating also that someone from CES had spoken to Austube. By March 2012, it was clear that there were problems with delivery: see Exhibit A, pp 44-46, 49. 
In an email of 30 March 2012, Mr Alati warned GO Electrical in respect of the delays of Versalux: 
Unfortunately this has left us in a very bad position in relation to not only finishing the project but also our professional reputation. I must therefore put you on notice that we will be forced to pursue damages against Go
Electrical for failure to meet our delivery schedules. These damages will not only include the costs for our time to install temporary fittings and remove them when the specified fittings arrive as well as the cost of the temporary fittings themselves along with any restocking fees but also any liquidated damages levied against us and the potential loss of earnings due to the damage to our reputation and the subsequent loss of future work.
 (Exhibit A, p 49)
The correspondence at Exhibit A, pp 56-68 demonstrates that Versalux was late with deliveries but not through any fault of GO Electrical or CES. The impact on the hospital project is noted by Mr Tom List of GO Electrical at Exhibit A, p 71 in an email to Versalux and Versalux replied at Exhibit A, p 72.
In August 2011 a problem surfaced with lights because the lights seemed to have the "wrong Famco emergency pack" (see Exhibit A, pp 74 and 86). Austube was contacted and various proposals were discussed. It seems that Austube would not accept that there had been any error on its part (see Exhibit A, p 90). GO Electrical clearly believed that the error lay with Austube (Exhibit A, p 97) as did CES (Exhibit A, pp 100-101).
By letter of 30 May 2012 CES wrote to GO Electrical with a proposed payment plan. I set out the text of the letter (see Exhibit A, p 103): "Dear Tom 
Re: OUTSTANDING DEBT 
As you are aware, we are experiencing difficulties in finalising the HMRI project at Newcastle which has been brought about by the direct result of your supplies inability to meet the various delivery schedules.

We can confirm that we are expecting to complete the project subject to the delivery of some outstanding Versalux fittings within the next three weeks. At this time I will in a position to confirm the extent of the financial damage created by the above issues. In the meantime I would like to propose the following payment schedule which, we will adhere to until such time as we have agreement on the amount of compensation due to Class Electrical Services from
GO Electrical and/or their suppliers.

On or before 18 July 2012 $200,000.00 
On or before 18 August 2012 $200,000.00 
On or before 18 September 2012 $500,000.00 
On or before 18 October 2012 $400,000.00 
On or before 18 November 2012 Balance less agreed compensation.

Given the magnitude of the situation, I believe the above proposal is more than fair and I would appreciate your acceptance as soon as possible.

Yours sincerely 
Class Electrical Services Pty Ltd 
Mark Alati 
Managing Director"
There is no response to that letter before the Court but there is evidence that GO Electrical did continue to supply equipment until November 2012 and correspondence later in the piece rather suggests that GO Electrical did accept the proposal. There was a similar proposal from CES by letter of 30 August 2012 (Exhibit A, p 104). 
By letter of 25 September 2012, headed "HMRI Versalux Fittings: Statement of Claim" CES set out the amount of $161, 190 as the summary of costs in relation to Versalux. The letter (Exhibit A, 105-106) also stated: 
There is a substantial amount of money being held from us by the client while delay costs and liquidated damages are assessed.

I have consulted my lawyers and they have instructed me that should a settlement not be agreed upon, then Class Electrical Services has no option than to hold all outstanding payments to Go Electrical until such time as a determination can be given by the courts.

The remuneration of these costs will not make up for the embarrassment we have suffered and the damage it has caused to Class Electricals long standing reputation in the industry.
There was a similar letter claiming the amount of $72, 900 in relation to Austube: see Exhibit A pp 107-108.
On 10 October 2012 Cockram wrote to CES: 
Further to our telephone conversation in regards to future tendering opportunities and why you have been unsuccessful in winning work with Cockram we confirm our discussion as follows...

The letter then set out matters relevant to the failure to meet delivery dates and the need for rectification work. The letter continued: 
While we acknowledge that the relationship between Class Electrical and
Cockram has been extremely strong over the last four years this last project has soured that. If our Project Manager's do not want to use Class due to performance concerns, I will fully back them in their decision.

The letter acknowledged that the issue was a supply issue: ...and to a certain extent this is beyond your control...

But that: 
It is your responsibility to meet the contract programme and to ensure that your subcontractors and suppliers also meet that programme.
 (see Exhibit A, p113).
By letter of 11 December 2012 Cockram advised CES of problems with faulty and non functioning light fittings and problems with incorrect battery packs. The letter advised that "a complete audit of the lighting is now being carried out" and that Cockram believed that CES Suppliers "may have provided you with fittings that were not fit for purpose": see Exhibit A, p 114. The letter refers to the fact that: 
As you are aware Cockram Construction are withholding a substantial amount of money from Class Electrical Services on the project and the cost of the audit and replacement of the faulty fittings will be withheld from your outstanding monies. Should there be insufficient funds held against you on this project,
Cockram will enact offset provisions in the contract to access other retention monies currently being held by Cockram from other projects Class Electrical
Services have completed.
 (see Exhibit A, p 114)
On 1 February 2013, Cockram wrote to CES advising that the audit previously foreshadowed had taken place and many defects found. The letter advised that Cockram had decided to engage others to complete the contractual works and that the costs of the work would be deducted from monies due to CES under the contract (Exhibit A, p 301). At pp 302 - 308 of Exhibit A are details of the work assessed by SMH Electrical and at pp 307-308 is a quotation for the rectification work of $1.637M.
By letter of 25 October 2012 Class Electrical wrote to GO Electrical "withdraw[ing]" previous payment plans and asserting that no further work was being awarded to CES from Cockram: see Exhibit A, pp 109-110. 
It appears that CES did pay the amount of $200K on 12 September (see Exhibit A, p 363) but it did not pay any other amount in accordance with any payment plans and that one payment of $200K is the only amount out of the $2M order that it has ever paid. On 22 November 2012, Mr Alati, the managing director of CES, wrote to Mr List in the following terms: 
Unfortunately once again my friends from Ikea have not paid however in order to negate any legal disputes I am prepared to offer the following payment structure, k can be picked up today and banked by the end of the month of November k by the end of December 2012 k by the end of January 2013..
 k by the end of February 2013 k by the end of March 2013 
Balance less agreed compensation by end of April 2013 
This offer is made on the basis that Go Electrical will not initiate any legal proceedings for any reason against either myself personally or Class
Electrical Services Pty Ltd.

Please indicate that this is acceptable and that Go Electrical agree to these terms.
 (See Exhibit A, p 383)
It will be observed that Mr Alati was offering to pay $800K and leave the remaining $1.3M unpaid and subject to the issue of "compensation". That compares with the offer made in May (Exhibit A, p 103) to pay $1.5M and with the balance unpaid subject to the issue of compensation.

The Statutory Demand
When GO Electrical issued its Statutory Demand on 23 November 2012, by the affidavit of Mr Coleman in support of the Statutory Demand, Exhibit A, pp 331-332, it acknowledged that there was an issue about losses claimed by CES totalling $234K (i.e. approximately the addition of the two figures I have mentioned in [19] and [20] above) and it deducted that amount from the statutory demand to arrive at a figure of $1, 656, 393.27 to which interest of $168, 158.61 was added making a total of $1, 824, 551.88 (see Exhibit A, 326-327).
The basis on which CES disputes the debt is a claim that it did not receive all of the goods which are the subject of the GO Electrical invoices. I have referred earlier to the estimate of $50K. In his affidavit of 19 September, Mr Abbott describes a task which he was asked to undertake and is relied on by CES to establish that $950K worth of goods were not delivered. Mr Abbott's evidence was not served within the 21 day period and on that basis its receipt is objected to by Go Electrical. Paragraph 7 is also objected to on the grounds of form. Mr Pritchard submitted that the swelling of a claim that approximately $50K worth of goods were not delivered to one that $950K worth of goods were not delivered cannot be accepted as an amplification or legitimate clarification within the Graywinter principle. I accept that submission but, in any event, I think that Mr Abbott's evidence does not establish that CES did not receive the goods which were ordered by it, rather it describes some other reconciliation of paperwork in which he has engaged. If CES genuinely believed that goods to half the value of the orders placed had not been supplied one would expect that letters or emails would have been sent well before February 2013, and that an employee of CES could attest to not having received goods ordered as opposed to embarking on the arcane exercise which Mr Abbott was asked to perform.

The offset or cross claim 
CES also claims that it is entitled to an offset by reason of: 
Delays in the delivery of equipment, 
Defects in the equipment supplied, and their consequential effect.
CES puts its claims on two bases. One is that it has contractual rights based on breach of terms express or implied by virtue of the [Sale of Goods Act 1923](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/soga1923128/) for delivery within the specified time, or within a reasonable time. The second is that CES has a claim under [s 18](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/soga1923128/s18.html) of the Australian Consumer Law Act (Cth), Schedule 2 of the [Competition and Consumer Act 2010](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/caca2010265/) (Cth) for misleading and deceptive conduct.
CES points out that a party to a sale of goods contract which has been breached by the vendor is entitled to loss to his reputation and can claim economic loss resulting there from: see Liftronic Pty Ltd versus Hyuandai Elevator Co Ltd (BC9303629, unreported New South Wales Supreme Court, 1 September 1993, Giles J (as his Honour then was)) and Flamingo Park Pty Ltd versus Dolly Dolly Creations Pty Ltd [(1986) 65 ALR 500] Palmer J and in particular [20] - [22] which case he submits is very similar to the present case.
Mr Pritchard challenges the bona fides of CES and its claimed dispute on the following bases: 
GO Electrical has already deducted $234K the total of the claimed losses referred to in CES letters of September 2012.

Up until 7 May at least (the date of Mr Assaf's written submissions) CES was claiming that it was entitled to between $16M to $30M from GO Electrical for loss of income plus $939K for goods claimed not delivered, $1.6M for defective works and $230K for rectification costs.

CES has not led evidence to the effect that it has not been paid its entitlement under its contract with Cockram, and it has not established that it has ceased to receive work from Cockram. It has not led evidence of contracts that it has bid for and not obtained from Cockram.

The $939K claim is itself is bogus and to be contrasted with the $50K estimate which Mr Alati gave in his first affidavit.

There is evidence which points to CES being insolvent: 
The profit and loss statement to 30 June 2012 shows a loss for the financial year of 3.1M (see Exhibit A, p 194).

There is no balance sheet for June 2012. None had been prepared as at
December and none has been prepared even by the date of the hearing. The balance sheet for June 2011 coupled with the June profit and loss statement for June 2012 point to financial difficulties since the total equity as at 30
June 2011 was $2.8M sustained by $10.2M of "trade and other receivables" less current liabilities of $7.5M and no significant other assets.

When Mr Alati proposed his repayment plan on 22 November he stated that he had not been paid by Ikea, apparently as an explanation of why he had paid only $200K of the total debt.

From all the plans for repayment, and before Cockram's letter of October , only $200K was ever paid.

The offer in the letter of 22 November 2012 was made after the October letters from Cockram had been received.

CES has brought no proceedings against GO Electrical for its $16M or $30M claim or indeed any part of it.
Mr Pritchard submits that the Court can have no confidence in Mr Alati and CES claims and he contends that there is no material to support the claimed loss of income. 
It was agreed that solvency is relevant only in the sense that establishing solvency (or insolvency) is capable of contributing to an assessment of the genuineness of the dispute and whether or not the claimed dispute is contrived: Reavill Farm Management Ltd versus Ashford Properties Pty Ltd  <case>, [28] per Barrett J.
Mr Pritchard also raises the question of what is supposed to be the misleading and deceptive conduct in which GO Electrical is said to have engaged. 
Mr Assaf submits that the threshold is a low one and this Court should not examine closely whether the assertions made by the plaintiff are made out only whether the plaintiff has established that there is a serious question to be tried.
In relation to the misleading and deceptive conduct claim, Mr Assaf referred to [s 4](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/caca2010265/s4.html) of Australian Consumer Law and said that GO Electrical's promise to deliver the goods within the specified period of time was a representation that it could do so, and that GO Electrical has the burden of establishing that it had a reasonable basis for making the representation. 
In Fuliban Catering Services Ltd (inc in PNG) versus Compass Group (Australia) Pty Ltd <case>, Heerey, Sackville and McKerracher JJ said at [91]: 
It is clear that to make a promise which is not performed or a prediction which is not fulfilled is not, without more, misleading or deceptive: Global
Sportsman Pty Ltd versus Mirror Newspapers Pty Ltd <case>; [(1984) 2 FCR 82], at 88, per curiam; Bill Acceptance Corporation Pty Ltd v
GWA Ltd <case>; [(1983) 50 ALR 242.] It is only where the making of a promise or prediction contains an implied representation of present fact, such as a representation that the promisor is capable of performing the promise, that the promise or prediction can be misleading or deceptive. Alternatively, if the promise can be construed as a representation with respect to a future matter, and the promisor does not have reasonable grounds for making the representation, it is taken to be misleading: TP Act, <case>. In this case, the promisor, unless it adduces evidence to the contrary, is deemed not to have had reasonable grounds for making the representation: <case>.

In Futuretronics International Pty Ltd versus Gadzhis <case>; [[1992] 2 VR 217], a case relief on by Mr Assaf, Ormiston J said at p 239: 
It would seem on the authorities that, at the least, a contractual promise would amount to an implied representation that the promisor then had an intention to carry out that promise. If it can be shown that he had no such intention he would be guilty of misleading or deceptive conduct. Likewise it would seem that such a representation connotes a present ability to fulfil that promise which, if shown to be untrue at the time of making, would likewise characterise the implied representation as misleading or deceptive.

Futuretonics does not assist CES and Fuliban seems to be dealing with a different situation to that under consideration here.
I do not need to dwell on the misleading and deceptive claim however because the sale of goods claim is a different category. The material presented, in my view, demonstrates that CES has grounds for a claim against GO Electrical based on GO Electrical's failure to deliver goods in a timely fashion, and notwithstanding the fact that on what has been presented GO Electrical has not itself been responsible for the delay by its suppliers of electrical equipment. I am also satisfied that CES has a claim that Famco energy packs which, it appears, should have been and were not supplied, again notwithstanding GO Electrical itself, on the evidence before me, having done nothing to cause that departure from what was ordered. There appears to be a real question about the quality of some of the other items that were supplied by GO Electrical to CES.
There is an issue in relation to the contractual claim as to whether the terms precluded any claim for damage of the kind asserted here. Mr Assaf points to the fact that CES disputes that the purchase orders are governed by the trading terms since incorporation is an issue. In view of the authorities in this area, I think I am precluded from delving into the merits of these arguments, and I proceed on the basis there is a serious question to be tried as to whether GO Electrical is liable to CES for failing to deliver on time and for defective goods and that is sufficient I think to establish that it is has a genuine claim. 
The only remaining question is whether CES has established there is a realistic prospect that its claim is equal to or exceeds $1.83M.
In Macleay Nominees versus Belle Property East Pty Ltd <case> Palmer J had to grapple with a similar problem, of the amount of the plaintiff's alleged offsetting claim, his Honour remarked at [16]: 
The position is by no means as easy where the claim is a claim for unliquidated damages and the damages are said to be economic loss suffered by the plaintiff.

His Honour referred to Jesseron Holdings Pty Ltd versus Middle East Trading
Consultants Pty Ltd (No 2) [(1994) 122 ALR 717]; [(1994) ACSR 787]; [(1994) 12 ACLC 490] in which the prospect of "ambit" claims were recognised and Palmer J went on to say: 
In my opinion, a genuine offsetting claim for the purposes of CA s459H(1) and s459H(2) means a claim on a cause of action advanced in good faith, for an amount claimed in good faith. "Good faith" means arguable on the basis of facts asserted with sufficient particularity to enable the Court to determine that the claim is not fanciful. In a claim for unliquidated damages for economic loss, the Court will not be able to determine whether the amount claimed is claimed in good faith unless the plaintiff adduces some evidence to show the basis upon which the loss is said to arise and how that loss is calculated. If such evidence is entirely lacking, the Court cannot find that there is a genuine offsetting claim for the purposes of s459H(1) and s459H(2).

See also Grass Manufacturers Pty Ltd versus Sraennik  <case> where Palmer J dealt with a similar position at [19] -[22].
In paragraph 27 of his first affidavit, Mr Alati sets out, in effect, the heads of claim. Some of these refer back to other paragraphs and incorporating those references the list can be discerned as: 
Lost income from Cockram.

The withholding of monies from Cockram (as set out in its letters of 10 and 11 December 2011).

CES has been excluded from insurance cover of suppliers which has had a substantial adverse effect on CES credit facilities "impacting upon the plaintiff's ability to carry on its business in the normal course of events" (reference made to Exhibit A pp 196- 197).

GO Electrical's failure to provide electrical equipment as specified and free of defects.

The invoicing of the plaintiff for electrical equipment not supplied.
I shall deal with these in reverse order.
In relation to item (5), if this is intended to reflect the $939, 298.91 claim I have already dealt with it. I am not satisfied that there is a serious question to be tried save in relation to the Famco emergency packs which would really seem to be part of (4). In relation to (4) the cost of those items has already been allowed by GO Electrical.
In relation to (3), the correspondence to which Mr Alati refers does not appear to support his contention that CES has been taken off insurance policies.
In relation to (2), I think there is sufficient evidence to indicate that Cockram has withheld and is intending to withhold money. The letter of 11 December 2012 states: 
As you are aware [Cockram] are withholding a substantial amount of money from [CES] on the project and the cost of the audit and replacement of the faulty fittings will be withheld from your outstanding monies.

Mr Alati in his third affidavit put a figure of $316, 090 on that. However, the letter of 1 February 2013 and the documents from SMH indicate that
Cockram's claim is likely to be much higher than what has been retained - in the order of $1.6M.
Given that Cockram, by its letters of 11 December 2012 and 1 February 2013, has foreshadowed a claim for rectification costs, has obtained a quote for those costs at $1.637M, has indicated that it has appointed "others" to do the rectification work and threatened to take action to recover all of its losses in respect of the rectification work, it is not difficult to contemplate that CES's claim could well exceed $1.8M in all the circumstances. Also, I find that it is not unrealistic to anticipate that if CES is successful in its claim against GO Electrical it will establish damages to its reputation and good will for which it might recover a significant sum of money.
In so far as lost income is concerned there is little put forward to support the claim that contracts tendered for have not been granted, but Cockram's letter of 11 October 2012 (see [21] above) gives some support for the claim. If lost income were the only component of CES offset it would be very difficult to estimate what is the realistic figure for it.
I need be satisfied only that there is a genuine claim to an offsetting amount of at least $1.83M and, on the face of the material presented in relation to Cockram's potential claim against CES as articulated in its letters to CES and the likelihood of a claim for damage to goodwill dealt with in [48] and [49] above, I am so satisfied.
Accordingly, in my view, the Statutory Demand should be set aside.

Costs
GO Electrical should pay CES' costs.
 * * * 
