

Sellers Fabrics Pty Limited and Anor versus Hapag-Lloyd Ag Matter No 12/96 [1998] NSWSC 640 (12 October 1998) 
Last Updated: 17 December 1998 
SELLERS FABRICS PTY LIMITED & ANOR versus HAPAG-LLOYD AG /96 October 1998 
Rolfe J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division Admiralty List 
Name of Case: SELLERS FABRICS PTY LIMITED & ANOR versus HAPAG-LLOYD AG 
Proceedings: 12/1996 
Dates of Hearing: 12 October 1998 
Date of Interlocutory Judgment: 12 October 1998 
Counsel for Plaintiffs: Mr P E King 
Solicitors for Plaintiffs: Withnell & Hetherington 
Counsel for Defendant: Dr M White QC/Ms A J Silink 
Solicitors for Defendant: Norton Smith & Co 
Application for a general adjournment refused in circumstances where it would lead to disruption of proceedings and where the party applying for the adjournment has had adequate time to prepare case.

SELLERS FABRICS PTY LIMITED V HAPAG-LLOYD AG 
RE THE SHIP "ENCOUNTER BAY" 
JUDGMENT - On application for adjournment. See page 14 of transcript. 
HIS HONOUR: In the reasons I gave earlier today, I set forth what I considered to be for present purposes, an adequate history of the litigation and I also stated my reasons for rejecting the tender of the various statements. After that occurred Dr White sought the opportunity, which I granted him, to take instructions as to what consequences should flow from the decisions to which I had come. 
Dr White has now sought a general adjournment, which is opposed by Mr King. He has sought that adjournment on the basis that the defendant wishes to adduce evidence that it is not liable to the plaintiff or, alternatively, that if it is liable, it is entitled to limit its liability. He has submitted that if the defendant has this latter entitlement, the amount in issue would be relatively small and in the order of $10,000, whereas, if the defendant either fails to establish any of its defences or, alternatively, to limit its liability, the amount in issue, being the principal sum to which I have referred, together with interest, is in the order of $500,000. In these circumstances, he has submitted, the defendant should be given the opportunity to bring forward the case it now wishes to present, and that in order to enable it to do that, I should grant an adjournment subject to directions.

Dr White does not dispute that a consequence of granting an adjournment would be that the defendant must pay the costs thrown away by the need for that and any other order for costs which may be appropriate.

Dr White has relied upon the decision of the High Court in Queensland versus J L
Holdings Pty Ltd, and in particular, the passage from the judgment of
Dawson, Gaudron and McHugh JJ, pages 154 to 155. Their Honours said, at page :
 "In this case, which is of a commercial nature, the litigants are, on the one side, a developer, and on the other side, government, and there is nothing which would indicate any personal strain which would justify the conclusion that costs are not an adequate remedy for prejudice caused by the amendment sought to the pleadings." 
I think it is necessary to pay some careful consideration to the facts of that case. What had occurred was that the appellant sought to amend its pleadings many months before a hearing would take place. Further, there was some dispute as to whether the amendment was necessary in any event, because, arguably, the matter sought to be raised by the amendment was already pleaded. In those circumstances the High Court considered that as a matter of discretion it was proper to conclude that an appropriate order for costs would be sufficient to remove any prejudice to the party opposing the granting of the amendment, and once the area of prejudice was removed, the justice of the case demanded that the amendment be allowed.

In the context of that case Kirby J made clear that one matter to which consideration had to be paid was that the amendment was not sought shortly before the hearing and at a time which would be disruptive of the hearing. At page 171 his Honour said: "An opposing party is entitled to have taken into account the consequences of an indulgence, especially where it would cause disarray at the last minute to its preparation of the trial. Similarly, the length of time that the proceedings have been pending before the application is made will often be a relevant consideration. The longer the time, the more reasonable it may be to expect that the parties or their lawyers should have earlier appreciated and raised the point in issue. If a consequence of the indulgence is truly a necessity to postpone a trial date, this will be a most important consideration. Its importance increases with the congestion of court lists and the difficulty, particularly in the case of a lengthy trial, of securing early replacement dates, the extent to which a new issue would give rise to a substantial new case in reply, is also relevant. So may be the nature of the litigation and whether it has been assigned to a special list designed to cater for the peculiarities and special needs of commercial cases in long trials and the like." 
The present proceedings have been the subject of extensive case management and, as I pointed out in my earlier reasons, the directions given by the Court were given with the consent of the parties or, put more accurately, the Court gave directions which the parties brought in as being consent directions.

It is important to note, which I did not in my earlier reasons, that when, on May 1998, the time within which the defendant was to serve its statements of evidence was extended by consent, a further order made was that the parties should have liberty to apply on three days notice. In every case in this list that liberty is assumed. However, in the present case the parties were astute to ensure that there should be no doubt about having such liberty.
Nonetheless, the defendant, notwithstanding that it was in gross default of the directions which it, together with the plaintiffs, had propounded for the
Court's endorsement, made no such application.

The defendant now says that it would be denied justice if it is not entitled to put forward its case. However, the defendant, in my view, has had ample opportunity either to put forward its case in accordance with the directions to which it agreed or, alternatively, to come before the Court at a far earlier point and seek to have the matter adjourned. As it is, the plaintiff has now had to bring its case before the Court and once again, as I said earlier, its case is not substantially or indeed at all in dispute.

It seems to me that for the defendant to be asserting that it will be the victim of an injustice is to look at the matter in quite the wrong way. The defendant will simply be precluded from bringing forward the case which it has had ample opportunity to bring forward for months and months prior to the hearing. Indeed, as I said earlier, its defence was filed over two years ago, on 19 September 1996. It then alleged the various defences, evidence in support of which it now asserts it is being precluded from bringing forward.
If it had acted responsibly in pleading those defences, which I am prepared to assume it did, it would have then had some evidence on which to base those defences.

In those circumstances the defendant has had more than adequate time to present its case and so much, in my view, has been acknowledged by its agreement to the directions it has joined with the plaintiffs in asking the
Court to make. In my opinion there would be a gross injustice to the plaintiffs to have this matter adjourned, particularly in circumstances where, once again repetitiously I state the plaintiffs' case is not in issue.

Dr White has rightly based emphasis upon the amount involved and in making the observations I am about to, I am not to be taken as overlooking what their
Honours said in Queensland versus J L Holdings at page 155. It seems to me that there would be a gross injustice to the plaintiffs to deprive them, or perhaps the insurer standing behind them, of an amount to which they are now entitled.
Part of the rationale of this List in ensuring that cases are brought on promptly, is to ensure that business people will know where they stand and, in particular, what money is available to them. That would be completely defeated if, in consequence of actions taken at the commencement of a trial, a defendant, or indeed for that the matter a plaintiff, was able to bring about an adjournment.

There will always be circumstances in which a Court may come to an ultimate view that an adjournment is justified in the particular circumstances of any case, and I am acutely aware that the Court must not become a slave to case management. Indeed, case management is but one factor which should be taken into account from time to time. It should be taken into account not only for the benefit of the parties immediately before the Court, but also for the benefit of the parties who are seeking time to have their cases heard by the
Court and have legitimate claims upon its time. But having said that, I acknowledge that the ultimate duty of the Court, by which I mean its main duty, is to ensure that justice is done between the parties.

It may be said, of course, that by preventing the defendant from presenting its case, justice cannot be done so far as the defendant is concerned. But in the particular circumstances of this case, I would disagree with that assertion because this matter has proceeded in the way in which I have referred, and has proceeded with the defendant, as I said in my earlier reasons, being represented by solicitors well used to conducting litigation of this type and in circumstances in which I am prepared to assume that the defendant has the financial wherewithal to properly conduct the litigation. It has had every opportunity to put forward its case in a proper and orderly manner. Further, it has had every opportunity, if it was unable to do that, to approach the Court at a far earlier time to seek the indulgence which it now seeks.

In this regard I have referred to the affidavit of Miss Wilmshurst and, as I have said, it is quite obvious from that affidavit that as late as 20 August the defendant was obviously not doing anything to seriously meet its obligations for the preparation of the hearing.

In all these circumstances, in which I encapsulate much of what I said this morning, I am of the view, in the exercise of my discretion, that the application for the adjournment must be refused.
 * * * 
