

Regina versus On Clinic Australia P/L [1996] NSWSC 530 (6 November 1996) 
REGINA v. ON CLINIC AUSTRALIA PTY LTD /96 
Wednesday, 6 November 1996 
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
HUNT CJ at CL, SMART J, McINERNEY J 
CATCHWORDS: [THERAPEUTIC GOODS ACT 1989](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/tga1989191/); EXTENUATING CIRCUMSTANCES; CONSTRUCTION OF S.19B OF THE CRIMES ACT (CTH); EXCEPTIONAL FACTS; USE OF NOMINAL FINE; DOUBLE JEOPARDY 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed 
HEADNOTE 
The Crown appealed against `sentences' imposed upon the respondent company on 34 charges under [s.20(1)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/tga1989191/s20.html) of the [Therapeutic Goods Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/tga1989191/) of knowingly importing therapeutic goods into Australia for use in humans which were not registered goods in relation to the company. The Crown submitted that the `sentences' were manifestly inadequate.

The company pleaded guilty to each offence and the judge discharged the company pursuant to s.19B of the Crimes Act . He ordered the company to serve 6 months probation and that therapeutic goods to the value of approximately $200,000 be forfeited.

Held: . The offences were not of a trivial nature and there is a high public importance in adhering to the provisions of the [Therapeutic Goods Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/tga1989191/). which is designed to protect the safety and welfare of humans. The system of controls must be adhered to fully. Those operating in the fields covered by the Act must make full enquiries and obtain full advice as to compliance with the Act and Regulations. The high penalties emphasise that breaches must be avoided. Those guilty of breaches of the Act must expect that convictions will be recorded and that substantial fines will be imposed.
The company sought advice from responsible persons and bodies, imported goods of the requisite quality and stored them properly. Further, the goods had been passed by the Australian Federal Police and Customs. In one instance this was after Customs had referred an importation to the Commonwealth
Department. When the importations were ultimately taken up with the company it disclosed all that had happened and facilitated that Department's enquiries.
There were other extenuating circumstances. The case was truly exceptional.
It was open to the judge to take the course which he did. However, his `sentences' were on the borderline of being inadequate. In any event the appeal should be dismissed on discretionary grounds.

Observations as to the construction of s.19B of the Crimes Act (Cth).

Per Hunt CJ at CL: The importance of the obligations imposed by the [Therapeutic Goods Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/tga1989191/) is such that even an innocent failure as occurred in the present case requires a fine.
The [Criminal Appeal Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) does not exist for the purpose of imposing a nominal fine except where the most extraordinary error has been made at first instance. The extenuating circumstances were very significant. Even so the appeal would have been upheld to impose a nominal fine had it not been for the substantial value of the goods forfeited. The appeal should be dismissed.

Orders: 
Appeal dismissed.
 
JUDGMENT 
HUNT CJ at CL: The background to this appeal is described in the judgment of Smart J.

It is easy to say, in retrospect, that Dr Vaisman on behalf of the respondent company should have made more inquiries as to what compliance was required with any regulatory obligations. The fact that he was being advised by a senior urologist, another urologist and an experienced general practitioner did not assist, as they clearly were not medical entrepreneurs as Dr Vaisman had sought to become. His inquiries of the New South Wales Department of
Health would not necessarily have brought forth (and did not bring forth) a warning to check with the Commonwealth Department of Health.

But, even when Dr Vaisman did later contact the Commonwealth Department (when
Customs first queried an import because a customs officer had mistaken one of the drugs imported for a narcotic), he did not receive the correct advice, so it could well have been that he would not have received the correct advice had he made inquiries of that Department before arranging the first import. That he was not referred by the Department, even at that stage, to the Therapeutic
Goods Administration shows, to say the least, a surprising negligence on the part of its officers.

The failure of the respondent company to obtain the status of a sponsor in relation to these drugs has not resulted in drugs being imported which had not already been approved for use in Australia or in any lessening of the required standards of control in their use here in Australia. What the Director of
Public Prosecutions has argued is that a punishment beyond the forfeiture of the goods wrongly imported (worth about $200,000) was necessary as a disciplinary type of action to ensure that others who failed to make the proper inquiries realize that they too would be punished for failing to do so.
I find that a curious submission. If a would-be importer had made inquiries even of the Commonwealth Department of Health without being referred to the
Therapeutic Goods Administration through any ignorance (let us assume) of the officers of that Department, he would hardly have any knowledge of what the
Director says should have been the proper punishment in the present case and be deterred thereby.

Nevertheless, the result which this Court is upholding in the present case should not be regarded as a precedent. I would myself have preferred the imposition of a notional fine. I agree with the Director's submissions that the importance of the obligations imposed by the [Therapeutic Goods Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/tga1989191/) are such that even an innocent failure as occurred in the present case requires a fine. But the [Criminal Appeal Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) does not exist for the purposes of imposing nominal fines except where the most extraordinary error has been made at the first instance level, because of the element of double jeopardy involved. This is not such a case. For myself, I would place no weight upon the cultural background of Dr Vaisman. The extenuating circumstances were, however, very significant. Even with all that,
I would nevertheless have upheld the appeal in order to impose a nominal fine had it not been for the substantial value of the goods forfeited.

I agree that the Crown appeal should be dismissed.
 
SMART J: The Director of Public Prosecutions has appealed against the "sentences" imposed upon the company on 34 charges under [s.20(1)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/tga1989191/s20.html) of the [Therapeutic Goods Act 1989](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/tga1989191/) of knowingly importing therapeutic goods into Australia for use in humans which were not registered goods in relation to the company on the grounds that the "sentences" were manifestly inadequate. The charges covered 17 importations during the period 1 November 1993 to 1 September 1995 with in each instance Regitine and Papaverine being imported. The company pleaded guilty to each offence. The judge discharged the company pursuant to s.19B of the Crimes Act and ordered it to serve 6 months probation. He ordered that therapeutic goods of a value of about $200,000 be forfeited. The judge took this course because he regarded the extenuating circumstances as powerful.

The Crown contended that the judge had not paid sufficient regard to the purposes of the Act and the element of public deterrence.

Dr J Vaisman, the founder, owner, and a director of the company, had been a professor of gynaecology in Russia and held a position at the University of
Advanced Medical Training at Kishenev in the USSR. He had published quite extensively in medical journals in Russia. He had not undergone the registration exams to be recognised as a medical practitioner in Australia.
His higher science degree had been recognised as the equivalent of a PhD in
Australia. He came to Australia in 1987. After he had learned English he set about establishing a clinic for the treatment of men with erection and ejaculation problems and other sexual difficulties.

The first clinic commenced operating in March 1993. By September 1995 the company had 20 clinics throughout Australia. Dr Vaisman did not and does not work in any of the clinics. They are manned by qualified Australian medical practitioners trained by a senior urologist, a former President of the
Australian Urological Society. The system employed comes from research which
Dr Vaisman carried out in Russia. It involves the self administration by the patient of a combination of three pharmaceutical substances known as Regitine,
Papaverine and Prostaglandin. Dr Vaisman was and is a skilled medical scientist and has now become a medical entrepreneur.

At an early stage the company discovered that the price of Regitine and
Papaverine in Australia was about 5 times that payable in Israel. Regitine has only one manufacturer in the world, namely, Ciba-Geigy, the well known pharmaceutical company based in Switzerland. The Regitine which was imported by the company had been manufactured there, exported to Israel and imported into Australia from Israel. That Regitine was identical with the Regitine regularly imported into Australia from Switzerland by others. The company now uses Regitine directly imported from Switzerland, albeit that it costs so much more.

The company imported Papaverine from a branch or subsidiary of Teva in Israel.
Teva is a large American pharmaceutical company. The supplies from the sources in Israel were organised for the company by Dr Vaisman's brother who lived in
Israel and was also a medical practitioner. Regitine and Papaverine have other uses. For example, Regitine is used to bring blood pressure down in the case of hypertension.

Three Australian doctors were involved in helping Dr Vaisman. One was the senior urologist earlier mentioned, the second was a urologist and the third was a general practitioner. All of them had at least twenty years experience in medicine in Australia. Their role was to provide professional assistance.

Dr Vaisman went to the Department of Health of New South Wales to ascertain if he needed special approvals, a special licence or special premises. This enquiry was answered in the negative as he did not use general anaesthetics.

The first parcel of substances imported from Israel was examined by the
Australian Federal Police. An officer thought that one of the drugs was a narcotic. This was because he confused Papaverine with another drug. The
Federal Police apologised for the error and returned the drugs which had been seized.

The drugs were openly ordered and checked from the beginning by Australian
Customs. The parcels which were clearly labelled were routinely opened by customs and forms were endorsed or issued with the words "Checked by Customs".
Customs delivered the parcels containing the drugs to the company's head office.

As a result of the Customs procedures and actions Dr Vaisman believed he was fully complying with the law. If something had been amiss Customs would have acted.

On 5 May 1994 Australian Customs wrote to the company advising that the importation of six boxes of Papaverine ampoules included in a parcel addressed to it from Israel was prohibited unless approved by the Department of Health.
The company was requested to forward this permission. The company was told that enquiries could be addressed to the Drug Monitoring Section, Drugs of
Dependence Branch, Department of Health, Housing, Local Government and
Community Services. The company was further requested to contact the Community
Protection Section of Australian Customs within 30 days or the whole parcel would be seized.

On receipt of that letter Dr Vaisman contacted the Health Department in
Canberra but could not obtain any satisfactory answers. He explained the position and was told he could get the parcel. There were many telephone conversations. He apparently also contacted Customs. Customs delivered that parcel and subsequent parcels to the company's head office. As the deliveries had been permitted Dr Vaisman assumed that everything was in order.

At one stage in 1995 Dr Vaisman went to Canberra to speak with Dr Wright of
Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) about the installation of certain sterile air cabinets and the transfer of Papaverine and Regitine from the phials to small bottles which were convenient for all the clinics' doctors to use. Dr Wright asked where the substances came from. The reply was Israel. Dr
Vaisman was not able to put a date on this visit. July and August 1995 have been mentioned.

Dr Vaisman stated that it was during his Canberra visit to the Department of
Health and his dealings with Dr Wright that he heard for the first time that he had to have registration as a sponsor to import the two drugs.

Mr W Close, a Principal Investigator, TGA, received his instructions to investigate the company's import activities about 20 July 1995. About 5
September 1995 Mr Close, having been alerted by a Customs Service Officer, inspected seven boxes addressed to the company at the International Mail
Centre at Clyde.

The boxes, which contained the two drugs were seized by Mr Close. On 6
September 1995 Mr Close attended at the company's head office with a search warrant and spoke with Dr Vaisman and Mr Mitchell, the company's General
Manager and explained the position. Mr Close received immediate co-operation.
Dr Vaisman took Mr Close to the storeroom at his block of flats where the drugs were kept. In cross examination Mr Close agreed with the following: 
At the time he caused the initial search warrant to issue he was aware of only three offences. He became aware of the remainder as a result of the full and frank disclosures of Dr Vaisman who told him the quantities of the importations and their duration; 
Dr Vaisman supplied the information which enable the TGA to attend upon the company's accountants and seize the prior invoices. Dr Vaisman told the investigators that his accountants, whom he named, had the invoices of the prior importations.

Arrangements were made with Dr Vaisman to attend at the company's storeroom and seize the drugs there. The storage conditions were satisfactory being dry and cool.

Dr Vaisman participated in a complete record of interview and also discussed other matters in which Mr Close was interested.

Regitine has been used in Australia since 1985 and Papaverine since
February 1990.

There was no suggestion that any of the drugs imported were untried or sub-standard or unsafe.

There was no reason to suggest that the company would not have been licensed to import the drugs into Australia. The manufacturing plant in
Switzerland had been approved. That of Teva would have had to be inspected and approved.

He had verified as correct with the laboratory concerned (Mr Staback) Dr
Vaisman's statement as to the drugs being mixed. That laboratory is involved in the manufacture of sterile pharmaceuticals.

Correct records had been kept of all that had been done. Nothing had been kept quiet or hidden. These were normal open business importation transactions.

On the basis of the inquiries he had made including those of the Federal
Police and Customs Dr Vaisman believed that he was complying with the law.

The moral culpability of Dr Vaisman is very low. Others who were more familiar with Australian Health Department procedures may have made detailed enquires of the officers of the TGA in Canberra. Usually making enquiries or seeking advice is stimulated or initiated by being aware that problems may exist in a particular area.

The Therapeutic Goods Act 1969 is an important piece of legislation. The object as stated in s.4 is to provide for the establishment and maintenance of a national system of controls relating to the quality, safety, efficacy and timely availability of therapeutic goods that are used, whether produced in
Australia or elsewhere or exported from Australia. Ensuring the quality, safety, efficacy and timely availability of therapeutic goods is at the core of the Act and to do this a system of controls was needed.

Section 3 contains a wide definition of "therapeutic goods". They mean goods that are represented in any way to be, or that are, or likely to be taken to be for therapeutic use or for use as an ingredient or component in the manufacture of therapeutic goods, amongst other goods. "Therapeutic use" is also widely defined. Inter alia, it means use in or in connection with preventing, diagnosing, curing or alleviating a disease, ailment defect or injury or influencing inhibiting or modifying a physiological process. Section enables the Minister by order to determine that matters specified in the order constitute a standard for therapeutic goods or a class of therapeutic goods identified in the order. Section 13 and the definition of "standard" in s.3 envisage that considerable use will be made of the standards in the
British Pharmacopoeia. Section 14 provides that except with the consent of the
Secretary a person must not import therapeutic goods into Australia or supply therapeutic goods in Australia if they do not conform with a standard applicable to the goods. There is a similar prohibition as to exporting therapeutic goods.

By s.18 the Secretary is required to maintain the Australian Register of
Therapeutic Goods for the purpose of compiling information in relation to, and providing for evaluation of, therapeutic goods for use in humans. There is provision for the exemption of goods.

Section 20(1) provides that a person who is the sponsor of therapeutic goods must not knowingly or recklessly import, export or supply or manufacture the goods for supply in Australia for use in humans unless the goods are registered goods in relation to that person. A "sponsor" means an exporter or importer or manufacturer in Australia or a person who arranges for the goods to be exported, imported or manufactured.

There are supplementary provisions designed to prevent the avoidance of the major provisions and providing for clear labelling of the goods.

The Act contains a procedure for having goods registered. Extensive information has to be provided about the goods including their formulation, composition, design, specification and quality, the method and place of manufacture or preparation, the procedures employed to ensure that proper standards are maintained and the safety and efficacy of the goods. The
Secretary must be notified of any adverse effects of the goods of which a person becomes aware after the goods have been registered.

What emerges from a detailed study of the Act is the emphasis at all stages on ensuring and maintaining the quality of therapeutic goods imported into or manufactured or used in Australia or exported from Australia. To achieve these important goals justifiably strict systems of control have been introduced.
Before goods manufactured overseas may be imported the processes of manufacture and the place of manufacture are checked.

The maximum penalty for each offence charged is $120,000. Similar high penalties apply where the goods supplied are not of the requisite standard.
Even higher penalties apply where adverse effects are not notified. Goods imported etc in contravention of the Act are destroyed.

The judge after a detailed review of the facts relating to the offences and the conduct, good character of the company and Dr Vaisman and his past suffering, reiterated that the offences, if assessed purely from their objective features without reference to the other matters, would merit a substantial penalty. However, the judge continued: "...with all the features which are of an overwhelming nature in favour of the company and the fact that it will lose $200,000 as a direct result of what was subjectively a mistake but objectively a criminal breach of the Therapeutic
Goods Act then that operates as sufficient penalty. I propose therefore not to impose any further penalty. I indicate that I have considered the requirements of the Crimes Act in particular section 16A. And under section 19B of the
Crimes Act whilst I am satisfied that the charges are proved, having regard to the extenuating circumstances under which the offences were committed, I find that it is inexpedient to inflict any punishment and the company is released on probation." 
The judge did not say that the charges were dismissed or that he was discharging the company. After some brief discussion the judge said: "Section 19B in subsection (b) simply referred to a release on probation and in (d) refers to a recognisance. I'll indicate that I would - unless the Crown wishes to relist the matter I would simply release the offender on probation to be of good behaviour for six months. But if the Crown wishes to relist the matter if the Crown believes that I don't have power to do that then I'll hear argument about that as to whether or not I ought to apply subsection (d) of section 19B." 
Everyone seems to have proceeded on the basis, probably correctly, that the judge had discharged the company without proceeding to a conviction and placed it on probation for six months.

No point was taken as to matters of form by either party but it would have been preferable if the judge had made an order discharging the company and otherwise complied with s.19B(1)(d).

Section 19B of the Crimes Act relevantly provides: "(1) Where: a person is charged before a court with an offence against the law of the
Commonwealth; and the court is satisfied, in respect of that charge or more than one of those charges, that the charge is proved, but is of the opinion, having regard to: the character, antecedents, cultural background, age, health or mental condition of the person; the extent (if any) to which the offence is of a trivial nature; or the extent (if any) to which the offence was committed under extenuating circumstances; that it is inexpedient to inflict any punishment, or to inflict any punishment other than a nominal punishment, or that it is expedient to release the offender on probation; the court may, by order: dismiss the charge or charges in respect of which the court is so satisfied; or discharge the person, without proceeding to conviction in respect of any charge referred to in paragraph (c), upon his giving security, with or without sureties, by recognizance or otherwise, to the satisfaction of the court, that he will comply with the following conditions: that he will be of good behaviour for such period, not exceeding 3 years, as the court specifies in the order; ..." 
The words "cultural background" were inserted as from 16 January 1995. As the company can only act through its servants and agents and depends upon them to ensure that it complies with the law, I would not regard this factor as irrelevant. In point of time the amendment applies to counts 29-34 but being a change in the law favourable to the company and Dr Vaisman it is a matter to be considered as to each count.

These offences were not of a trivial nature.

While the judge referred in the course of his reasons to matters which would go to the good character of Dr Vaisman and the company and to his cultural background he primarily based his decision on what he regarded as extenuating circumstances. He probably regarded the other factors as forming the backdrop against which the extenuating circumstances should be assessed.

In Cobiac versus Liddy <case>; [119 CLR 257] the
High Court considered section 4 of the Offenders Probation Act 1913-1963 (South Australia). It was in substantially similar terms to s.19B. The differences are not material. However, the South Australian provision was restricted to summary offences.

In the joint judgment of Barwick CJ, Kitto and Owen JJ the question posed at was whether there was sufficient material to justify the exercise by the magistrate of the discretionary powers conferred by s.4(1) of the Offenders
Probation Act. The Court pointed out that the expediency which the magistrate was required to consider was not limited to the enumerated factors although it was the existence of one of such factors which gave rise to the question whether it was expedient in all the circumstances to exercise the powers given by the subsection. The Court held that there was material upon which the magistrate could exercise his discretion. Its approach at 265 is of interest: "...the magistrate was entitled to consider whether, having regard to the age of the appellant in the circumstances which included the penalties which he had resolved to impose on the other charges, penalties which included the fact that he would be disqualified for the rest of his life from driving a motor car, and having regard also to the fact that to send the appellant to gaol would subject him to distress by reason of his being thereby prevented from caring for his aged sister, it was expedient to take the course described in s.4(1) I rather than to convict him..." 
The decision of the South Australian Full Court to the contrary was overruled.

At 276 Windeyer J stated: "The Act speaks of the court exercising the power it confers `having regard to' the matters it states. I read that as meaning more than merely noticing that one or more of them exists. Its, or their, existence must, it seems to me, reasonably support the exercise of the discretion the statute gives. They are not mere pegs on which to hang leniency dictated by some extraneous and idiosyncratic consideration. But they are wide words. None of the matters they connote is necessarily to be regarded in isolation from the others, or apart from the whole of the circumstances of the offender and the offence." 
This approach may be slightly different in emphasis from that taken in the majority judgment. The majority were obviously not contemplating leniency dictated by some extraneous and idiosyncratic consideration. The majority's approach was first to determine whether one of the enumerated factors existed.
If so, then it is determined whether it was expedient in all the circumstances to exercise the power given by the subsection. I must follow the majority approach.

In an interesting historical review Windeyer J pointed out that the South
Australian provision had been derived from the Probation of Offenders Act of the United Kingdom. There had been criticism of it - people were found guilty and at the same time they were being declared not guilty. The Criminal
Justice Act 1948 (U.K.) endeavoured to solve the problem by providing that no longer could justices decline to convict when they think a charge is proved.
However, they could put a person on probation after conviction in lieu of penalty.

The United Kingdom changes have not found favour in Australia. There has been a strong desire to retain the discretionary power of a court not to proceed to conviction after it has found an offence proved. There are cases where this is the fairest result and I would not suggest that we should proceed along the UK path.

Section 19B was introduced into the Commonwealth Crimes Act in 1960. In 1982 the existing section was repealed and a new section was substituted. In 1990 and 1994 there were further amendments. The 1994 addition of "cultural background" reveals some widening of s.19B. It alone can activate s.19B although there remains the final and critical question of whether it is expedient in all the circumstances to exercise the power given in the sub- section. This is a recognition of those who have come to Australia from a different cultural background. They may not be so familiar with Australian ways and Australian laws with the increased possibility of inadvertent breaches. Of course, each case has to be assessed individually and there can be no rule of thumb.

By virtue of [s.68(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ja1903112/s68.html) of the [Judiciary Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ja1903112/) and [s.5D](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5d.html) of the [Criminal Appeal
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) and the decisions thereon this Court has to consider whether the sentence imposed was manifestly inadequate. It is not sufficient that this Court would have imposed a greater sentence. An error of law or fact must be identified or the result must bespeak of error even though there is no specific error revealed.

In deciding whether the sentence was manifestly inadequate it is necessary to determine whether any of the factors enumerated in s.19B(1)(b) exist. Even though the defendant is a company this question must be answered in the affirmative as the offences were committed under extenuating circumstances.
This was the view of the judge. As earlier indicated the judge had regard to all the circumstances some of which related to Dr Vaisman's personal circumstances. He has not been charged. Given that Dr Vaisman owns and runs the company these cannot be ignored but in dealing with the company they have less weight than when dealing with Dr Vaisman personally.

As mentioned, the judge concluded that, having regard to the extenuating circumstances which he viewed against the backdrop of the other factors, it was inexpedient to inflict any punishment. Broadly, the judge approached his task in the manner which the High Court indicated was correct. He seems to have married the approach of the majority and that of Windeyer J.

The question is whether it was open to the judge to hold that it was inexpedient to inflict any punishment. If it was, the "sentence" was not manifestly inadequate. The Crown contended that it was not expedient to refrain from imposing punishment because that failed to recognise the purposes of the Act and to emphasise public deterrence.

The Therapeutic Goods Act provides important safeguards for the public on a matter of major public importance, namely the safety and welfare of humans whether in Australia or in countries to which the goods are exported. To ensure that these goals are achieved the system of controls must be adhered to fully. Those operating in this field must ensure that they make full enquires and obtain full advice as to compliance with the Act and Regulations. The high penalties emphasise that breaches must be avoided. Those guilty of breaches of the Act must expect that convictions will be recorded and that substantial fines will be imposed. Bonds and the use of s.19B of the Commonwealth Crimes
Act will seldom be correct. These propositions are self evident given the importance of the subject matter, the terms and purposes of the legislation, the severity of the maximum penalties and the public interest to be served.
Section 16A(1) provides that a court must impose a sentence or make an order that is of a severity appropriate to all the circumstances of the case. The judge referred to that section.

The Crown submitted that this is a typical case of a person of previously good character committing a breach of the law because of his ignorance and then co- operating with the Authorities. This was an unsound submission. This case is not "typical" - it is exceptional, if not unique. The case can only be regarded as "typical" if only portion of the facts and circumstances are taken and others are ignored. The Crown contended that the judge should have recorded convictions and imposed a modest fine on each charge.

Windeyer J in Cobiac v. Liddy at 277 cautioned about taking public deterrence too far when he said: "It is said that unless the magistrate's decision were overruled it would be a bad precedent and a bad example, apparently on the Shakespearian ground that `nothing emboldens sin so much as mercy.' But I do not see that anyone who drives when drunk can, because of what the magistrate did in this case, expect leniency, unless perhaps he be a man of seventy-three, of good character, looking after an aged sister and about to lose his driving licence." 
I keep in the forefront of my mind the high public importance of adhering to the provisions of the Therapeutic Goods Act. On the other hand, the company from the outset retained experienced Australian medical practitioners of standing to advise it. Enquires were made of the health authorities. There is no question of any sub-standard substances being imported. They were obtained from reputable and well known sources. In respect of one of the substances
Regitine, its import from the same company in Switzerland has been permitted since 1985. The importation of Papaverine has been permitted since 1990. The substances were imported openly. They were examined by the police initially and Customs routinely who, after examination, delivered them to the company's head office. Dr Vaisman proceeded on the basis that as both the police and
Customs had passed them nothing more remained to be done. The TGA became effectively active after a Customs Officer drew their attention to what was being imported and queried it. It is unfortunate that an earlier reference by
Customs to TGA did not produce similar action. This is not a case where the breaches were hard to detect.

The co-operation of the company once the breaches were taken up with it was of the highest order. It facilitated the Department's investigation into the full range of the company's importations and the seizure of the remaining stock. In round terms about two-thirds of the stock imported was seized and later destroyed. Supplies are now obtained from approved sources in Australia.

Dr Vaisman arrived in Australia from Russia after spending 7 years in labour camps in Siberia for wanting to emigrate. He did labouring work while learning
English. Within a short period he was busy in fruitful endeavour requiring much skill. He would not have been familiar with Australian law or Australian ways. He came from a different legal system. He sought good advice and did his best and the best he could do on behalf of the company. He made a mistake. I do not regard the company's loss of $200,000 as a result of the forfeiture of the goods as minimal.

The judge faced a difficult task in weighing the public importance of the legislative purposes, the need to adhere to the control systems and public deterrence along with the exceptional combination of favourable and extenuating circumstances surrounding the commission of the offences. After much anxious reflection I think it was open to the judge to take the course which he did. Despite some fluctuations in opinion, I do not think that the course taken by the judge should be described as manifestly inadequate but it is on the border-line. The result in this case should not lead any offenders or potential offenders to expect any leniency. Indeed, it emphasises that even with wholly exceptional circumstances the court is reluctant to apply s.19B.
Few cases will even approach the facts of the present case.

We were referred to other cases where there had been deliberate avoidance of the legislative provisions, secretive dealings and actual knowledge of the requirements of the Therapeutic Goods Act. They were not of great assistance. I would dismiss the appeal primarily on the ground that error on the part of the judge has not been established.

Assuming that I am wrong in the view that it was open to the judge to take the course which he did it becomes necessary to consider whether notwithstanding the judge's excessive leniency this court should intervene. The judge gave the matter extensive consideration and paid close attention to the facts and the circumstances in which the offences were committed. Restraint has always been applied in intervening on a Crown appeal against sentence.

If the Court did intervene it would be to record convictions and impose a modest fine of say $100 to $200 on each count. Given the modest amount of such a fine I would not draw a distinction between the three offences of which the
TGA became aware and those disclosed voluntarily by the company.

I am of the opinion that what has happened in this case is truly exceptional, that the judge's decision will not lead to any false expectations of leniency and that the difference in punishment between a conviction and a small fine and the course taken by the judge is insufficient to warrant intervention.
There is also the matter of double jeopardy. While this is less significant in the case of a company it is still a factor of some weight. In the exercise of the Court's discretion I would in any event dismiss the Crown Appeal.
 
McINERNEY J: I agree with the order proposed by Smart J, for the reasons he has given.
 * * * 
