

Regina versus Nathan Lee [2003] NSWSC 1279 (21 May 2003) 
REGINA versus Nathan LEE /96 May 1997 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
COLE JA, DOWD J, SPERLING J 
CATCHWORDS: VOIR DIRE - right of trial judge to terminate - ss.137 and 138 [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) - identification evidence - cross-examination ss.38 and [43](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/s43.html) [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) - R versus Welch (unreported, 6 November 1996) followed, application of proviso [s.6](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/s6.html) Criminal Appeal Act.

EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Appeal dismissed 
JUDGMENT 
COLE JA: On 6 May 1996 a jury returned a verdict of guilty against the appellant Nathan Lee on the charge that on 21 March 1995 at Paddington, when armed with a dangerous weapon, namely, a pistol he did assault Patricia Edith Jones with intent to rob Patricia Edith Jones. On 15 May Saunders DCJ sentenced him to a minimum term of penal servitude of six years to date from 22 May 1995, expiring on 22 May 2001, with an additional term of two years commencing on 22 May 2001 and expiring on 21 May 2003. 
The appellant has appealed against the conviction and seeks leave to appeal against sentence.

The Crown case, apparently accepted by the jury, was that at about 8.15pm on March 1995, Mrs Jones saw the appellant and an unknown male co-offender enter her video shop at 108 Oxford Street, Paddington. The appellant walked up to the counter and produced a silver coloured pistol and aimed it at her from waist height and demanded money. Mrs Jones picked up a sticky tape dispenser and threw it at the appellant. She missed the appellant who was standing about a foot away from the counter. The co-offender who was standing to the appellant's right and was about four feet further away, then ran out of the shop. Mrs Jones picked up the stool she was sitting on and pushed its legs at the appellant and began to push him away. He moved back from the counter to avoid the blows. Mrs Jones commenced to make her way around the counter. She saw a pistol in the appellant's hand aimed at her. She saw his hand make two firing movements. Nothing happened on the first movement but on the second movement there was a bang and smoke emitted from the pistol.

The appellant attempted to lift the cash register from the counter but it fell to the ground. Mrs Jones began swinging the stool at the appellant. He attempted to avoid those blows and ran from the shop. Mrs Jones then closed the door behind him and rang the police providing a description of both the appellant and the co-offender.

At about 8.25pm the appellant and Romeo Calin were seen by two police officers a short distance from the scene of the robbery. Both were arrested. At the time the appellant was seen to be sweating profusely as if he had been running. He was searched and a silver coloured pistol was found in his jeans pocket. That pistol was later shown to Mrs Jones who said it was similar to the one that the appellant had at the time of the robbery.

In a record of interview with Senior Constable Pooley the appellant denied he was inside the shop. He said he was outside the shop when two men came running out from it handing a pistol to him.

On 21 March 1995 Romeo Calin provided a statement to Constable Sharpe. He said that at the time he was stopped by the police in the street he was asking the appellant to repay him $80 owed. He said that the appellant said "I haven't got it, leave me alone, because I'm running because I fired two shots. I did a job and the other guy with me bailed out". At trial he said that was a police fabrication. Being declared an unfavourable witness he was cross-examined on his prior inconsistent statement.

Senior Constable Pooley gave evidence that he served a subpoena on Romeo Calin in hospital on 15 March 1996. Calin told him he was called "a dog" by the appellant and that his friends were going to get him. He did not wish to give evidence at the trial.

On 22 March 1995 Mrs Jones was shown a number of loose individual photographs of Asian males. Selecting a photograph of the appellant she wrote on its reverse side "I think this is him". The Crown asserted that she meant, "I know it was him", the use of the word "think" being her manner of speech.

A Mr Malcolm MacMillan was standing across the street from Mrs Jones' shop at the time of the occurrence waiting for a bus. He had a clear vision assisted by good lighting into the shop. He saw a Caucasian male backing towards the door and leaving the shop then walking up Glenmore Road. Having heard Mrs
Jones screaming something like "Get out" her saw her swing a stool at another male person whom he later saw leave the shop and walk around the corner to
Hopewell Street. He described the other male person as being of Asian extraction and wearing a white T-Shirt underneath a black jacket. On 24 March Mr MacMillan was shown a number of individual photographs of Asian males.
He selected the photo of the appellant as the person whom he saw coming out of the shop. His account was obviously at variance with the appellant's account that two persons came out of the shop and handed the appellant the gun.

The pistol was examined and found to be a firearm under the Firearms Act
The firing system was found to be unbalanced so that it would not always work. The Crown asserted this corroborated Mrs Jones' evidence that although two firing movements were observed, the gun operated only once.

GROUNDS OF APPEAL 
Ground 1 The trial judge erred when he terminated the voir dire hearing in relation to identification.
 
At the commencement of the trial defence counsel requested the trial judge to embark upon a voir dire hearing in relation to the admissibility of identification evidence to be given by each of Mrs Jones and Mr MacMillan. It was contended this was appropriate because of the provisions of s.137 [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) which requires a court in a criminal proceeding to refuse to admit evidence adduced by the prosecutor if its probative value is outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice to the defendant, and s.138 which confers a discretion to exclude certain improperly obtained evidence. Having sought to invoke s.138 it was contended that s.189(1) and (2) required a hearing on the voir dire concerning admissibility of the identification evidence. 
His Honour terminated the voir dire hearing after significant cross- examination by counsel for the accused of Mrs Jones and after having seen the tendered photographs. His Honour ruled that the evidence of identification would be admitted.

Once it is recognised as a principle of general application that apparently weak or poor quality evidence may gain strength from other evidence in the case, as was recognised in Chamberlain versus the Queen[1] and by this Court in
Regina versus Brotherton[2] and Regina versus Heuston[3], a trial judge is entitled, notwithstanding the provisions of s.137 to admit weak evidence if, when coupled with other evidence led or to be led, it cannot be said that the probative value of the weak evidence is outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice to the defendant.

Although defence counsel in seeking the voir dire mouthed the words of s.138 by referring to "the inappropriateness of the police in the manner in which the photographic identification procedures were conducted", no basis of any such impropriety was put to the trial judge. Presumably the reference to "inappropriateness of the police in the manner in which photographic identification procedures were conducted" was a reference to evidence "improperly obtained" within s.138(1)(a) and was meant to encompass a challenge based on an inadequate number of pictures, and an inappropriate selection of pictures. It must be doubtful indeed if either circumstance if established would constitute evidence "improperly" obtained within the meaning of s.138(1)(a) but it is unnecessary to determine that issue. No question of any admission or evidence obtained in consequence of an admission within s.138(2) arose. Although it was being advanced by counsel for the accused that there was, in truth, a question of discretion arising under s.138, in my view a judge is entitled to reject an application for a voir dire contemplated by s.189 if no real question of exercise of discretion under s.138 applies.
Similarly a judge is entitled to terminate a void dire once it becomes apparent to him that there is no such question arising under s.138. That is the situation in the instance case. A voir dire examination undertaken for any reason may also be terminated pursuant to s.135 if the trial judge is satisfied that its continuance is unlikely to service any useful purpose.

I would reject the first ground of appeal.

Ground 2 The trial Judge erred in Admitting the Identification Evidence of Mrs Jones, or alternatively in refusing to withdraw the evidence.
 
Mrs Jones made a photographic identification of the appellant. At the time she was shown various photographs she expected the assailant to be amongst them.
She had given a description to the police that the assailant was wearing a long sleeved black jacket and T-Shirt, and had black hair, and described him as having a full round face.

Nine photographs were shown to her. Six were of Asian men with thin faces. On the voir dire she said she accordingly discarded those photographs although at trial she said she kept for further consideration those with fuller faces.
There is no difference in substance between those two accounts of the selection process. Of the three with fuller faces only one was wearing a
T-Shirt and none was wearing a jacket. It was contended that as a police officer gave evidence that "The criteria for selection is a minimum five photographs of similar description", the identification was unsatisfactory.
Coupled with this it was said that the probative value of the identification was minimal and should have been excluded, and there were other unsatisfactory aspects of identification such as her note "I think this is the man".

I would reject this ground of appeal. It is not a satisfactory basis of challenge to identification evidence to seek to render it tenuous by seeking to exclude from the array of photographs produced all those with a feature or features different to the precise description previously given to police.
Whilst the photographs must bear a relationship to the description given, it is always a matter of judgment whether they constitute an appropriate and sufficient panel from which any selection may be made.

Further, having regard to the principles summarised in Heuston by Hunt CJ at
CL, it is not inappropriate to allow weak evidence to go before the jury where that evidence may be supported by other material, as here it is.

Ground 3 The trial judge erred when he admitted identification evidence of the witness Mr MacMillan, or alternatively in refusing to withdraw that evidence.
 
The appellant contended that Mr MacMillan's evidence should have been rejected because he wrote on the back of identified photograph "95% sure", and in evidence said that his identification was based on the circumstance that the person in the photograph had on a white T-Shirt and had with him a navy blue or black jacket and had dark hair. It was not a facial identification. Thus it was said to be prejudicial and should have been rejected. Further it was argued that no directions to the jury could adequately address the prejudice caused by the admission of the photographs.

I do not agree. Heuston recognises that weak evidence may be supported by other material, such as the accused having a pistol in possession. In those circumstances it could not be said that the evidence was so weak that any prejudice to the accused outweighed its probative value. Further, his Honour directed the jury that the evidence of Mr MacMillan, if it stood alone, "would be completely and utterly worthless and useless". It did not stand alone, and in those circumstances no error in exercise of the trial judge's discretion in admitting or not withdrawing the evidence has been demonstrated.

Ground 4 The trial judge erred when he allowed cross-examination of the witness Mr Calin to establish an admission made by the accused to Mr Calin.
 
Ground 5 The trial judge erred when he admitted evidence from Senior Constable Pooley that Mr Calin said to him he had heard from some friends of his or acquaintances that, he, Mr Calin, was a dog and that the accused "had some friends who were going to get him so as not to give evidence". 
Ground 6 The trial judge erred when he admitted evidence that Mr Calin had been stabbed whilst in custody.
 
Ground 8 The trial judge failed to direct the jury adequately and erred in his directions in relation to the evidence of the witness Mr Calin 
On the day of the offence, Mr Calin made a statement to police containing an admission by the accused to him that he had "done a job" and fired two shots.
The Crown called Mr Calin and shortly after his evidence began made application under s.38 [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) to cross-examine him. The accused's counsel objected to him being cross-examined for the purpose of putting to him a prior inconsistent statement. A voir dire was held and, his Honour being satisfied that Calin had made the statement to the police which the Crown alleged, he granted leave to the Crown to cross-examine
Calin if he denied the making of that statement, and to adduce evidence from police officers concerning its making. He did deny the making of the statement. The Crown became entitled to cross-examine him on the prior inconsistent statement [(s.43(1))](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/s43.html) and, in the circumstances to adduce evidence of the statement by tendering it [(s.43(2)).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/s43.html)
Once admitted s.60 provided that the hearsay rule did not apply to the statement in it. As Hunt CJ at CL held in Regina versus Welch[4] the statement once admitted becomes "evidence of the truth of what had been said". The trial judge had a discretionary power pursuant to s.136 to limit the use to be made of such evidence if it was unfairly prejudicial. An application was made by the accused's counsel either to exclude the evidence or limit its use in exercise of the court's discretion, implicitly under s.135 or 136. The trial judge admitted Calin's prior statement which included his account of the appelaant's admissions to him.

I see no error in the exercise of the trial judge's discretion to allow cross- examination of Mr Calin as an unfavourable witness in circumstances where, on the voir dire, the trial judge was satisfied that the statement had been made and had determined that, if the making of the statement was denied in evidence, cross-examination should be permitted. Ground 4 thus fails.

Once the prior statement was admitted, as the hearsay rule did not apply to it because of the provisions of s.60, it became evidence of the fact that the accused had made the statement to him which Mr Calin recited to the police.
Application was made to the trial judge pursuant to s.165 that a warning be given to the jury that Calins' evidence might be unreliable and to warn the jury of the need for caution in determining whether to accept the evidence and the weight given to it (s.165(2)). His Honour declined to give that warning, presumably in exercise of the discretion conferred by s.165(3).

To my mind his Honour should have given that warning. On any view, Mr Calin and his evidence were unreliable. He denied in evidence making a statement which plainly he made. That was the basis upon which cross-examination of him was permitted.

Nonetheless, in light of the confirmatory evidence of police officers that the statement was made shortly after the relevant events, and of the strength of the Crown case against the appellant with the resultant inevitability of a guilty verdict, the proviso under [s.6](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/s6.html) [Criminal Appeal Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) should be applied.

Senior Constable Pooley was permitted to give evidence that he had been told by Calin that Calin had heard that the prisoner was calling him "a dog" and that the prisoner had some friends who were "going to get him". The Crown contends that such evidence was admissible as evidence of prior inconsistent statements pursuant to s.43(2), and further as being probative of the Crown's contention that statements in Calin's statement to police were true. Even if that be so, the relevance seems to me to be so peripheral that it ought to have been excluded in the exercise of discretion. However, having been admitted, a clear direction was given to the jury that there was no evidence at all that any threat to Mr Calin had been made by the accused. Accordingly I would again apply the proviso.

There was no evidence that the stabbing of Mr Calin was related in any way to the trial and no miscarriage of justice has been established by its admission.

Accordingly I would not uphold grounds 4,5,6 or 8.

Ground 7 The trial judge erred when he rejected evidence of a radio log containing the description "Asian N.F.D" and when he rejected the cross-examination on the note. 
Defence counsel sought to tender a radio log recording "Asian N.F.D" meaning no further description. This was said to be contrary to Mrs Jones' evidence which was that she had given a description to police officers by telephone.
However the tender of the document was withdrawn by defence counsel and no complaint can now be made regarding its rejection. A person, not the author of the document, was sought to be cross-examined on it and his Honour rejected that cross-examination relying upon s.44(1). I see no error in that decision in circumstances where the tender of the document had been withdrawn. Ground 7 fails.

Ground 9 The trial judge failed to direct and warn the jury adequately in relation to identification.
 
It was contended that his Honour's directions to the jury in relation to the identification evidence of Mrs Jones and Mr MacMillan was unsatisfactory. I do not think that it was. His Honour adequately went through the evidence concerning identification and drew attention to the defence's submissions in that respect.

Ground 10 The trial judge erred when he put to the jury the proposition, purporting to be based on the ballistics evidence "that the accused had tried to discharge the gun twice".
 
I doubt if this ground of appeal is a sufficient summary of the summing up in this respect. The trial judge dealt with the evidence of Sergeant North and
Mrs Jones regarding, on the one hand, marks which might be indicative of a double firing, although not necessarily on the night in question, and of Mrs
Jones' evidence that she saw two hand movements consistent with an endeavour to fire the gun twice. However if there was any error it was corrected by the subsequent additional directions. This ground fails.

SENTENCE 
In my view it is plain that the sentence imposed was within the appropriate range. 
The appeal against conviction should be dismissed. Leave to appeal against sentence should be granted and the appeal dismissed.

DOWD J: I have had the advantage of reading in draft form the judgment of Cole JA. in this appeal, which judgment extensively sets out the facts, making it unnecessary to repeat those here. 
The first ground of appeal contends that the trial judge erred when he terminated the voir dire hearing in relation to identification of the appellant, a request for a voir dire having been made by Counsel for the accused in relation to the admissibility of identification evidence to be given by each of two witnesses, Mrs Jones and Mr MacMillan.

The basis for the voir dire was a proposed application under [s.
](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s137.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) ("the
Act"), that section requiring a Court in criminal proceedings to refuse to admit evidence adduced by the prosecutor if its probative value is outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice to the accused.

There was a further basis for seeking the voir dire examination under s. 138 of the Act, which section confers a discretion to exclude improperly obtained evidence.

The Act, by s. 189 prescribes the manner in which a voir dire hearing is to be conducted in certain circumstances, particularly relating to the absence of the jury but does not, in its terms, deal with the question of whether a voir dire should occur. The entitlement to a voir dire is therefore preserved by s. 9 of the Act, which retains the existing common law except as the Act expressly prohibits or alters the common law's operation.

The right to a voir dire examination on matters such as the admissibility of improperly obtained evidence, or to examine questions in relation to the exercise of discretion clearly therefore continues and the appellant was entitled to have such matters determined by the time-honoured procedure of conducting a voir dire hearing, it now being the practice to have such hearings before the jury hears evidence, to avoid interrupting the jury hearing. It is however the right of a party to have such trials conducted at a later stage of the hearing.

A voir dire trial, like any other trial, is subject to the rules of evidence and subject to the entitlement of a judge to restrict improper cross- examination. In these proceedings however, the appellant's Counsel was not afforded the opportunity to call all the witnesses she sought to call, as the voir dire was interrupted peremptorily.

Although his Honour stated that he could, in my view correctly, apply the principle that apparently weak or poor quality evidence may gain strength from other evidence in the case, as recognised in Regina versus Heuston (unreported, June 1995, per Hunt CJ at CL at page 7), this did not entitle his Honour to decide that at any point in time in the admissibility trial that he could terminate the voir dire.

It may be that there would be other evidence called within that voir dire trial which may have caused him to reject the evidence in the substantive trial. His Honour's termination of the voir dire trial was done without ascribing reasons, nor did his Honour purport to give a judgment in respect to the two areas of discretion, the first being s. 137 of the Act, which reads as follows: "137 Exclusion of prejudicial evidence in criminal proceedings 
In a criminal proceeding, the court must refuse to admit evidence adduced by the prosecutor if its probative value is outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice to the defendant." 
The second area of discretion is provided in s. 138 of the Act, which relates to the exclusion of improperly or illegally obtained evidence.

In terms of a decision as to admissibility under the Act, at any stage, but particularly after a voir dire hearing, his Honour is obliged to give reasons and to make an adjudication. The mandatory nature of s. 137 obliges the Court to weigh the probative value of evidence against the danger of unfair prejudice. Such evaluation cannot occur until each of the parties to a voir dire trial has called such evidence, as each party may deem appropriate.

In my view, his Honour erred in failing to allow the completion of the voir dire hearing, in failing to give proper reasons for the termination of such voir dire and for failing to adjudicate, as required by Part 3 of the Act, on the issue of exclusion of prejudicial evidence under s. 137 and the discretion to exclude improperly or illegally obtained evidence under s. 138.

There was, however, no subsequent application for exclusion of the evidence, even though those witnesses that would have been called in the voir dire trial gave evidence in the proceedings. It was open at any time for the appellant to have evidence excluded or to make application to have the evidence limited, by s. 136 of the Act. No such application was made.

I do not consider that the identification evidence, even though in my view it was obtained in an imperfect and inappropriate way, could be considered to have been obtained improperly. The manner in which it was obtained affects the probative weight which is ascribed to it, but does not, in my view, constitute improper evidence and I therefore agree with the reasons of Cole JA that the evidence ought not to be excluded under s. 138.

The evidence of the other witnesses who would have been called on the voir dire hearing, to determine an exercise of discretion under s. 137 of the Act, were later called and it was at this time that the appellant had an opportunity to renew his application for exclusion of the evidence. As I have indicated, this application was not made.

I do not therefore consider that the admission of the evidence by the learned trial judge, although an unfortunate decision, was such as to form the opinion that the verdict of the jury should be set aside. I would, in any event, have applied the proviso under [s.
](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s6.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/). Except as I have indicated, I would otherwise concur with the reasoning of Cole JA.
in relation to the first ground of appeal.

With the exception of what I have said in relation to the first ground of appeal, I agree with reasoning set out in the judgment of Cole JA. and the proposed orders.

SPERLING J: I have had the advantage of reading in draft the judgments which Cole JA and Dowd J propose to deliver in this appeal. With a reservation which I shall mention I agree with the orders proposed by Cole JA and with his reasons.

The reservation relates to ground 1. The trial judge commenced a voir dire hearing in relation to identification evidence. He terminated the voir dire hearing over the objection of counsel for the appellant. Cole JA is of the opinion that the trial judge did not err in doing so. Dowd J is of the opinion that he did and that there was the further error of failing to give reasons for doing so.

It is apparent from the subsequent course of the trial - as to which see the judgment of Dowd J - that a continuance of the voir dire hearing would not have affected the result. Accordingly, the proviso under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s6.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) would apply if error in relation to the voir dire hearing were shown.

In these circumstances, it is unnecessary to decide whether the trial judge erred in refusing to permit the voir dire hearing to continue or in failing to give reasons for his decision in that regard. I would prefer to await a case in which such questions, in point of principle, are determinative of the result before settling my own view on the matters that have been raised.
 <case>; [(1984) 153 CLR 521] at 535.
 [2] [(1992) 29 NSWLR 95] at 106-107.
 [3] (Unreported), 20 June 1995, per Hunt CJ at CL p.7.
 [4] (Unreported) 6 November 1996 at pp.6-7.
 * * * 
