

Regina versus Van Bien Tran; Regina versus Van Phung Do [2000] NSWSC 1262 (14
February 2000) 
REGINA versus Van Bien TRAN REGINA versus Van Phung DO /96; 60293/96 
Wednesday 9 April 1997 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
SIMPSON J, HIDDEN J 
JUDGMENT 
HIDDEN J: These are applications for leave to appeal against sentences imposed on the applicants, after they were found guilty at their trial in the District Court on a number of drug charges. The applicant Do was found guilty of four counts of supplying heroin, and the applicant Tran of three counts of knowingly taking part in the supply of heroin. On each count, against each man, the learned trial judge passed concurrent sentences of six years imprisonment, comprising a minimum term of three years to commence on 15 February 1996 and an additional term of three years.

The facts briefly are that, in the early morning of 14 March 1995 both applicants were observed during the course of a covert police operation in
Cabramatta. Mr Do had with him a paper bag, and he was observed to remove from it small objects which he passed to people who handed him money. Mr Tran was observed to be near Mr Do, and to talk to him from time to time. It appeared also that Tran himself approached customers whom he would direct to Do. Both men were approached by police and they ran. As they ran Do was observed to drop the paper bag. The bag was retrieved and both applicants were arrested.

The bag was found to contain forty-nine heat shrunken capsules and they, in turn, were found to contain 2.27 gms of a powder, part of which, upon analysis, was heroin.

Three of the counts against each man arose from his involvement in the actual supply of the heroin. The additional count against Do related to his possession of the heroin in the paper bag.

Mr Sides QC, who has appeared before us for both applicants, has submitted, I think correctly, that this could be described as a commercial venture as there was no evidence that either man was addicted to heroin at the relevant time, but one properly classified at the bottom of the range of ventures of that kind. On the evidence, the two men appeared to have been small-time dealers and the charges against them arise from one activity over a relatively brief period of time, it would seem about half an hour.

Mr Do had a criminal record at the time. In April 1994 at the Fairfield Local
Court he had been ordered to perform 200 hours community service in respect of a charge of supplying heroin, and had been fined on a charge of goods in custody. In November 1995, that is, after the commission of these offences, he was sentenced for breach of that community order which resulted in a sentence to the rising of the Court.

Mr Tran had no criminal record at the time of the offences. However, in
January 1996, he was given 200 hours community service and placed on a three year recognisance for offences of supplying a prohibited drug. The evidence before us does not disclose what that drug was.

The subjective material before his Honour was contained in pre-sentence reports tendered in respect of each man.

Mr Do is now aged thirty. He is married but has no children. He was brought up in Vietnam and his parents and six siblings are still in that country. He spent his childhood in a fishing village and had a very limited education. He escaped from Vietnam in 1985 and, after spending twelve months in a refugee camp in Hong Kong, came to this country with a Vietnamese family who had also been at the camp. He returned to Vietnam in 1993, where he married, and his wife joined him in this country apparently in the later part of 1995. On first arriving in Australia he did a three month English language course. He had employment for a time as a process worker, but at the time of sentence he had been unemployed for some years. He told the probation officer that he had used heroin for some months in 1992, but had not done so since.

The officer observed him to be anxious and to have low self-esteem. He was concerned at his poor command of English and what he saw as his lack of motivation in obtaining employment. He considered that the applicant would benefit from a course in English as a second language at an attendance centre, and from a period of supervision by the Probation and Parole Service.

Mr Tran is now aged thirty-five. He also was brought up in Vietnam in a large family, and had limited formal education. He was conscripted for military service by the Communist government, but escaped from the training centre and led an itinerant lifestyle for a time before he got out of Vietnam by boat and got to Malaysia in 1983. In 1984 he came to Australia under the sponsorship of one of his brothers who had come to this country earlier. He also undertook a three month English language course upon arrival in Australia and has had a basically creditable work record here. He told the probation officer that he had used heroin for a relatively short time in 1989, but not since then.
However, the applicant's brother told the officer that he had occasion to reproach the applicant for his involvement in drug selling. The probation officer saw the applicant as having an inferiority complex as a result of his low education. He felt that he would benefit from a short period of supervision.

His Honour, in his remarks on sentence, emphasised the seriousness of the offence of supplying heroin. He referred to the need for deterrence and to the fact that neither applicant had shown remorse. But, at the end of his remarks, he turned his attention to the need for rehabilitation of both men. He found special circumstances, which he identified in each case as the need for rehabilitation, the offender's age and his general circumstances.

The application has been pursued on a number of grounds, the first and foremost of which is that the total sentence of six years is manifestly excessive, as is the minimum term of three years. In my view that submission has been made good and, indeed, before us the Crown prosecutor properly and realistically conceded as much.

The appeal, in my view, must accordingly succeed, but it is appropriate to examine some other matters relating to his Honour's approach to the matter which were argued by Mr Sides QC, either in oral or written submissions.

Mr Sides submitted that the additional term of three years was, on the evidence, longer than any term that might reasonably have been called for to foster the applicant's rehabilitation. In that context, he referred to pronouncements of this Court about the purpose of extending an additional term beyond its usual proportion to the minimum term, in cases such as
Farroukh (CCA, unreported, 24 March 1996) in the judgment of Gleeson CJ at page 5, and Phelan [(1993) 66 A Crim R 446] in the judgment of Hunt CJ at CL at 449. Mr Sides' specific complaint is that his
Honour appears to have extended the additional term without an appropriate corresponding reduction of the minimum term: see The Queen versus Moffitt [(1990) 20 NSWLR 114] at 122 and 134-5.

Whilst the course by which his Honour assessed the additional term of three years is not entirely clear from his reasons, I must say that it does appear to me that his Honour has done exactly what Mr Sides complains of.
Coincidentally, three years is the average term for which offenders are placed on recognisances to be of good behaviour, and it may be with that in mind that his Honour arrived at the period. However that may be, it does seem that the total sentence of six years which, as I have already said I consider to be excessive, may well have come about in part because his Honour arrived at a lengthy additional term without an appropriate corresponding reduction of the minimum term.

Mr Sides also submitted that there ought to have been some differentiation in sentence between the two applicants, given that Mr Do had a prior conviction for an offence of the same nature, whereas Mr Tran did not. There is a passage in his Honour's judgment from which it might be inferred that his Honour mistakenly believed that the recognisance to which Mr Tran was subject at the time of sentence, had been current at the time of the offences. I do not read the passage in that way and, in any event, I consider that there is force in the Crown prosecutor's submission that there were other differences between the circumstances of the two men which, in a sense, balanced the fact that one had a prior conviction for supplying heroin and the other did not. In particular, the Crown prosecutor pointed out that Mr Do was a younger man than
Mr Tran, and is married.

In any event it is clear and, indeed, it is common ground, that the criminality of the two men in the venture with which this case is concerned is exactly the same. For those reasons I think it was entirely appropriate for his Honour not to differentiate in sentence between the two applicants, and I see no error in that regard.

Returning then to the matter which is at the heart of this application, both the Crown prosecutor and Mr Sides have supplied us with Judicial Commission figures relating to the sentencing of persons for the supply of heroin of quantities less than the commercial quantity. Mr Sides has also supplied, perhaps more helpfully, a schedule of cases dealt with in this Court involving the supply of smaller quantities of heroin. I do not think it is necessary to record what those cases are, or to go into the detail of the statistics which have been supplied to us from the Judicial Commission. The statistics and the decided cases cover a range of quantities of heroin and of activities in the supply of it.

It is clear that both the total sentence of six years and the minimum term of three years sit at the top of that range but, on its objective facts, this case does not. For those reasons I am satisfied that the sentence and the minimum term have been demonstrated to be manifestly excessive and, in my view, the appeal should be allowed and this Court should re-sentence each of the applicants.

In the course of doing so, I have regard to material supplied to us this morning by Mr Sides relating to each applicant. That material shows that both men have been co-operating in the rehabilitative programs offered by the prison system since undertaking their sentences and, for what significance it may have for the purpose of sentence, the material demonstrates the difficulties undergone by Mr Do's wife since his incarceration.

It does appear to me that the case is one where there are special circumstances warranting an extension of the additional term beyond its usual proportion to the minimum term, given the circumstances of the two men and particularly the circumstances in which they arrived in this country and the difficulties they face with their limited command of English and limited education. It seems to me that an extended period of conditional liberty is in their interests, and the community's, upon their release and an extended period of supervision would assist them to readjust and to adopt a satisfactory lifestyle upon their release.

In the view I have formed leave to appeal should be granted, the appeal allowed, and in each case, on each count, I would quash the sentence passed by the learned sentencing judge and substitute a sentence of imprisonment for four years, comprising a minimum term of two years to date from 15 February and to expire on 14 February 1998, and an additional term of two years to commence on 15 February 1998 and to expire on 14 February 2000. In each case, on 14 February 1998 each applicant will be eligible for release on parole.
 
SIMPSON J: I agree. The orders of the Court will, accordingly, be as proposed by Hidden J.
 * * * 
