

Prospect Electricity versus Advanced Glass Technologies of Australia P/L [1996]
NSWSC 510 (22 October 1996) 
PROSPECT ELECTRICITY V ADVANCED GLASS TECHNOLOGIES OF AUSTRALIA P/LTD /94 ED 3512/92 OCTOBER 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
PRIESTLEY JA, COLE JA, ABADEE AJA 
CATCHWORDS: CORPORATIONS - WINDING UP - RECEIVERS AND MANAGERS 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: ALLOWED 
CORPORATIONS - WINDING UP - RECEIVERS AND MANAGERS APPOINTED BY SECURED
CREDITOR AFTER FILING OF WINDING UP SUMMONS - EFFECT OF SUBSEQUENT WINDING UP
ORDER ON INTERVENING TRANSACTIONS - POWER TO VALIDATE TRANSACTIONS - SECTION (1) CORPORATIONS LAW - appellant authority supplied electricity to respondent company in bulk - supply essential for respondent's manufacturing business - summons filed to wind up respondent company - receivers and managers appointed - respondent continued to trade - electricity used for continuing respondent's business - receivers and managers arrange for prompt payment by company for electricity including some owed for supply prior to date of filing of winding up summons - winding up order made - appellant had no knowledge of proceedings or final order until much later date - claim by liquidator on supplier in respect of payments received after filing of winding up summons, discharging debts then owing - trial judge refused to order "otherwise" under <case> of the Corporations Law, ie refused to validate payments discharging the debt for electricity supplied before the filing of the winding up summons.

On appeal, held: The trial judge placed too much emphasis on the pari passu rule as opposed to the weight of countervailing considerations, which led to a miscarriage in the trial judge's discretion. Tellsa Furniture Pty
Limited versus Glendave Nominees Pty Limited [(1987) 9 NSWLR 254] applied.
Although he mentioned all relevant considerations, only one reason was given by trial judge for his conclusion which in the circumstances was not sufficient to warrant refusal of validation. Re Rampton Holdings Pty Ltd (In
Liquidation) (1991) ACLC at 224 and Re Transconsult Australia Pty Ltd (In
Liquidation) [(1991) 9 ACLC 1052] at 1063 approved. The trial judge accepted that the payments contributed to the continued existence of the company as a going concern for the possible benefit of creditors but did not take into account that the actual and possible benefit could not have been available if there had not been payments of the outstanding amounts. The trial judge in reaching his conclusion considered only one aspect of the law of preferences and not the protection available in appropriate circumstances to the payment of a pre-existing debt, and did not take into account the probability that the payments in question, if they were subject to preference law, would be held to be protected: Air Services
Australia versus Ferrier (1996) 70 ALJR 655 at 670 referred to.

ORDERS 
Short minutes embodying orders in accordance with the court's reasons to be brought in within fourteen days.
 
JUDGMENT 
PRIESTLEY JA: From time to time before and during 1992 the Prospect County Council, trading as Prospect Electricity, which I will call it from here on, supplied electricity pursuant to its "general terms and conditions of supply" to Advanced Glass Technologies of Australia Pty Limited (AGTA). AGTA used electricity, which was essential for its manufacturing business, in large quantities.

Prospect Electricity used to send accounts to AGTA monthly, at or near the beginning of the month. By its account of 1 June 1992 it charged $10,776.85 for the preceding month, payable on 15 June 1992, and also showed as remaining outstanding at 1 June 1992 the amount of $10,958.35 from the previous month's account dated 1 May 1992.

Thus at the date of despatch of the account of 1 June 1992 the balance outstanding in Prospect Electricity's books was $21,745.20.

On 9 June 1992 the amount of the May account was paid leaving outstanding at that date the amount of the June account, $10,776.85.

On 23 June 1992 a summons to wind up AGTA was filed. Prospect Electricity did not become aware of this until at least April 1993.

On 6 July 1992 the holder of a registered fixed and floating charge over the assets of AGTA appointed receivers and managers (the receivers) to the company.

Almost immediately after the appointment of the receivers, they asked Prospect
Electricity to terminate the arrangement then on foot with AGTA for the supply of electricity and to supply electricity thereafter in the name of AGTA with the addition of the words "(Receivers/Managers appointed)" after it.

Prospect Electricity replied, saying: "Prospect does not recognise that your request is a new and separate customer, but is a continuation of the existing customer relationship with a request to add the words Receiver/Manager to an existing name.
 
Therefore I must advise you that unless the outstanding account of $21,639.50 is paid by Friday, 17 July 1992 supply of electricity will be disconnected on
Monday, 20 July 1992 and not restored until full payment plus fees are paid." 
The receivers responded by offering to pay the outstanding account of $21,639.50 by weekly payments of $5,000 until the amount was paid in full.

Prospect Electricity accepted this offer "subject to future monthly accounts being paid on the due date indicated on the account".

From then on the receivers conducted the ordinary business of the company with a view to selling its business, or if that could not eventually be achieved, its assets, at their best realisable value.

Prospect Electricity had sent an account dated 3 July 1992 to AGTA for an amount of $10.862.65. At that time the amount of $10,776.85 shown in the account dated 1 June 1992 had not been paid. These two sums total the $21,639.50 the subject of the agreement between Prospect Electricity and the receivers.

AGTA, by the receivers, paid an amount of $5,000 on 21 July 1992 and a further amount of $5,000 on 3 August 1992 to Prospect Electricity.

On 7 August 1992 Prospect Electricity sent an account for the preceding month in the amount of $10,343.55, bringing the amount outstanding to $21,985.05.

Thereafter AGTA, by the receivers, paid amounts of $5,000 to Prospect
Electricity on 10 August 1992, 17 August 1992 and 21 August 1992.

The first four payments of $5,000, and $1,639.50 from the fifth payment of $5,000, were taken as satisfying the amount of $21,639.50 which had been outstanding at 3 July 1992 and had been the subject of the agreement between
Prospect Electricity and AGTA by its receivers.

AGTA made a further payment of $5,000 on 31 August 1992.

On 4 September 1992 Prospect Electricity sent an account for the preceding month in the amount of $8,592.10, bringing the amount outstanding to $10,575.15. Amounts of $5,000 paid on 4 September 1992 and 16 September 1992 left $575.15 as the amount outstanding at the latter date.

After that, Prospect Electricity sent an account on 6 October 1992, for $10,689.65, which together with the outstanding $575.15 was paid on 12 October , leaving the account with a nil balance.

After that Prospect Electricity sent further accounts on 6 November 1992, 4
December 1992, 4 January 1993, 1 February 1993, 2 March 1993, 14 April 1993 and 3 May 1993, for electricity supplied each preceding month. These were paid, with a minor exception, on time and in full.

During all this period, for the reasons already mentioned, AGTA had continued to trade. Mr Bridge, who supervised the carrying on of the business on behalf of the receivers said in an affidavit later read in the proceedings: "the continuation of the former business of the company preserved the value of the goodwill of the company, enabled the completion of work in progress, enabled the sale of stock on hand in the normal course of business and enabled debts to be collected which in my experience are more difficult to collect from debtors of a business that has closed because the leverage of refusing further supply is no longer available. Further, the plant and equipment of the business is more valuable whilst it is continued in use in a going concern business." 
On 26 October 1992 a winding up order was made. Prospect Electricity did not become aware of this, either, until at least April 1993. The receivers continued to carry on the business; however, their attempts to sell it as a going concern did not succeed.

The supply of electricity to AGTA continued until April 1993. On 21 April 1993
Prospect Electricity received a letter by fax from the receivers asking that the account be cancelled as at 2 April 1993. The letter also told Prospect
Electricity that the receivers had been locked out of AGTA's factory premises on 2 April 1993. The heading to this letter was: "Re: Advanced Glass
Technologies of Australia Pty Limited (Receivers & Managers Appointed)(In liquidation)".

By letter dated 10 June 1993 Mr J.B. Harkness wrote to Prospect Electricity saying he had been appointed liquidator of AGTA on 26 October 1992. He said that he had been told by the receivers about the arrangements by which the amount of $21,639.50 said to have been outstanding at 3 July 1992 had been paid pursuant to the arrangement made between Prospect Electricity and AGTA by its receivers. He asserted that the payments comprising the $21,639.50 were dispositions of AGTA's property, made after the commencement of the winding up, (because that commencement dated back to the date of the filing of the summons once the winding up order was made), and were void by virtue of s (1) of the Corporations Law unless the court ordered otherwise. He then asked Prospect Electricity to refund $21,639.50 to AGTA in liquidation within fourteen days.

Both Mr B. Welsh, Prospect Electricity's Payroll Advisor and Mr M. Walsh,
Prospect Electricity's Customer Accounts Branch Manager at relevant times, said in affidavits that they were not aware that a summons for the winding up of AGTA had been filed until receipt of the letter dated 10 June 1993 from the liquidator. Neither was challenged on this statement in the proceedings at first instance. In fact, the letter of 21 April 1993 from the receivers should have alerted Prospect Electricity that as at that date the liquidator was busying himself in AGTA's affairs. Probably Prospect Electricity should be treated as having knowledge in its possession at 21 April 1993 of the liquidation position. However, there is nothing in the materials to suggest that Prospect Electricity had any knowledge either of the winding up summons having been filed or the winding up order made prior to 21 April 1993. Nothing therefore turns upon the discrepancy between the April and the June dates, as the argument all turns on events prior to 21 April 1993.

By summons filed 20 January 1994 the liquidator sought a declaration that the payments comprising the $21,639.50 were void and an order that that sum be paid by Prospect Electricity to the liquidator. Subsequently Prospect
Electricity filed a notice of motion seeking orders that the relevant payments were not void dispositions for the purposes of <case>. It was then ordered that the summons and the notice of motion be heard together.

Hulme J heard the summons and the notice of motion. After considering the materials before him and hearing argument, he came to the conclusion that he should not make an order that the payment to Prospect Electricity of the $21,639.50 was not void.

In stating his reasons, he set out substantially the facts I have already outlined. He referred to a number of decisions in which courts had considered whether or not they should "otherwise order" under <case> or its equivalent in earlier company legislation. As to some of the cases, he said: "In the course of submissions my attention was directed to a number of passages in the authorities where judges referred to circumstances tending to argue in favour of upholding the validity of payments made after the commencement of the winding up, eg 'a disposition ... bona fide believed at the time to be in the best interest of the creditors' - Re Atlas Truck
Service Pty Ltd [(1974) 24 FLR 220] at 223; 'A transaction entered into in good faith which offers actual or prospective advantage to the company or its general body of creditors' - and 'whether, overall, the transaction -- could, at the time, reasonably be perceived as offering some advantage or at least potential advantage, to (the company) and, thereby, its general body of creditors'. Jardio Holdings Pty Ltd versus Dorcon
Constructions Pty Ltd <case>; [(1984) 3 FCR 311] at 317 and 321 respectively; 'the payment ... contributed towards the continued existence of the company as a going concern with -- actual and possible benefits to the relevant parties --' - Tellsa Furniture
Pty Ltd (In Liquidation) versus Glendave Nominees Pty Ltd [(1987) 9 NSWLR .](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281987%29%209%20NSWLR%20254 "View LawCiteRecord" )
 
Obviously the payments in the case fell within such descriptions." 
By the last sentence quoted, and elsewhere in his reasons, Hulme J made it clear he accepted that: the payment of the challenged amount was bona fide believed at the time to be in the best interests of the creditors; the payment was made in good faith as offering actual or prospective advantage to AGTA or its general body of creditors; the transaction could at the time reasonably be perceived as offering some advantage or at least potential advantage to the company and its general body of creditors; the payment contributed to the continued existence of the company as a going concern with actual and possible benefits to the relevant parties; the limitation of the claim by the liquidator to repayment only of $21,639.50 and not the subsequent payments to Prospect Electricity was proper; that is, although the subsequent payments also fell within <case> and were thus void unless there were an order otherwise, Hulme J thought it appropriate that they not be claimed, because they represented the cost or value of the electricity supplied during the receivership. (It was implicit in this view that Hulme J would have made an order otherwise under <case> in regard to the subsequent payments had he been asked to do so.) 
A continuation of the supply of electricity was essential to the receiver's prospects of selling AGTA's business as a going concern.

Hulme J also remarked that except in the sense that Prospect Electricity would not have continued to supply electricity if arrangements had not been made to pay the outstanding $21,639.50, the payments comprising that sum had nothing to do with the benefits which AGTA received or which it was contemplated AGTA might receive by continuing to trade.

Hulme J's reasons for refusing to order otherwise under <case> in respect of the amount in question seem to have been based on the following ideas: to refuse Prospect Electricity's claim would further the principle that creditors of an insolvent company should shoulder the burden of insolvency rateably; he was not persuaded that more weight needed to be given to factors (i) to (vi) above than to a recognition that moneys paid for electricity supplied after 3 July 1992 should not be repaid; he did not agree with what was said by Commissioner O'Connor QC in Re
Rampton Holdings Pty Ltd (In Liquidation) (1991) ACLC at 224; namely: "Certainly it is, in my view, a reasonable proposition to say that payments made bona fide in the ordinary course of business will ordinarily be validated so long as they relate to the need to continue business and earn income or, save loss, during the pendency of a petition".

Hulme J noted that this statement had been approved by Owen J in Re
Transconsult Australia Pty Ltd (In Liquidation) [(1991) 9 ACLC 1052] at 1063.
However, Hulme J was of opinion that the statement was too generous to payees, and gave no recognition to the principle that creditors should bear losses rateably and that Parliament had chosen the commencement of the proceedings not the date of the winding up order as the time after which payments were to be void unless the court ordered otherwise.

Hulme J brought together the various considerations on which he based his conclusion in the case in the following two paragraphs: "In this case, payment of moneys outstanding was required by Prospect
Electricity as a condition of further supply. Such payment related to the need to continue business and earn income. Because of Prospect Electricity's monopoly situation vis-a-vis AGTA, AGTA had no option if it was to continue trading but to pay off the arrears. But I can not see why Prospect Electricity should by reason of these facts gain or retain any advantage over other creditors to whom money was owing at that time. Certainly Prospect Electricity should not be in a worse situation by its further support of AGTA and if when
AGTA finally ceased trading further moneys were owing to Prospect Electricity there would be a deal to be said for the view that no such further moneys should be repaid. However, I am unable to see why the fortuitous circumstance that a creditor can induce payment of moneys then owing to it as a condition of continued supply should, merely because of continued (and beneficial) supply, entitle it to retain payments Parliament has said are prima facie void.

Furthermore, to adopt an approach whereby only payments representing the value of electricity or goods supplied after the commencement of the winding up are validated seems to me consistent with the approach taken by those provisions of the law dealing with preferences." 
In its main features this case is very similar to Tellsa Furniture Pty
Limited versus Glendave Nominees Pty Limited [(1987) 9 NSWLR 254.] In that case a summons to wind up a manufacturing company was filed. A supplier of goods essential to the manufacturer was unaware of the summons for a considerable time. During that time the supplier continued to supply the essential materials to the manufacturer; the manufacturer paid the supplier for all the goods supplied during the period, and also reduced the amount which had been owing at the date of the filing of the winding up summons for goods which had been supplied earlier than that date.

Young J validated the payments made by the manufacturer. In doing so he surveyed the case law and the various reasons disclosed by the cases relevant to either the validation of such payments or the withholding of validation. An appeal to this court was heard by Hope and Mahoney JJA and me. In my reasons I discussed the various considerations which Young J had identified as possibly being relevant in cases of this kind. I divided these into seven propositions
What I had called the fifth of his propositions appears in bold type in the following citation, the balance of which is my comment.
 "(5) A disposition carried out in good faith at a time when the parties are not aware that a petition has been presented will, generally speaking, be validated. In what he described as a limitation to this proposition Young J stated some further considerations which perhaps strictly speaking are independent of it, but which I will deal with as part of it, namely: on the one hand both bona fide payments where parties are unaware of the presentation of a winding up summons and bona fide payments in the ordinary course of business (presumably irrespective of awareness of the presentation of a summons) might ordinarily be validated so long as they 'related to any need to continue business, and earn income, or save loss, during the pendency of the petition' (per Fox J in Re Atlas Truck Service Pty Ltd [(1974) 24 FLR ]
at 23) as distinct from on the other hand payments which even though made honestly are no more than reductions of a pre-existing debt without arguable countervailing benefit to the company." (at 260) 
I later stressed that none of the various considerations discussed in the cases yielded a rigid rule requiring validation or non validation but that they were all useful general guidelines which would produce differing results according to the differing circumstances of particular cases.

All three members of the court in Tellsa were of the view that the appeal from Young J should be dismissed. No-one saw any reason why his discretionary decision should be interfered with. I added that if it were for the appeal court to consider the application entirely de novo, my view would be that the court should come to the same decision as Young J (at 267). Hope JA agreed with me.

Mahoney JA said: "... the amount which in substance is in issue in the present case is the excess of the payments over the price of goods supplied after the date of commencement of the winding up. In the sense to which I have referred, the statutory fund available as at the date of commencement of winding up has, by the payment of this amount, been depleted. If an order is to be made in respect of this amount or a relevant part of it, the creditor must show considerations justifying such an order.
 
It is clear that orders may be made in respect of payments which deplete the statutory fund. It is not necessary or desirable to seek to indicate when this will be done by categorising factual situations. But it is proper to refer to the kinds of considerations which may justify such an order.
 
In substance, the amount in question corresponds to the amount which, on or about 22 November 1982, was paid by the company in respect of goods delivered to it in September 1982. The amounts paid did not correspond exactly to particular quantities of goods delivered: the parties occasionally paid round sums in reduction of outstanding accounts. But it is, in my opinion, proper to see what was paid in November 1982 as, in substance, paid in respect of the goods delivered in September 1982. As I have said, I do not think that the court, in the exercise of this power, is restricted by the precise details of delivery and payment: to adapt what was said by Harman LJ in Re Clifton
Place Garage Ltd (at 491), the court may, in the exercise of this power, ensure that its officer the liquidator acts fairly and like a gentleman.
 
The fact that the payment has the appropriate relationship to the goods delivered in September is, in my opinion, of significance in determining whether an order should be made in respect of it. In the exercise of this power, the court will take into account whether the payment, and the transaction of which it is part, was or was apt to be for the benefit of the creditors in question. It will, in general, see the continuation of the company's business as, in the proper case, for their benefit.
 
In the present case, the inference to be drawn from such evidence as there is is that, had the payment not been made on or about 22 November 1982, the company would probably have not received the deliveries of goods which took place thereafter in November, in December, and in January and February 1983.
The significance of the payment in this regard was not pursued in detail in the evidence. However, it is at the least proper to see it as part of an ongoing relationship between the parties which was essential to the continuation of the company's business or the relevant part of it. Given the circumstances, I am of opinion that it is proper that the court's order extend to the balance of the sum of $91,914.58 here in question." (at 256-7) 
As I have said, the main features in the case presently under appeal are in my opinion very similar to those in Tellsa. If I were deciding the case at first instance I would validate the payments in question. However, the situation in the present appeal is not so simple. This court follows the rule that it will not change a discretionary judgment unless it concludes that the judge's discretion miscarried because the judge erred in his understanding or application of recognised legal rules or wrongly took into account matters he should not have taken into account or wrongly omitted to take into account matters he should have taken into account or materially understood the facts or, finally, if none of the foregoing things can be demonstrated, nevertheless arrived at a result so contrary to what the case would appear to require that although no error of the foregoing kind can be demonstrated nevertheless the court concludes that there must have been an error involved in the judge's reasoning.

It seems to me that there is error of one or other of the above kinds in Hulme
J's reasoning.

First, although he mentioned all the relevant considerations that he must balance before coming to his conclusion, the only reason he gave for the conclusion he arrived at was that he did not think the various considerations in favour of validation of the payments outweighed the one consideration that the Corporations Law prima facie required that all unsecured creditors at the date of the filing of the winding up summons should share in the property of the company, if subsequently put into liquidation, on an equal footing. It seems to me that the case law to which Hulme J referred shows that the equal treatment of unsecured creditors principle is not of itself enough to warrant the refusal of validation where there are considerations in favour of validation of the kind which he acknowledged were present in this case. That case law seems to me to justify the generalisation stated in Rampton
Holdings and adopted in Transconsult Australia (see p 9 above), and I do not think Hulme J gave any sound reason for criticising it.

Second, Hulme J made it clear that he thought it appropriate that Prospect
Electricity should retain all the payments made by AGTA after the date of the filing of the winding up summons except those comprising payment of the debt for electricity supplied before the filing of the winding up summons. These payments also were void by <case> unless the court validated them. It thus seems clear that Hulme J accepted that the considerations in favour of validation outweighed the equal treatment of unsecured creditors approach in regard to those payments and that, if requested, an order for validation for such payments should be made. One of the considerations that he accepted as going towards such a conclusion was that those payments contributed towards the continued existence of the company as a going concern with actual and possible benefits to relevant parties. What he appears not to have taken into account is that that situation of actual and possible benefit could not have been reached if there had not been payment of the amount outstanding at the time the receivers undertook the management of the company.

Third, Hulme J thought that his approach whereby only payments representing the value of electricity supplied after the filing of the winding up summons were validated was consistent with the way preferences were required to be dealt with. In saying this he was referring to only one aspect of the law concerning preferences. That aspect is the one pursuant to which the payment of the pre-existing debt in the circumstances of the present case would probably be regarded as a preference: see Air Services Australia versus Ferrier ALJR 655 at 670 per Dawson, Gaudron and McHugh JJ. However, there is a second aspect of the preference law which Hulme J does not appear to have considered, also explained in Air Services Australia: "When the initial indebtedness has been reduced the creditor may nevertheless be entitled to the protection of <case>(a) of the Bankruptcy Act in respect of that reduction ... in such a case, the circumstances of each payment made for the purpose of reducing the debt have to be examined in order to determine the issue under <case>(a), unless it is clear that the creditor's 'knowledge and relation to the [debtor's] solvency and in relation to the effect of any permanent reduction in the [debtor's] indebtedness ... was the same throughout the period.'" (per Dawson, Gaudron and McHugh JJ at 666, citing Rees versus Bank of New South Wales <case>; [(1964) 111 CLR 210] at 220.) 
If the law relating to preferences were to be applied to the present case it seems to me that on the evidence before Hulme J and by reference to what he was prepared to accept concerning the facts, namely that the payment was bona fide believed at the time to be in the best interests of the creditors, that the payment was made in good faith, that it offered at least potential advantage to the company and its general body of creditors and was made without knowledge of the filing of the winding up summons, the payment would be held to be protected: the requirements of good faith, for valuable consideration (in the sense accepted in bankruptcy law), and ordinary course of business, would be made out.

It was submitted for the respondent before us that there was doubt about whether Prospect Electricity should be regarded as entitled to protection if the matter were to be treated in accordance with preference law; it was submitted that the fact that receivers were appointed to manage the business of AGTA was an indication that should have led Prospect Electricity to suspect that AGTA was insolvent. It is true that receivership often precedes and sometimes accompanies the winding up of a company because of insolvency, but this is by no means invariably the case. Further, although before the appointment of the receivers AGTA had been behind in paying its electricity accounts, it had regularly been paying them in full although at a time later than the contract provided for. Then, after the arrangement was made with the receivers both the past and the current charges were paid virtually up to date by 16 September 1992 and thereafter in full and on time. It seems to me that on these and the other facts which were before Hulme J it could not be said that Prospect Electricity had reason to suspect that AGTA was unable to pay its debts as they fell due as distinct from having reason to suspect it might be unable to do so: see Queensland Bacon Pty Ltd versus Rees <case>; [(1967) 115 CLR 266], at 293 per Barwick CJ and at 303 per Kitto J.

The three matters I have mentioned seem to me to show misapprehensions on the part of Hulme J which led to a miscarriage of discretion in that he placed unacceptably too much weight on the pari passu rule as against the weight of the countervailing considerations discussed in a series of cases accepted in this court in Tellsa.

In my opinion therefore the court should set aside the orders made by Hulme J and instead make orders in accordance with Prospect Electricity's notice of motion of 24 March 1994. The costs of the proceedings below should be borne by the respondents in the appeal. The respondents should pay the appellant's costs of the appeal and have a Suitors Fund certificate if qualified.

There was some discussion at the hearing of the appeal whether in any event validating orders should be made in respect of all payments after those attacked by the respondents. Although the respondents have not sought to recover those later payments from Prospect Electricity, in law they remain void unless validated and it would seem preferable since the parties are in agreement on this aspect of the matter for such an order to be included in this court's final orders.

It is also necessary to mention that the court was informed at the commencement of the hearing of the appeal that the Prospect County Council no longer exists. Legislative changes, principally appearing in the [Energy
Services Corporations Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/esca1995332/) have brought about the result that a legal entity called Integral Energy Australia now stands in place of the Prospect County Council. Leave was given for an appropriate amendment to be made to the title of the proceedings.

A case came to the court's attention after judgment was reserved in this appeal, which could, arguably, provide a further and different basis for upholding this appeal. This is Wily versus Commonwealth of Australia [(1996) 136
ALR 527.] It was not referred to in argument, and the matters relevant to the different approach taken in that case were not examined in the instant case. I record its existence only because of the possibility the instant case might go further. My own conclusion in the present case is based on the reasons already stated, unconnected to the ideas in Wily.

I propose the parties be directed to bring in short minutes of the orders necessary to carry out the conclusions I have reached and putting the record in order, within fourteen days from the date of publication of the court's decision.

COLE JA: I agree with Priestley JA.
 
ABADEE AJA: In this matter I have had the benefit of considering the reasons of Priestley AP. I am in general agreement with his Honour's reasons and the orders that he has proposed. However, I wish to add a few short remarks of my own in relation to the matter of discretion.

The principles of law in which an appellate court may review the exercise of a judicial discretion are considered by Priestley JA. They are well established and not in doubt. There is not only the difficulty in an appellate court reviewing the exercise of discretionary power but also the need for restraint in doing so: see Cohen versus McWilliam & Anor [(1995) 38 NSWLR ]
per Cole JA at 494-495.

Indeed, there must be some reason for regarding the discretion confided to the court of first instance as having been improperly exercised. However, as has been pointed out by Priestley AP it is not necessary that some definite or specific error be assigned. Error may not be readily discernible or be apparent on the face of the trial judge's reasons, yet the result or the conclusion itself, may suggest that undisclosed error has nevertheless occurred in some way. Nevertheless, the decision itself, when considered, having regard to the circumstances which the court has taken into account may at times alsoafford convincing evidence that in some way the exercise of discretion may be unsound.

At one stage I was inclined to the view that perhaps the instant case was one where it might have been fairly suggested that the conclusion itself was perhaps such as to suggest some undisclosed error. However, for reasons given by Priestley AP I do not consider that it is necessary to go this far but rather to conclude, that there was error of one of the kinds referred to by his Honour. Further, I also expressly agree with Priestley AP's view that in the instant case, the three matters expressly mentioned by his Honour do show a misapprehension on the part of the trial judge leading to a miscarriage of the discretion for the reasons stated by his Honour.

For these additional reasons I agree with the orders proposed by Priestley AP.
 * * * 
