

Currie and Anor versus Liston and Ors Matter No 16258/90 [1997] NSWSC 389 (10
September 1997) 
Last Updated: 4 March 1998 
Currie & Anor versus Liston & Ors /90 September 1997 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: These proceedings were commenced by Statement of Claim filed on 6 November 1990. The defendants are sued as solicitors. It is alleged that there was a retainer to give advice. The claim (as pleaded) related to advice given on two separate occasions. The first advice was given on 27 February 1984. The second advice was given on 20 March 1985. The claim is founded on allegation of breach of duty. It is framed in both contract and tort. The plaintiffs propound a claim for damages. 
The original Statement of Defence was filed on 31 May 1991. An Amended Defence was filed on 5 August 1996. It added a plea of failure to mitigate damage.

The giving of advice on the two separate occasions is not in dispute. The allegations of breach of duty are disputed. Further, there is issue as to whether any proven allegations of breach of duty have caused damage flowing from the conduct of the defendants. The defendants rely on a limitation defence. It is accepted that the limitation defence defeats the claim of contractual breach of duty made in respect of the advice given in February
Ultimately, the claim made in relation to this advice was not pressed.
The only case then argued related to the advice given in March 1985. There is a question as to whether this claim can be framed in contract. At one stage, it was said that it mattered little whether the claim was propounded in contract or tort. However, at a later stage, a different stance was taken and a particular emphasis was placed on the duty in tort. There is also the plea of failure to mitigate damage.

The first defendant gave the advice which is the subject of the claim. He carried on practice in Glen Innes. He had acted for the plaintiffs for many years. The plaintiffs had been residents of Glen Innes. They had operated a business involving certain school charter bus runs, pursuant to certain conditions of authority (Conditions Document No. 5017 from the Department of
Public Transport) for about 25 years.

The Conditions Document was not before the Court. Presumably, no copy of it is now available to the parties. It was not discovered by the plaintiffs. There is evidence showing that departmental records have been destroyed.

The meagre material available to the Court relevant to the question of the rights conferred by this document reveals certain characteristics. A right was given by the relevant department to operate a particular bus run to carry school children and to be paid a subsidy by the department. The quantification of the subsidy depended on the maximum number of children using the service and the distance travelled. The right was transferable upon giving notice to the relevant department. It was exclusive in respect of each route. I should add that there seemed to be no dispute concerning these matters.

The hearing of the trial commenced on 4 August 1997. The hearing had been expedited because of the advanced age of the first defendant. He died shortly before the commencement of the hearing at the age of about 85 years.
Applications for adjournment (made prior to, on and after 4 August 1997) by the plaintiffs have been refused by the Court. The hearing concluded on 7
August 1997. The plaintiffs brought yet a further Notice of Motion on that day. A further application for adjournment was refused. Leave was given to further amend the Statement of Claim. Certain other questions were reserved.

A formidable pile of documentation has been tendered by the parties. The trial has proceeded on the basis of prepared witness Statements. There has been cross-examination of the makers of the Statements relied on by the plaintiffs (both plaintiffs, Mr Weatherly and Mr Brown). Statement material prepared by the first defendant has been tendered. No question of credibility of any witness has been put in issue.

I shall now refer to certain of the material placed before the Court. This recitation of material is not intended to be exhaustive.

By Agreement dated 24 December 1980, the plaintiffs, as vendors, sold the business to Mr and Mrs Arandale for the sum of $350,000. A part of this sum was payable on completion. The balance of the purchase money ($200,000), together with interest ($20,000 p.a.), was to be paid at the expiration of four years from the date of completion. The payment of these moneys was to be secured by a Bill of Sale and a Declaration of Trust of the goodwill of the bus runs. Completion took place at the end of January 1981. The Agreement is
Exhibit A.

An Indenture made 29 January 1981 was executed by the parties. It is Exhibit
B. It was the security given pursuant to the Agreement. Subject to the proviso for redemption, the Indenture, inter alia, assigned the property identified in the Schedule thereto (which included the goodwill of the business and book and business debts). By Clause 21, the mortgagors covenanted to hold the authority and all other licenses necessary to conduct the business upon trust for the mortgagees. The Indenture contained a provision which defined "Mortgagor" as including the mortgagor's assigns. The personal covenant remains incomplete (only the year (1985) for the date of payment has been inserted). This omission did not excite any submissions from the parties.

The plaintiffs moved to the Tamworth area. Mr and Mrs Arandale soon encountered financial difficulty. There was continuing default in the payment of interest. In the first year, there was a shortfall of $8,000. Mr Currie has said that in 1983 there was a cut in the bus subsidy (this differed somewhat from the recollection had by Mr Brown) and that there was an agreement to defer some of the interest payments. Mr Arandale was contemplating going into bankruptcy. Mrs Arandale was suffering from ill-health (she was found to be suffering from cancer and later died in about 1988). The Department had notice of the Bill of Sale. The buses used by Mr and Mrs Arandale were the subject of the security held by Mercantile Credits. Mercantile Credits purported to repossess the buses. The plaintiffs knew that the buses had been repossessed.
When this took place, the Department contacted the plaintiffs.

In 1984, it was decided to transfer the bus runs to the son of Mr and Mrs
Arandale (Paul Arandale). The purpose of the exercise was to protect the business from creditors. Mr Currie said that "they were transferred to protect our interests and their interests in the bus runs at that time". The plaintiffs knew that Paul Arandale had to acquire other buses. The Department consented to the transfer. The approval was given on 3 February 1984. Mr and
Mrs Arandale remained in default under the Indenture. At some unspecified time, the transfer was effected. The evidence supports the view that it was a voluntary transfer (Mr Currie agreed that Paul Arandale did not pay any money). Ultimately, the plaintiffs did not contend otherwise.

On 27 February 1984, Messrs Currie and Arandale attended on the first defendant. He gave advice. His file note reads as follows:- "Attg. Dale Currie and Arandale when the latter said that due to financial difficulties he had already obtained the Department's approval for the transfer of the bus runs to his son Paul and that he wanted to make a fresh arrangement with you so that the debt would be owing to you by Paul and not by himself and his wife. Advising you that I could see no advantage in this and positive disadvantages in that your Bill of Sale was already registered and probably had obtained priority from having been on the register some 3 years whereas if you discharged it and took a fresh one from Paul this would not be the case and the new Bill of Sale would be signed at a time when the economic position of Arandale was obscure to say the least. Advising that it would be advisable for you to maintain touch with the Department of Education in
Tamworth and that I should write drawing attention to your rights and requesting that consideration be given to your interests in the event of a proposed transfer of the bus run not necessarily to Paul Arandale since this already seemed to have been accomplished, but in case he himself should seek to transfer it." 
Mr Arandale was made bankrupt on 25 February 1985. By that time, the date for repayment under the security had passed. The plaintiffs knew that they were entitled to enforce their security after January 1985. Save as to what was said, inter alia, in Exhibits R and V, the evidence is consistent with the view that the plaintiffs were not disposed to take any enforcement action at that time. It is consistent with the view that this continued to be the position until 1990 (they refrained from taking action until 1990).

A letter dated 11 March 1985 was sent by Davies, Horan & Egan (Solicitors) to the defendants. It was in the following terms:- "Re: Arandale Traders Bill of Sale to Currie 
We have been instructed by Mr P M Arandale to forward the enclosed Bill of
Sale to you for approval and if approved it is then presumably to be returned to us to arrange for the execution thereof by our client. We realise that this course of action is unusual in that you would normally prepare the document acting on behalf of the Mortgagee but nevertheless we are complying with our clients instructions.

We do not have a copy of the previous Bill of Sale between Mr M R Arandale and your clients and are accordingly unable to complete the schedule to conform with the manner in which it was previously completed. We are instructed that what is to be secured by the Bill of Sale is the Mortgagor's right title and interest in the following bus runs which he operates with the approval of the
Department of Education and Motor Transport:- 
Glen Innes Town runs Nos. 1, 2 and 3 
Blair Hill - Mount Mitchell Run 
We await your advice. The principal sum is calculated by the addition of the sum of $31,000-00 outstanding interest due at the expiration of the term of the previous Bill of Sale. The various runs were transferred to Mr P M
Arandale, presumably with the consent of your clients, over twelve months ago." 
This letter together with the enclosed Bill of Sale is Exhibit K.

The enclosure is headed "Trader's or Ordinary Bill of Sale". It contains provision for the mortgagee having agreed to lend and advance the sum of $231,000. The proposed provisions for repayment are to be found in the "Annexure" (Clause 28). This Clause provided for, inter alia, repayment of principal and interest on an unspecified date in December 1987.

On 20 March 1985, a telephone conversation took place between the first defendant and Mr Currie. According to Mr Currie, it was a conversation that "wouldn't have taken long".

In a Statement (Exhibit N), Mr Currie gave the following evidence:- "7. In early 1984 Michael Arandale passed the bus runs over to Paul, his son, because of Michael's impending bankruptcy and I asked Mr Liston words to the effect, `How will the Bill of Sale be affected and should a new one be drawn up?' Mr Liston advised in words to the effect, `The Bill of Sale stands good until it is discharged by you and your wife and it does not matter who has the bus runs as long as you are satisfied with the arrangements. A new Bill of
Sale would put you and your wife on the end of a creditors list instead of first.' Mr Liston's record of this conversation or a similar conversation is discovered document 27 which I will seek to tender at the hearing.
Around this time Betty Arandale had cancer and 5 children (3 of them young children) and being friends and knowing them for years, we could not bring ourselves to foreclose or demand that they sell up because of the unpaid interest. Bus runs were one job where Michael could look after Betty and the children and still have an income.' `12. In March, 1985, I spoke to Mr Liston by telephone. I sought his advice as to whether my wife and I should take the Bill of Sale being offered by Paul
Arandale. He advised that we not do so. He said words to the effect, `Not even the Queen of England can upset your security'. My wife was nearby whilst I had this conversation with Mr Liston. Mr Liston's record of this conversation is discovered document 27 which I will seek to tender at the hearing." 
In oral evidence, this material was provided:- "Q. As you understood it, you were asking to obtain his advice on the same transaction as had been suggested by Michael Arandale back in February of the year before? 
A. That we take a new bill of sale, yes." 
Mrs Currie overheard part of the conversation had with the first defendant.
She heard the words, "Queen of England" and "Don't touch it". The first defendant has said that he has no recollection of using those words.

A file note was made by the first defendant. It is in the following terms:- "Attg. you on phone when you rang from Tamworth and discussing letter received from Davies, Horan & Egan and repeating previous advice that we could see no advantage to you in discharging the Bill of Sale from Arandale and substituting for it one from his son. The principal reason was the preservation of priorities. You agree with this and gave instructions to take the matter no further. We mentioned to you that it was essential to keep in touch with the Department of Education to make sure that your claims to an interest in goodwill of the bus runs were not overlooked when you said that they knew about you and had in the past referred to you at a time when
Mercantile Credits Limited had proposed to take over and dispose of the runs.
At that time the Department had said that if the Company insisted, it would withdraw the franchise and offer it afresh. Letter to Davies, Horan & Egan accordingly." 
The two file notes are Exhibit G.

There is other relevant material (including paragraphs of a Statement made by the first defendant - Exhibits AB and 2). It provides some additional information as to the circumstances of the discussion. Advice was sought and given in relation to the contents of the letter. There was probably no detailed discussion concerning the state of indebtedness. The first defendant was not made aware of discussions had in relation to the arrears. He was not instructed to take enforcement action. There was no further contact between the plaintiffs and the first defendant until February 1990.

Mr Currie has said that he assumed he would be charged for this advice. There is no evidence of the rendering of any account or of the payment of any account in respect of this advice.

A letter dated 20 March 1985 was sent by the defendants to Davies, Horan &
Egan. It contained the following:- "We have your letter with enclosure of 11th instant. The writer has spoken with Mr Currie and has advised him that, on the facts as known to us, and unless good cause can be shown to the contrary, the security arrangements should be left as they are. Our clients' already hold the original Bill of
Sale over the bus runs mentioned in your letter so that their security stands to be weakened by taking one later in time.

It is therefore not proposed to take any action in the matter at this stage." 
This letter is Exhibit L.

After March 1985, Mr Currie made contact with the Department. He told them that he still had an interest in the Conditions Document.

In November 1988, Paul Arandale sought finance from the Commonwealth
Development Bank (the Bank). On 30 January 1989, Paul Arandale granted to the
Bank a "Bill Of Sale And Equitable Mortgage Over Business". It seems to be accepted that the security thereby given included the chose in action relating to the goodwill of the business. Over the years, he has entered into other security transactions with the Bank. The Bank holds various securities.
Material relating to his financial affairs and the security held by the Bank may be found in Exhibits P and Z. It has not been said that the 1989 security has been discharged.

There is no evidence as to what inquiries (if any) were made by the Bank prior to its entering into the 1989 transactions. There is no evidence as to whether or not the Bank had notice of the earlier security given by Mr and Mrs
Arandale to the plaintiffs.

In 1988, the plaintiffs moved to the Holbrook/Albury area. In early 1990, they consulted their present solicitors. On 13 June 1991, a telephone conversation took place between Mr M Arandale and Mr Currie. Mr Currie's version of that conversation is recorded in Exhibit O. Following that conversation, no further payments were made to the plaintiffs.

In 1990, a new regime governing school bus runs came into force. It was implemented by the Passenger Transport Act 1982 , 1990. The terms and conditions of a "regular passenger service" were thereafter governed by a "service contract" entered into between an "accredited operator" and the
Director-General (Department of Transport).

The plaintiffs have not taken any steps to seek recovery of the indebtedness from either Mr M Arandale or Paul Arandale. No action was taken against Mrs
Arandale prior to her death. No action has been taken pursuant to the
Indenture. Prior to 1 August 1997, nothing had been done to seek determination of any question of priority between the Indenture and the Bill of Sale held by the Bank. On 1 August 1997, a Summons was filed in the Equity Division of this
Court. Paul Arandale and the Bank are parties to those proceedings. Their commencement formed part of the rationale advanced to support more recent adjournment applications.

The evidence throws up a number of matters relevant to the reasons behind the plaintiffs not taking action to recover the moneys secured by the Indenture.
The plaintiffs rely on a number of reasons (including a belief (founded on advice given by the first defendant) that they continued to have a good security over the business).

Statements made by Mr Currie contain the following:- "19. Glenn Innes had a population of about 5,000 - 6,000 people. We knew the
Arandales and were aware that they had had all their goods and chattels repossessed some years before we sold them the bus runs. When Michael Arandale informed us he was going bankrupt, we were confident Betty Arandale did not have sufficient assets that it would be worth suing her to recover the principal and interest. She was also ill with cancer.
We gave Michael Arandale a couple of years after the death of his wife but eventually we went to Kell Moore & Co. to seek advice." (Exhibit N) "9. Mr Liston did not at any stage advise us that it was not in our interest to leave the matter indefinitely after the business was transferred to Paul with out any security for us directly from Paul. He did not advise us that we should either obtain a new security from Paul or call in the debt and the existing security.
If Mr Liston had so advised us, I would have taken the new Bill of Sale offered by Paul Arandale, or if he refused to give one, I would have called up the debt. I did not wish to occasion hardship for the Arandales while Mrs
Arandale was very ill, but I would not have been prepared to jeopardise our financial interest." (Exhibit R) 
There is evidence that there is no record of any grant of probate or letters of administration in the estate of Mrs Arandale.

A further relevant matter is the financial circumstances of the plaintiffs themselves. If steps had been taken to repossess the business, it would have been necessary to acquire buses. The plaintiffs were not in a position to buy a new set of buses. Mr Currie said that he did not have enough income and would have had to borrow money to buy them. He gave this evidence:- "Q. You could not have afforded to do that? 
A. I would have to lease them and throw my property down the drain." 
Whilst default continued under the Indenture, payments were made until 1991 (see Exhibit Q). The last payment was made on 5 June 1991. The principal sum of $200,000 remained unpaid. The default is presently in the order of $400,000.

At the commencement of the hearing, Counsel for the plaintiffs handed up a written Outline of Plaintiffs' Case. During submissions, Counsel for the defendant spoke to Written Submissions and made additional oral submissions.
At a later stage, Counsel for the plaintiffs handed up Plaintiffs' Submissions and made additional oral submissions.

The submissions demonstrate the conflicting approaches taken by the parties.
The terms of the written submissions made on behalf of the plaintiffs reflect in some respects the changes which took place in the presentation of their case as the hearing progressed. I gained the impression that the conduct of the plaintiffs' case, in recent times, has been dictated by a growing awareness of evidentiary deficiencies in certain areas.

It is convenient to refer to certain of the contents of the plaintiffs' written submissions made in respect of both breach of duty (including scope of retainer) and measure of damages.

In the Outline of Plaintiffs' Case, it was submitted, inter alia, that:- "1. The Defendants were negligent in failing to advise the Plaintiffs, on or about 20 March 1985, that it was in their interests to obtain a Bill of Sale from Paul Arandale, then being offered by him.
As a result of that negligence, the Plaintiffs on or about 20 March 1985 lost the opportunity of obtaining a security which would impose personal liability on Paul, who was apparently solvent, and which would have had unarguable priority over later securities granted by Paul.
The measure of that loss is the extent to which the value of the
Plaintiffs' security has been diminished by loss of priority to CDB and the lack of personal rights against Paul.
Because both the Plaintiffs' Bill and the CDB Bill are for relevant purposes equitable securities, and because the Plaintiffs have, by reason of the negligence of the Defendants, been guilty of postponing conduct, the CDB's
Bill has priority; the Business will not be adequate to satisfy both debts and the Plaintiffs have therefore suffered loss.
The Plaintiffs' damages are the amount by which the Business is inadequate to satisfy the debt after paying out CDB.
The failure to earlier move to assert the trust against Paul by moving for the appointment of a receiver of the Business is not a failure to mitigate." 
In the Plaintiffs' Submissions, it was submitted, inter alia, that:- "1. The scope of the duty of care of a solicitor to his client is not confined to the contract of retainer but extends according to the circumstances of the case to require the taking of positive steps beyond the specifically agreed task or function where these are necessary to avoid a real and foreseeable risk of economic loss (Waimond Pty Limited versus Byrne [(1989) 18 NSWLR ).](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281989%29%2018%20NSWLR%20642 "View LawCiteRecord" ) See also Hawkins versus Clayton (1988) 164 CLR 539 and most recently Hill v
Van Erp [(1997) 71 ALJR 487.'] `11. The fact that damages cannot be assessed with certainty does not relieve the wrongdoer of the necessity of paying damages for his breach of contract - `the Plaintiff may be accorded the benefit of every reasonable presumption as to the loss suffered', Callaghan versus Wm Lynch Pty Limited <case>; <case>; [(1991) 174 CLR 64.] In such cases, where the loss is a lost opportunity, the plaintiff merely must prove that there has been `a' loss. Proof on the balance of probabilities has no part to play in the evaluation which becomes a matter of informed estimation. Crudely, if what has been lost is a 30% chance, that does not mean the Plaintiff fails. The Plaintiff may recover 30% of the value of the successful event - in this case 30% of $400,000.
Putting the damage this way obviates the necessity to delve into the precise excess that the CDB might have if they sold all of the goods over which they had a charge, which excess in theory might be available pursuant to the doctrine of marshalling if it applied, to the Plaintiffs. What is clear is that the Plaintiffs will have enormous difficulty in ever causing the CDB to so act and have for all intents and purposes lost any realistic opportunity of recovering anything from the goodwill of the bus runs because of the position of the CDB. What is apparent is that the goodwill has been charged twice and is clearly insufficient to pay out either creditor. The slim possibility, based on no evidence that the CDB might one day sell all their security and have an excess which the Curries could claim pursuant to marshalling is negligible." 
The submissions and other material threw up a variety of questions. It may be helpful to make express reference to certain of them.

Before dealing specifically with those questions, I should briefly refer to the material provided by Mr Weatherly. He was a country solicitor in general practice at Albury. He was presented on behalf of the plaintiffs as an expert witness. In fact, the plaintiffs' case propounded during the hearing placed little reliance on his evidence.

He had provided an advice (see Exhibit S). He had been given limited information. He had proceeded on assumptions lacking validity. He gave evidence based on his "instinct about bills of sale" rather than knowledge had as to "the rules governing assignments of choses in action". He did not know of the rule in Dearle versus Hall [(1828) 3 Russ 1.] He would not have consulted Equity - Doctrines & Remedies (Meagher, Gummow &
Lehane). He had never had to advise on the sale of bus runs. His advice raised, inter alia, the matters of, "I would have renegotiated a new transaction with the son" and, "I would have exercised any remedies under the
Bill of Sale".

He was disposed to regard that which was contemplated by Exhibit K as being in the nature of a proposal. Whether or not it can be accurately so described, it may be convenient for present purposes to refer to it as a proposal.

One of the arguments advanced on behalf of the plaintiffs is that Paul
Arandale was offering an additional security to that which had been previously given by Mr and Mrs Arandale to the plaintiffs. I do not accept that argument.

I have formed that view for a number of reasons. I shall mention certain of them. The argument is not consistent with the relevant circumstances and lacks evidentiary support. In February 1984, Mr and Mrs Arandale wanted to make a fresh arrangement which involved the son taking over the debt (so that it would not be owed by the parents) and the drawing up of a new Bill of Sale. In
March 1985, a largely similar proposal was put up. By that time, the term of the existing Bill had expired. The argument is not consistent with the contents of Exhibit K. It is not supported by evidence given by Mr Currie. It is not supported by evidence given by the plaintiffs' expert (Mr Weatherly).
It is not supported by material in the Statements made by the first defendant.

Exhibit K makes it clear that what was to be secured was "the Mortgagor's right title and interest in" certain specified bus runs and that the amount to be secured was a loan of $231,000 (which was made up of the unpaid principal sum together with a sum of $31,000 being "outstanding interest due at the expiration of the term of the previous Bill of Sale"). It was not a proposal to secure the equity of redemption. The proposal involved a variation of the terms of repayment (including a postponement of the date of repayment of the principal sum). It was not a proposal in the nature of a guarantee of the liability of the parents.

In my view, it is an implausible argument. I am satisfied that the proposal made in March 1985 was intended as a replacement for the arrangements which had been made with Mr and Mrs Arandale.

I should add that an acceptance of the proposal would not have seen the granting of a Bill of Sale to the plaintiffs. They would have received the benefit of a personal covenant (which would have postponed the date of repayment of the principal sum) and an equitable security (which would have had later temporal priority).

There is the suggestion that the plaintiffs should have been advised to negotiate with Paul Arandale (who was said to be "apparently solvent"). I do not accept that contention. I am not satisfied that this fell within the contractual retainer. Further, there is nothing in the evidence to support a contention that Paul Arandale was prepared to negotiate and/or enter into any other arrangement with the plaintiffs. The plaintiffs have not led evidence as to the financial circumstances of Paul Arandale at that time. However, there is material (such as the continuing state of arrears and the proposed postponement of repayment of principal) which would justify an inference of, at least, some financial difficulty. He had been placed in a situation where he had to acquire new buses.

There is the suggestion that the plaintiffs should have been advised to exercise their rights of enforcement. The first defendant was not asked to give such advice. I am not satisfied that this fell within the contractual retainer. In any event, the plaintiffs were aware that they could exercise their rights if they wished to do so. There were reasons why the plaintiffs did not wish to enforce their rights. Exhibits R and V provide evidence of circumstances in which the plaintiffs say they would have enforced their rights.

I shall now turn to certain of the submissions made on behalf of the plaintiffs concerning the matter of the scope of the duty of care. During submissions on the question of breach of duty, reference was made to cases other than those previously mentioned (including Trust Company of Australia
Ltd versus Perpetual Trustees WA Ltd & Ors (McLelland CJ in Eq, unreported, 9
July 1997 (p 15) and Citicorp Australia Ltd versus O'Brien [(1996) 40 NSWLR ).](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281996%29%2040%20NSWLR%20398 "View LawCiteRecord" ) The plaintiffs' submissions were founded on what was said by Kirby P (as he then was) in Waimond. In Citicorp, the judgment of the Court was delivered by Sheller JA. His Honour referred to what was said by Priestley JA in
Cousins versus Cousins & Ors (Court of Appeal, unreported, 18 December 1990).

In Cousins, Priestley JA said:- "The appellant's claim against the third respondent asserted that his obligations to her arose both from the contractual retainer and also from the general law because of the relationship between them. This position is established by Hawkins versus Clayton (1988) 164 CLR 539. Whether it is yet possible to express in general terms the duty that arises at common law from the relationship, as distinct from the contract, between client and solicitor, is not clear. Deane J in Hawkins stated the position in terms of a general rule, but neither Brennan J nor Gaudron J, the other members of the majority, (Mason CJ and Wilson J having dissented) appear to have fully agreed with him.
Brennan J stated the specific duty that arose on the circumstances of that case, without stating the position for solicitors generally. In Waimond Pty
Ltd versus Byrne [(1989) 18 NSWLR 642], Kirby P adopted what had been said by Deane J in Hawkins, but Hope AJA, who agreed with the result reached by Kirby P, confined himself to a more particular approach. Mahoney JA, who dissented, dealt with the matter in a way which did not require him to state a general formula. Thus this court has not yet committed itself to adoption of the views of Deane J.

Notwithstanding that the view of Deane J was not in a formal sense part of the ratio decidendi of Hawkins, it seems to me to be very much in accordance with the trend of development in the law of negligence in the High Court in recent years, and I will assume for the purposes of the present case that it accurately states the law for Australia. What Deane J said was: `The relationship of solicitor and client is ... a relationship of proximity which ordinarily involved the combination of those elements with respect to foreseeable loss which may be caused to the client by the performance of professional work. It is a relationship of proximity of a kind which may well give rise to a duty of care on the part of the solicitor which requires the taking of positive steps, beyond the specifically agreed professional task or function, to avoid a real and foreseeable risk of economic loss being sustained by the client. Whether the solicitor-client relationship does give rise to a duty of care requiring the taking of such positive steps will depend upon the nature of the particular professional task or function which is involved and the circumstances of the case.' (at 579) 
The sentence particularly relevant here is that stating that there may be proximity `which may well give rise to a duty of care,' requiring the solicitor to do something more beyond what he has been specifically retained to do. Deane J was contemplating both that some cases would and other cases would not require a solicitor to do more than he was specifically retained to do." 
In Cousins, Meagher JA agreed with the reasons of Priestley JA. He did not agree with those of Kirby P. He observed that:- "This, with the greatest of respect to Kirby P, is an absurd submission." 
In Citicorp at pp 413-414, Sheller JA made the following observations:- "Furthermore, applying the decision in Hedley Byrne to which Deane J referred, the existence of any duty not found in the express, inferred or implied terms of the retainer would depend upon the solicitor's assuming responsibility to the plaintiff and the plaintiff's relying upon the solicitor to perform diligently and skilfully the services for which the solicitor so assumed responsibility: Hawkins versus Clayton (at 578); Henderson versus Merrett
Syndicates Ltd <case>; [[1995] 2 AC ] at -181 and 205-206; White versus Jones <case>; [[1995] 2 AC ] at -270." 
In this case, the contractual retainer was of a limited nature (to advise whether or not the plaintiffs should accept the Bill of Sale contemplated by
Exhibit K). As I understand the later submissions, it is not contended otherwise.

There was no precise identification of circumstances which were said to require the first defendant to do more than he had done. However, if it be assumed that the law is as stated by Deane J, I am not satisfied, having regard to the nature of the professional task that was involved and the circumstances of this case, that the first defendant was required to take any positive steps beyond the specifically agreed task. Further, the evidence fails to establish that the first defendant assumed responsibility for any duty not found in the scope of the retainer itself. Indeed, it was not said that he had.

At least by the end of the submissions, it was common ground that the rights to operate the bus runs constituted a chose in action which was assignable.
The Indenture assigned, inter alia, the goodwill of the business and book debts. Goodwill has been held to include whatever adds value to the business (Box versus The Commissioner of Taxation <case>; [86
CLR 387] at 396-397 and Fraser versus Pickup & Anor (Court of Appeal, unreported, 24 June 1997)).
As with book debts, there was no personal chattel and therefore no Bill of
Sale. The definition of "Bill of sale" (section 3 of the Bills of Sale Act, ) contemplates the involvement of a personal chattel and the definition of "Personal chattels" provides that it does not include "choses in action". The security proposed by Paul Arandale was an equitable security. An acceptance of it would have seen the plaintiffs acquiring a security which did not have the same priority as that which would have been previously held by them. The transfer to Paul Arandale may have been void as against the trustee in bankruptcy.

It may be that various of the legal advisers laboured under a mistaken view as to whether or not an assignment of these rights constituted a Bill of Sale. I am not satisfied that any such error on the part of the first defendant is a matter of significance in this case.

In Trust Company of Australia, it was observed that:- "As has been said: * `[A] solicitor who brings a reasonable degree of skill and knowledge to a task and exercises reasonable care in carrying it out will not be liable for an error of judgment.' (Ormindale Holdings versus Ray, Wolfe BCLR 378 at 387 per Taylor J) * `[A] lawyer ... is not ... normally required to warn experienced business clients of the possibility that [his] opinion, although firmly held, may not, in fact, prevail.' (Ibid at 389, affirmed on appeal at 392) * `A solicitor is not liable for mistake in a nice and difficult point of law.' (Bannerman & Co versus Murray [1972 NZLR 411] 
The questions that arose for consideration in the course of the relevant legal advice were matters of some complexity. Apart from questions associated with the nature of the rights themselves, there were questions of priority. There had been a voluntary transfer of the business by probably insolvent transferors which was effected to defeat creditors. There were bankruptcy considerations (inter alia, sections 120 and 121 of the Bankruptcy Act, ). The Indenture given by Mr and Mrs Arandale involved an assignment of existing and future choses in action against the Department. The subject matter of the Indenture was of unique character. The Indenture had been given for valuable consideration. It would operate as an equitable assignment as soon as the chose in action came into existence. The assignment would operate as a legal assignment if notice was given pursuant to section 12 of the
Conveyancing Act, 1919. The priority questions involve the potential application of the rule in Dearle versus Hall (this was a rule not known to Mr
Weatherly) and matters of postponing conduct.

I am not satisfied that the advice given by the first defendant was attended by any significant error. I am not satisfied that there was breach of the duty of care owed by him to the plaintiffs. He brought a reasonable degree of skill and knowledge to his task and he exercised reasonable care in carrying it out.
In my view, he discharged the duty owed by him.

Whilst this finding suffices to dispose of the plaintiffs' claim, in deference to the other arguments put by Counsel, I should make some brief observations as to certain other matters. In dealing with these matters, I shall proceed on the assumption that the plaintiffs have demonstrated breach of duty.

There is the question of whether or not any loss has been suffered by the plaintiffs. There is a question of whether or not any proven loss has been occasioned by the conduct of the defendants. These are questions which are plagued by evidentiary deficiencies. The concern of the plaintiffs is well demonstrated by their attempts to have this question tried separately, or alternatively, further deferred for final consideration. I have earlier mentioned that certain questions were reserved. In the light of the findings that I have made, the reserved questions do not require further consideration.

The inactivity on the part of the plaintiffs in pursuing other remedies renders the plaintiffs' case a difficult one. The plaintiffs accept that Paul
Arandale holds the rights in trust for them. On the material before me, I am not satisfied that the Bank's security would take priority over that held by the plaintiffs. Even if it did, I am not satisfied that Paul Arandale does not have the means of satisfying the plaintiffs' claim.

In addition to these matters, there are other considerations. It may be that the delay on the part of the plaintiffs now adversely affects the maintainability of remedies against Paul Arandale. There are questions of marshalling. At this stage, it is not necessary to further pursue these matters.

There is the further matter of the plea of failure to mitigate. In the light of my findings, it does not require consideration. However, if loss had been demonstrated, it would clearly be a real consideration.

There will be judgment for the defendants. I dismiss the balance of the Notice of Motion filed on 7 August 1997. The plaintiffs are to pay the defendants' costs. The exhibits may be returned.
 * * * 
