

D Seaton versus The Council of the Municipality of Mosman and Anor [1999] NSWSC (30 June 1999) 
DONALD SEATON versus THE COUNCIL OF THE MUNICIPALITY OF MOSMAN AND ANOR /96 L&E 40188/95 L&E 40121/95 
Friday 18 October 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
PRIESTLEY, MEAGHER, BEAZLEY JJA 
CATCHWORDS: LOCAL GOVERNMENT - Powers, functions and duties of councils - Grant of lease in accordance with Plan of Management - whether Plan of Management in compliance with [Local Government Act 1993](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/) [Local Government Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/), [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/s36.html) 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: ALLOWED 
Appeal from Stein J in the Land and Environment Court 
LOCAL GOVERNMENT - Powers, functions and duties of councils - Grant of lease in accordance with Plan of Management - whether Plan of Management in compliance with [Local Government Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/) [Local Government Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/), [ss ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/s36.html), [46](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/s46.html), [47](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/s47.html) 
Balmoral Beach and its environs, including the building known as the Bathers Pavilion is zoned community land under the [Local Government Act 1993](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/) (the Act). Under [s 36(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/s36.html) of the Act, the first respondent was required to prepare a draft plan of management in respect of community land. A draft plan was prepared in early 1995. However, as it incorrectly categorised the land, council's resolution adopting the Plan was declared invalid. On 29 August 1995, the first respondent resolved to adopt an amended version of the original plan of management. Although some of the amendments were exhibited, two further sets of amendments were made to the plan, and were not exhibited. The first respondent is currently proposing to grant a lease to 7the second respondent of the Bathers Pavilion building pursuant to [sections 46](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/s46.html) and [47](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/s47.html) of the Act. The first respondent has also granted Development Consent to proposed alterations to the Pavilion.

The appellant appealed from the decision of Stein J, arguing that the Plan of
Management adopted by the first respondent on 29 August 1993 did not comply with [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/s36.html)
Secondly, if it did comply with the requirements of the Act, the appellant argued that the lease that the first respondent proposes to grant to the second respondent is not authorised by or is in not in accordance with the
Plan of Management. Thirdly, the appellant argued that a development consent granted by the first respondent to the second respondent on 14 July 1995 was invalid.
 
HELD: 
The Plan of Management, in specifying the objectives and performance targets of the plan, complied with [s 36(3)(b).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/s36.html) 
The Plan of Management did not comply with [s 36(3)(c)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/s36.html) as it substantially failed to specify the "means" by which the first respondent proposed to achieve the stated objectives and performance targets.
 
The area of Balmoral Beach and Environs, as an integrated whole, was appropriately categorised as "park" in the Plan of Management.
 
The second and third sets of amendments to the Plan of Management were not substantial, and were not required to be re-exhibited under [s 40.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/s40.html) 
The proposed lease by the first respondent to the second respondent is not authorised by the Plan of Management.
 
The phrase "nature and use" in [s 44](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/s44.html) is not a composite phrase and is to be read disjunctively. An increase in use may amount to a change in the use of the land. The proposed increase in the restaurant seating capacity of 40% amounted to a change in use within [s 44.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/s44.html) The development consent was thereby invalid.

ORDERS 
The Court orders:
The appeal be allowed;
The respondent pay the appellant's costs of the appeal and of the proceedings below.

The Court declares that:
The resolution of the first respondent dated 29 August 1995 adopting the
Plan of Management is invalid.
The development consent for alterations and additions to the Balmoral
Bathers Pavilion granted by the first respondent on 14 July 1995 is invalid.

JUDGMENT 
PRIESTLEY JA: I have had the benefit of reading in draft Beazley JA's statement of the facts and her reasons on the various issues in this appeal.

Except for a reservation on one issue, which does not affect the outcome of the case, I agree with Beazley JA's reasons and conclusions and do not wish to add to what she has said.

The issue about which I have a reservation is the one Beazley JA deals with under the heading "Were the second and third amendments substantial?". I find this question a difficult one and because, in view of my agreement with the balance of Beazley JA's reasons, it is unnecessary for me to answer it, I refrain from doing so.

I agree with the orders and declarations proposed by Beazley JA.

MEAGHER JA: I agree with Beazley JA.

BEAZLEY JA: This is an appeal from a decision of Stein J in the Land and Environment Court in respect of Class 4 proceedings. The appeal to the Court is a full appeal on both fact and law: [s 58](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/s58.html) of the [Land and Environment Court Act 1979](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/) : see Fatsel Pty Ltd versus ACR Trading Pty Ltd (No 3) [(1987) 64 LGRA 177] at 179. The essential issue on the appeal is whether the first respondent presently has the capacity to grant a lease of a building known as the Bathers Pavilion at Balmoral Beach. That issue requires the resolution of three questions. First, whether the Plan of Management adopted by the first respondent on 29 August 1995 complied with [s 36](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/s36.html) of the [Local Government Act 1993](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/) (the LGA 1993). Secondly, if the Plan complied with the LGA 1993, whether a lease proposed to be granted by the first respondent to the second respondent in respect of the Bathers Pavilion is authorised by or is in accordance with the Plan of Management. Thirdly, whether a development consent granted by the first respondent to the second respondent on 14 July 1995 is valid.
 
Background 
Balmoral Beach is a popular harbourside beach within the municipality of
Mosman. It is described in the first respondent's Plan of Management (being the plan under challenge) as "a symbol of the `Mosman' lifestyle". For the purposes of the Plan of Management, the first respondent treated Balmoral
Beach and its environs, comprising 17.05 hectares of land in 27 separate parcels, as an integrated whole. Its major features as described in the Plan of Management include: ". . .the panoramic views over Middle Harbour; the boatshed and the boating activities; the beach with its different formal and informal facilities; the lawns and associated exotic trees, picnic and shelter facilities; the playing fields and their support facilities; the sailing club; the promenade and historic sea wall; the historic beach pavilion and rotunda; the restaurants and other food outlets; the surrounding bush; the pathways and scenic streets linking to the beach; the history and the evidence of past uses." 
The historic beach pavilion referred to in this description is the Bathers
Pavilion which is the focus of these proceedings. The Pavilion was constructed during 1928-1929 on a separate parcel of land owned partly by the first respondent and partly by the Department of Lands. As its local name implies, it was built for the purposes of, and used as a change and toilet facility for users of Balmoral Beach. By 1967, its use by the public as changing facilities had declined and the first respondent called for tenders for alternative uses of the building. The chosen use was as a restaurant and a 15 year lease was granted for this purpose. The Pavilion eventually became the site of a well known Sydney restaurant, "Mischa's".

The current lease of the premises is a 20 year lease commencing on 7 July 1979 and terminating on 30 June 1999. The current lessee is the second respondent in these proceedings and has submitted to any order the Court may make on the appeal.

In 1989, the second respondent lodged a development application seeking approval for the conversion of the Bathers Pavilion into a ground floor restaurant and private hotel. Local controversy surrounded the application.
Development consent had not been granted when, on 23 January 1995, the second respondent lodged an amended development application (the DA), which is the DA relevant to these proceedings. The DA abandoned the private hotel proposal and instead, proposed an extended restaurant facility. This proposal made provisions for male and female change rooms and toilet facilities for the use of the public. The female facilities comprised five toilets, two washbasins and a separate shower and change area. The male facilities comprised two toilets, a urinal, washbasin and a separate shower and change area. In total, the facilities constituted an area amounting to 2% of the overall development.

Under the Mosman Local Environmental Plan No. 1 (the LEP), gazetted on 22
January 1982, Balmoral Beach and its Environs was zoned 6(a) Existing
Recreation. Upon the introduction of the LGA 1993, the land became community land. As such, the first respondent was required to prepare a Plan of
Management: [s (1).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/s36.html) 
The first respondent prepared a draft plan for the area which it exhibited between 16 February and 16 March 1995. On 4 April 1995, the first respondent resolved to adopt the plan (the original Plan of Management) as the plan of management for Balmoral Beach and Environs. Under the original Plan of
Management, the first respondent categorised the area as "significant". That category finds no expression in the LGA 1993. The appellant brought proceedings in the Land & Environment Court challenging the validity of the resolution adopting the original Plan of Management. The first respondent eventually conceded that its resolution was invalid and of no effect. A declaration to that effect was made by the trial judge.

Subsequent to this challenge, the first respondent amended the original Plan of Management. Under the amended Plan of Management, Balmoral Beach and its
Environs was categorised as "park": see [s (4)(c).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/s36.html)
The amended Plan of Management was exhibited on 13 July 1995. After exhibition, two further sets of amendments were made. On 29 August 1995, the first respondent resolved to adopt the Plan, in its finally amended form, which is the subject Plan of Management (the Plan of Management) in these proceedings.

Authorisation of lease to second respondent 
Schedule 3 to the Plan of Management provided, relevantly, that the Plan "expressly authorises the lease or licence of community land as follows:
Balmoral Bathers Pavilion to enable use thereof as outlined under `Use' . .
.and in accordance with the Conservation Plan dated July 1994, and prepared by
Robert A. Moore Pty Limited".
 "Use" of the Bathers Pavilion as specified in the Plan of Management stated :
 ". . .the need to upgrade the surrounds of the pavilion has already been noted, of equal importance is the need to improve community access to the building. The use of sections of the building for commercial purposes which are in keeping with the quality and atmosphere of the whole precinct is not inappropriate. However, commercial use should not totally exclude community use. Thus, efforts should be made to redevelop and provide community access to sections of the pavilion for a range of uses, including change/toilet facilities. Other uses could include a local artist's gallery and/or sales area; a local history museum; meeting areas; youth, family and senior citizen's program areas, and adult eduction [sic] and U3A (University Third
Age) program spaces .." 
The 1994 Conservation Plan referred to in Schedule 3 of the Plan of Management had been commissioned by the first respondent. The brief for the preparation of the plan was not in evidence. However, the title, "Conservation Plan and its Recommendations", indicates that its authors were requested to make recommendations as to the conservation and continued use of the Bathers
Pavilion, having regard to matters such as its history, architecture, construction and state of repair. The Conservation Plan's "Conclusion and
Recommendations" were: "The Bathers Pavilion is an important community heritage item and asset, inviting careful management to enhance the enjoyment of an important recreation reserve, of which it is a major contributory component. It has reached a crucial point in its life cycle at which the building's repair and adaptation for better continued use have to be planned and appropriately implemented.
 
The building is still owned by the Council which built it as a facility that has now, in essence, outlived its usefulness. The physical landmark status of the building, and the regard with which it is held by its users, both former and current, support the building's careful retention. The success with which its present lessee has maintained a successful business and established an international reputation is indicative not only of the commitment that such a building can draw from people, but of the future which the building could also have, given the application of equal skill, intelligence and hard work. The building has become a special place of many different meanings to a wide range of people, and could go even further.
 
Almost all the community around it are agreed upon its potential for continued use, so as to enhance the special place that it occupies in Balmoral
Reserve. Just how this is to be achieved is the problem that Council must solve.

In difficult economic times, it is unlikely that a simple, unencumbered solution will be found for the building's predicament. Like all historic structures, its survival can only be supported by an economic use, one which may not solve all aspirations for the building's future.
 
However, if a clear view can be maintained of the building's importance, and if that view can guide and direct what will be, after all, the next phase in its life, the building will be supported through this difficult period, and remain to meet with further reassessment and perhaps further adaptation, as it endures.
 
It is therefore recommended: 
That Council adopt this Plan as a Draft Conservation Plan for the Bathers
Pavilion, and invite submissions (including from the Heritage Council of NSW) in relation to its findings, and recommendations; 
That having considered submissions on the Plan, Council amend and adopt the
Plan, as its Policy for the future of the Bathers Pavilion, the Policy to be subject to regular review or upgrading as may be felt necessary; 
That Council secure further consulting engineers' advice as to the feasibility of the structural repair and capacity of the interior to support re-use of the building, so as to be able to better advise tenderers of the preferred approach to the building's adaptation; 
That having prepared a briefing document of advice and information to tenderers, Council invite expressions of interest for the conservation and adaptive reuse of the Bathers Pavilion, in accordance with the Policies of this Plan as adopted by Council; 
That having adopted this Plan and determined to seek expressions of interest for the building's conservation and reuse, the Council advise the present lessee of its new Policies for the building, and invite from the lessee a revised submission for the building's adaptive reuse; 
That Council ensure that the brief for prospective tenderers requires them to propose and install within the development an interpretation facility explaining the cultural significance of the Pavilion to its visitors, to the approval of Council, and that the requirements within the lease conditions include the preparation and adoption of a maintenance programme for the completed building; 
That having received tenders or proposals in response to its invitation
Council exhibit the submissions for public comment; and 
That having considered all submissions and determined a preferred tenderer,
Council negotiate contractual conditions to secure an early commencement and completion of the works." 
On 14 July 1995, the first respondent granted conditional development consent of the DA under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s92.html) of the [Environmental Planning and Assessment Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/). On the same day, the Minister for Local Government gave his consent to a proposed 21 year lease of the Bathers Pavilion to the second respondent under <case> of the
LGA 1993.

The LGA 1993 
Before dealing with the issues raised on the appeal, it is convenient to refer to the relevant provisions of the LGA 1993. They are:
Preparation of draft plans of management for community land "(1) A council must prepare a draft plan of management for community land.
 
A draft plan of management may apply to one or more areas of community land.
 
A draft plan of management for community land must identify the following: the category of the land, the objectives and performance targets of the plan with respect to the land, the means by which the council proposes to achieve the plan's objectives and performance targets, the manner in which the council proposes to assess its performance with respect to the plan's objectives and performance targets, and may require the prior approval of the council to the carrying out of any specified activity on the land.
. .
 Public notice of draft plans of management 
A council must give public notice of a draft plan of management.
 
The period of public exhibition of the draft plan must be not less than days.
 
The public notice must also specify a period of not less than 42 days after the date on which the draft plan is placed on public exhibition during which submissions may be made to the council.
 
The council must, in accordance with its notice, publicly exhibit the draft plan together with any other matter which it considers appropriate or necessary to better enable the draft plan and its implications to be understood.
 Adoption of plans of management 
After considering all submissions received by it concerning the draft plan of management, the council may decide to amend the draft plan or to adopt it without amendment as the plan of management for the community land concerned.
 
If the council decides to amend the draft plan, it may publicly exhibit the amended draft plan in accordance with this Division or, if the council is of the opinion that the amendments are not substantial, it may adopt the amended draft plan without public exhibition as the plan of management for the community land concerned." 
A council has no power to sell, exchange or otherwise dispose of community land: <case>. It may lease or license such land, but only in accordance with ss 46 and 47: <case>.

Section 46 provides: " Leases and licences of community land - generally 
A council may grant a lease or licence of community land if: the grant of such a lease or licence is expressly authorised by a plan of management for the community land, and it does so in accordance with such provisions of the plan of management as apply to the granting of the lease or licence.
 
An authorisation in a plan of management for the granting of a lease or licence may be limited to the granting of a lease or licence for a public purpose or by reference to other matters.
 
A council must not grant a lease or licence for a period (including any period for which the lease or licence could be renewed by the exercise of an option) exceeding 21 years.
 
A council must not grant a lease or licence for a period (including any period for which the lease or licence could be renewed by the exercise of an option) exceeding 5 years unless it has also complied with section 47." 
If a council proposes to grant a lease or license exceeding 5 years (including any period of renewal), there must be public notice and exhibition and a period for the making of submissions: subs 47(1) and (3). The council must consider all submissions: subs 47(4). If there is any objection to the lease or license, the same may not be granted without the Minister's consent: s (5). If the Minister's consent is required, there are certain procedural requirements, not presently relevant, with which the council and the Minister must comply: subs 47(6) and (7). The Minister's decision is discretionary: subs 47(8).

Although not a feature in this case, it is also useful to refer briefly to a council's responsibility to prepare a Management Plan. During each year, a council must prepare a draft management plan with respect to its activities for at least the next 3 years: <case>. The content of a draft management plan is specified in <case>. A draft management plan must include a statement of the principal activities which the council proposes to conduct and a statement of the objectives, performance targets and the means of achieving the targets of each of the principal activities: <case>. The council must, each year, adopt a management plan, prepared and exhibited in accordance with Ch 13 [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/index.html#p2), and the draft management plan must be publicly exhibited: <case>. The requirement to prepare, exhibit and adopt a Management Plan on a yearly basis is one of the means by which a council is made publicly accountable for its actions.

I have already referred to the three major questions which call for resolution in the appeal. It is now necessary to turn to those questions in more detail.
 
Did the Plan of Management comply with the LGA 1993? 
The appellant contended that the Plan of Management failed to comply with the
LGA 1993 in the following respects: first, the Plan of Management was no more than a proposal to prepare a more detailed plan, which the first respondent called a Management Plan (see [s (3)(c))](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s36.html); secondly, the Bathers Pavilion had been impermissibly categorised as `park' (see [s (3)(a))](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s36.html); thirdly, the Plan of Management failed to identify objectives and performance targets and the means proposed to achieve them (see [s (3)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s36.html) and (c)); and fourthly, that the first respondent failed to advertise the amendments to the Plan as required by <case> of the LGA 1993. It is necessary to refer to the Plan of Management in some detail in order to determine these issues, which I propose to deal with in a slightly different order to the order in which they were argued.

Compliance with [s (3)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s36.html) 
Section 3 of the Plan of Management is headed "The Management of Balmoral
Beach and Environs". Eight "Objectives" are identified. They are: * "ensure visitor experience is of the highest quality; * retain the diversity of recreational, tourism and conservation roles while seeking to resolve conflicts between these roles of the parkland and users; * maintain the area to the highest standards of appearance and safety; * sustain the environmental and cultural heritage of the area; * improve pedestrian access to the Beach from throughout the municipality and region; * retain the ability to accommodate special and intermittent uses; * improve landscaping and disabled access; and * establish clear guidelines for future use, development and design as part of the management planning process." 
Prior to the Plan of Management being amended the second time, this section was headed "Management Objectives". The word "Management" was deleted as part of the amendments, but the section otherwise remained in its original form. Counsel for the appellant submitted that the deletion of the word "Management" was a failed attempt to comply with [s (3)(b).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s36.html)
The mere deletion of the word could not, of course, convert the substance of this section of the Plan of Management into a section which thereby complied with the statute. However, I am of the opinion that the Plan of Management complied with the requirements that the objectives of the plan be specified.
An "objective" is "an end towards which efforts are directed; something aimed at": Macquarie Dictionary; "something sought or aimed at": The
Concise Oxford Dictionary. The eight specified objectives properly fulfil the concept of something being "aimed at".
 "Performance Targets" are separately identified in the Plan of Management and categorised under five major strategic areas as follows: "ownership, design, infrastructure, use and use impacts". Under each major performance target, a number of issues or more specific performance targets are identified. They are summarised at p 9 of the Plan of Management as follows: "In summary, the immediate performance targets of this plan can be identified as:- 
Ownership amalgamate or consolidate titles to the land 
Secure open space links to the beach environment 
Design 
Review and redevelop overall character of open space by landscaping and detailed site design 
Ensure design and placement of facilities complement and support use of the open space. 
Design and promote open space links to Balmoral Beach. 
Infrastructure 
Review and manage traffic 
Review and manage parking 
Attend to services such as rubbish management systems, lighting, seating and information. 
Use 
Higher standard of maintenance of existing resources 
Extend recreational uses 
Monitor and control change of recreation activities. 
Use Impacts 
Maintain and manage natural resource assets." 
The Macquarie Dictionary meaning of "performance" and "target" are: "performance: the execution or doing; target: a goal to be reached." 
The Concise Oxford Dictionary meanings are: "performance: the act or process of performing or carrying out; the execution or fulfilment; target: an objective or result aimed at." 
I am of the opinion that the five major strategic areas and the sub-categories identified thereunder fall within the description "performance targets" for the purposes of [s (3)(b).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s36.html)
They each specify an objective or goal to be performed.

Compliance with [s (3)(c)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s36.html) 
The next question is whether subs 36(3)(c) has been satisfied. [Subsection (3)(c)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s36.html) requires that the Plan of Management "must identify. . .the means by which the council proposes to achieve the plan's objectives and performance targets". Counsel for the first respondent submitted that his client had complied with this provision, both in the body of the Plan of Management and by means of the proposed Management Plan. He submitted that the section in the
Plan of Management: "Landscaping needs and opportunities", provided an example of how the first respondent had specified the means by which it was to achieve its performance target relating to "Landscaping". The relevant part of the Plan of Management was in these terms: "Considerable opportunities exist to enhance the quality of visitor experiences and the attractiveness of Balmoral Beach through landscaping and detailed site design. Those sections of the beach to the north of the pavilion and south of the boatshed would benefit substantially from landscape treatment. There are also significant opportunities to improve the attractiveness and usefulness of Hunter Park through plantings, paths, seating and other design inputs." 
It was submitted that the second and third sentences of this passage were a sufficient identification of "means" for the purposes of subs 36(3)(c). I do not agree. The concept of "means" in subs 36(3)(c) involves the identification of the method intended to be used to achieve an objective or performance target. At the most, the second sentence identifies a performance target - namely, the enhancement of the designated area of the beach by landscape treatment. The last sentence may also be a performance target, although the mere identification of matters which might be desirable or which could be done may be more correctly described as a recognition of possible management considerations than performance targets within the meaning of [s (3)(b).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s36.html)
However, it is unnecessary for me to express a concluded view on this issue having regard to the conclusion I have reached on compliance with subs (3)(c). I shall assume, for present purposes, that this part of the Plan of
Management involves a proper identification of a performance target. However, neither of these sentences specifies the means by which the objectives which are related to this performance target or the target itself are to be achieved. This is not unexpected. This section is found in a part of the Plan of Management dealing with performance targets. A Plan of Management may, of course, deal with "objectives", "performance targets" and "means" together (or as a combination of some of them) and a heading used in such a plan does not necessarily delimit the content of any particular part of the plan. It is clear, however, that in this part of this Plan of Management, the first respondent was dealing with the subject matter of its heading - namely "Performance Targets". Counsel's attempts to construe certain aspects as also specifying "means" for the purpose of subs 36(3)(c) were, therefore, strained, artificial and ultimately unsuccessful.

Counsel for the first respondent identified the section of the Plan of
Management dealing with the performance target, "Use", as another example where the Plan of Management identified the means by which the performance target was to be achieved. The relevant performance target identified in this section was "maintenance and extension of recreational uses". Counsel submitted that the segment under the subheading "The key user areas requiring upgraded maintenance. . ." identified the "means" of achieving the performance targets. The first three items under this heading were dealt with in these terms: ". Lawn areas and beachfront south of the boatshed - bare patches of soil, erosion of the ground surface under the Moreton Bay fig trees, erosion of the lawn-beach interface are significant problems in this area;
Rocky Point - surface cover and vegetation".
Hunter Park - the poor quality of the play facilities, inability to cater for a diversity of ages and the lack of good support facilities and services for parents and other carers".

In my opinion, there is no identification of "means" in these items. Nor can it be said that the reference to "upgraded maintenance" in the subheading specifies the means by which the performance target relating to the use of these areas is to be achieved. Rather, the reference to "upgraded maintenance" is part of the performance target. If there is any doubt, the matter may be tested in a number of ways. First, the question can be asked whether there is any identification of how upgraded maintenance is to be achieved. The answer is in the negative. Secondly, if Hunter Park is taken as an example, a supposed means of "upgraded maintenance" bears no relationship to a performance target of "the poor quality of the play facilities, inability to cater for a diversity of ages, etc". It follows that "upgraded maintenance" cannot be a "means" for this item. Thirdly, again using Hunter Park as an example, an identification of "the poor quality of the play facilities" is no more than a specification of something which warrants attention.

However, the topic, "Balmoral Oval", also dealt with under this heading, may arguably identify a means. It is in these terms: "Balmoral Oval - the playing surfaces of Balmoral Oval need substantial upgrading through improved drainage and surface cover (the quality of the support facilities for users also leaves much to be desired and the appropriateness of leasing the former rugby club building for a commercial use should be reviewed - see grounds maintenance issues in the Sportsground Plan of Management." 
The next two and the final items are: ". North of the Pavilion - the lawn-beach interface area to the north of the pavilion;
Balmoral Baths - the baths warrant a higher maintenance input if they are to continue to serve users and be retained as an important part of the heritage of the foreshore; . . .
Sharkproof net - the maintenance of the shark-proof net at the northern end of the beach was also noted." 
The same comments may be made about these items as has been made in respect of the first three items.

That leaves the item relating to the Bathers Pavilion, the text of which is reproduced at pages 4-5 above. There is nothing in this segment which identifies the means by which the performance target or targets referred to are to be achieved.

It is thus necessary to look at the section of the Plan of Management headed: "Means of Achieving Objectives and Performance Targets" to determine whether there has been compliance with subs 36(3)(c) . It is in this section that the first respondent's proposal to substantially satisfy its obligations under subs 36(3) by means of a Management Plan is revealed. In all, three "means" are identified: that the performance targets are themselves "means" of achieving the objectives of the plan; that council should pursue the design, development and management strategies outlined in Schedule 2 to achieve the objectives and performance targets; and that a detailed Management Plan for the carrying out of the strategies be prepared providing for, inter alia, the work outlined in Schedule 2, in any recommended studies".

I have already addressed the question whether the first of the "means" identified above satisfies subs 36(3)(c). It does not, or at least, in substantial part, does not. The second and third of the means identified above are both included in Schedule 2.

Schedule 2 is headed: "Management Strategies for Balmoral Beach &
Environs". The first two items under this heading are: "Consolidation of titles or agreement to allow for effective management as one open space management unit".
 "Securing open space links as community land".
 
In my opinion, these matters are a sufficient specification of the means for achieving the purposes of objectives 1 and 2 and for the performance target identified as "Ownership and Management", having regard to the content of that performance target. That leaves the balance of Schedule 2 which deals with the
Management Plan.

As I have said, the proposed preparation of the Management Plan is directed to the Balmoral Beach area. In this regard, Schedule 2 specifies that the
Management Plan "should include such work as:- * preparing a traffic and parking strategy; * establishing development, design and landscaping guidelines; * review of park infrastructure and services; * addressing maintenance problems; * responding to user group pressures and impacts; and * program of action to monitor, evaluate and resolve use impacts on the natural and built environments." 
It is clear from the inclusive language introducing these 6 items of work that the proposed Management Plan could cover a range of work which has no relationship to any of the items of work specified. It is thus entirely unknown, except to the extent of the specified items, what might be included in the Management Plan. However, these items are best described by their generality and for the most part contain no more particularity than is found in the identification of the objectives and performance targets. [Section (3)(c)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s36.html) clearly requires more than this.

Counsel for the first respondent informed the Court that the first respondent did not contend that the Management Plan, referred to in the Plan of
Management, was a Management Plan for the purposes of chapter 13 of the LGA
Rather, it was a convenient name given to a document which the first respondent proposed to prepare for the purposes of carrying its objectives and performance targets into effect. In other words, it was the means by which the first respondent proposed to satisfy [s (3)(c).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s36.html)
This was a significant concession. Unless it can be said that the Plan of
Management, by its own terms (without reference to the Management Plan), satisfies [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s36.html), the first respondent's proposed means of managing this area of community land, by preparation of an internal council document, lacks the public accountability mechanisms which lay at the heart of Chapters 6 and 13 of the
LGA.

This emphasis on public accountability in both Chapters 6 and 13 provides guidance as to what is required in a Plan of Management for the purposes of [s (3)(c).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s36.html)
Public accountability carries with it the notion of exposure. The requirements in Chapters 6 and 13 relating to the contents of Plans of Management and
Management Plans respectively and to their public exhibition is, in effect, the statutory prescription of the level of exposure which the legislature requires in each case. Thus, when [s (3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s36.html) calls for the identification of certain matters - "objectives and performance targets" in the case of para (b) and "means" in the case of para (c), it calls for a statement which exposes what a council intends in relation to those matters. Thus, when para (c) calls for the identification of `"means" whereby objectives and performance targets are to be achieved, it is not sufficient to state that a document, the contents of which are yet to be determined, or which, once prepared, may deal with matters not previously identified, will be prepared.

In addition to the foregoing, the following passages further demonstrate the
Plan's lack of compliance with [s (3)(c):](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s36.html) "During the public consultation program a number of suggestions were made for extending and improving recreation use. These included the provision of a separation area for roller blading; provision of a skateboard facility on a temporary basis; provision of a second playground in the vicinity of the picnic area at the southern end of the beach; provision of a fitness trail in the park; outdoor art shows; and the provision of a second path around the ovals so [as] to overcome use conflict between cyclists, walkers and joggers or the signposting of the path to indicate the junior cyclists have priority use. The issues involved with these activities need to be addressed within the context of the Management Plan as these could lead to other conflicts. . . ." 
The Plan of Management does not state whether these issues, raised in the public consultation process, are even considered to be performance targets let alone specify any means relating to them. The only matter which is clear from this passage is that there were significant matters left unresolved by the
Plan of Management.

It follows from what I have said that the Plan of Management fails to comply with [s (3)(c)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s36.html) in substantial respects. It was not within the first respondent's power to adopt a Plan of Management which does not comply with the Act. Because the non-compliance is substantial, I am of the opinion that the appellant is entitled to a declaration that the first respondent's resolution adopting the
Plan of Management is invalid.

Categorisation of the land as "park" 
The Plan of Management categorises the whole of Balmoral Beach and its
Environs as park. "Park" is defined in the LGA to mean "an area of open space used for recreation not being bushland". "Bushland" is defined to mean: " land on which there is vegetation which is either a remainder of the natural vegetation of the land or, if altered, is still representative of the structure and floristics of the natural vegetation." 
The appellant submitted that the first respondent, in order to comply with [s (3)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s36.html), should have categorised the area according to its separate uses. It was submitted that it was not open to categorise the Bathers Pavilion as park and that it should therefore have been categorised as "general community use".

Categorisation of land is a mandatory requirement of the new legislative scheme governing a local council's control of community land. The purpose of categorisation is to facilitate a local council's proper planning and management of community land. This is important in several respects, not the least of which is the relevance of proper categorisation to community involvement. Once land is categorised in a particular way, the community's attention is thereby directed to planning and management according to that categorisation. [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s36.html) further contemplates that land may be categorised in more than one way. It can thus readily be appreciated that categorisation is not only mandatory. It is an integral component of control of community land. As Gleeson CJ observed in
Friends of Pryor Park Inc versus Ryde City Council and Anor (unreported, Court of
Appeal, 24 July 1996) at 27: "It is not possible to treat a categorisation under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s36.html) as though it were some kind of additional or alternative zoning.
. .
 
The function of categorisation is related to the system of accountability involved in requiring councils to spell out in detail, and expose to the public, their plans for the use and management of community land." 
However, as was pointed out in Friends of Pryor Park, the LGA 1993 does not specify the consequences of inappropriate categorisation. It does not, for example, specify that the Plan of Management is thereby invalid. It may be, as
Gleeson CJ observed in that case, that a lease or license authorised by a Plan of Management could be manifestly inconsistent with the categorisation of the land in the plan so as to give rise to an entitlement to relief by way of judicial review of administrative action.

In this case, whilst the Bathers Pavilion, taken as a unit or section on its own, could have been appropriately categorised as community use, the area of
Balmoral Beach and Environs as an integrated whole, was appropriately categorised as "park", it being sufficient for the Plan of Management to recognise the existence, circumstances and present function of the Pavilion.
It follows that the proposed lease to the second respondent is not manifestly inconsistent with the categorisation of the area as park.

Failure of Council to advertise the proposed amendment to the plan 
The original Plan of Management was adopted on 4 April 1995. It was subsequently amended three times. The first amendment involved amending the categorisation of the area from "significant", a concept not found in the statute, to "park". There were other amendments directed to satisfying [s (3)(d).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s36.html)
The first amendment was substantial. Section 41 dictated that there be full public exhibition before the amended plan was adopted. This was done.

The second amendments were incorporated into the Plan of Management on 24
August 1995 upon the advice of the first respondent's Director of Environment and Planning. The third amendments were incorporated on 29 August 1995, prior to the plan's adoption, upon the further advice of the first respondent's
Director of Environment and Planning. The sole question raised under this ground was whether the amendments were "substantial". The appellant contended that the second and third amendments were substantial so that the Plan was required to be exhibited in accordance with [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s38.html) before the Plan of Management was adopted by the first respondent. Counsel for the first respondent submitted that the question whether an amendment was substantial was a matter for the opinion of council and therefore only challengeable on the basis of Wednesbury unreasonableness.

This ground focused, in the main, on the second amendments although there is one aspect of the third amendments which calls for consideration. In order to deal with this submission it is again necessary to return to the Plan of
Management in some detail.

The second amendments 
A numbering system and headings were inserted by the second amendment. This was not a substantial change. There were also a number of additions made to the Plan of Management. It is convenient to set out the additional material in the context of the passage or section to which the amendment was added. The bold type is the additional or amended material. I will number the amendments for ease of reference.
 "1. For the purposes of open space planning, Balmoral Beach and its Environs are considered to include those open spaces (including those owned by CaLM) surrounding Hunters Bay as shown on Map 1. All community land of
Council has been categorised as park (with the exclusion of natural areas), for the purposes of [Section (3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/s36.html) of the [Local Government Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/) (The
Act). Council regards land owned by CaLM similarly. In so doing Council has regarded Balmoral Beach and its Environs as one integrated area notwithstanding that there may be within the area individual components which are not community land and/or have dual purposes.
 . 3.0 The Management of Balmoral Beach and Environs 
For the purposes of Section 36 of the Act, objectives have been identified together with performance targets which are in themselves means by which the objectives will be achieved. Further means of achieving the performance targets (and objectives) are outlined under "Means of Achieving Objectives and
Performance Targets" below.
 . Each of the performance targets is discussed in the following paragraphs.
Securing open space linkages 
Closely related to the performance target area of ownership is that of securing open space links to the Beach environment. While Council owns a number of pedestrian links, many others remain under the Crown. Efforts must be made to ensure these remain in public use.
Traffic and parking management are two of the major planning issues for this area of performance targets facing Balmoral Beach and unless resolved, will continue to impact negatively on visitor experiences, the quality of the resource and the surrounding residential areas.
Use impacts 
The purpose of this area of performance targets is to ensure that the benefits and opportunities provided by Balmoral Beach and Environs are available for future generations.
 
Any use of Balmoral Beach will affect the natural resources and built environment of the reserve. Asset maintenance and asset management are thus essential if the benefits and opportunities provided by the parkland are to be available to future generations. Issues which need to be addressed and resolved in this context are: measuring the extent of visitor impacts on the different components of the built and natural resources; development strategies for minimising or eliminating those impacts; the protection and interpretation of heritage features including the
Pavilion, the sea wall, the old tram route and terminus, and other site features of heritage significance; bushland protection, regeneration, weed control and fire management and the management of bushland-park-residential interfaces.
This amendment is reproduced above at page 19.
 . Means of Achieving Objectives and Performance Targets 
As stated, the performance targets outlined above are in themselves means of achieving the objectives of this plan. In addition, Council should pursue the design, development and management strategies outlined in Schedule 2 to achieve the stated objectives and performance targets and thereby bring about effective management and use of Balmoral Beach and Environs.
 
For the carrying out of the strategies, there should be prepared a detailed Management Plan providing for, inter alia, the work outlined in schedule 2 and the work detailed in the Management Plan and in any recommended studies and/or reviews should be carried out properly and with reasonable expedition taking account of the resources which are available.
Manner of assessment of performance with respect to objectives and performance targets.
 
For the purposes of Section 36(3) of the Act, the Management Plan should stipulate reasonable dates by which various works or stages thereof should be completed taking account of the resources (financial, personnel and otherwise) which are available and assessment of Council's performance with respect to the objectives and performance targets set out in this plan is to be made on the basis of Council's ability or inability to have completed such works or stages by the set dates. In particular, completion dates should be stipulated for landscaping and/or upgrading the sections of the beach to the north of the pavilion and south of the boatshed, the area around Balmoral
Bathers Pavilion and Hunter Park; preparation of a traffic and parking study; a review of the park infrastructure and services; performing the maintenance tasks outlined under the performance target `Use' above; provision of any recommended recreational facilities; and upgrading/installation of any specified drainage or waste facilities. Council's performance should also be assessed on the quality of work which will be measured by public reaction (eg. the amount of public use) the length of time for which works endure and the operational ability of works.
 
The responsibility, priority, estimated cost and performance measures for each strategy are also provided where it is appropriate to do so." 
There were also amendments to Schedules 1 and 2. Schedule 1 contained details of the 27 parcels of land subject to the Plan of Management. Two parcels which were subject of the original Plan of Management were deleted, and a new parcel "Unmade Road Amaroo Crescent, comprising 4800 metres2" was included and categorised as "natural area bushland". Five parcels were recategorised from "park" to "natural area bushland". The total area of these five parcels was 6512 metres2 out of a total area of 170,540 metres2, of which ,742 metres2 was owned by the first respondent.

Schedule 2 was amended so as to change two completion dates from December 1994 to December 1995 and to designate a different section of council as being responsible for a specified objective and performance target.
 
The third amendments 
Further amendments were made on 29 August 1990. Counsel for the appellant properly conceded most were immaterial. The one amendment which calls for consideration was an addition to that part of the Plan of Management on "Use". The addition stated: "Also, leases and licences of community land such as Balmoral Beach and
Environs are provided for by the Act if authorised by a Plan of Management.
Schedule 3 authorises certain leases/licences for the purposes of and/or by reference to the matters set out in Schedule 3." 
Were the second and third amendments substantial? 
The word "substantial" is a word of ordinary English meaning, not used in any technical sense in <case>. It means "of real worth or value; essential, material or important": The Macquarie Dictionary; "of real importance or value": The Concise Oxford Dictionary. It is convenient in determining whether the amendments were substantial to consider the amendment which I have numbered "1" in the second set of amendments. This amendment does two things.
It notifies a reader that Balmoral Beach and its Environs have been regarded as an integrated whole for the purposes of the Plan of Management, notwithstanding that some components are not community land or have dual purposes. In my opinion, this was obvious from the Plan of Management before this amendment. The amendment, whilst a helpful clarification, is not substantial in itself. It also highlights the fact that some land is not categorised as park. A reference to Schedule 1 reveals the areas now classified as natural area and which comprise about 4% of the total area subject of the Plan. In the normal course, a change of statutory categorisation would involve a substantial amendment. However, given the small overall percentage of land involved, and without any evidence as to its significance in the overall area subject of the Plan, I do not consider this amendment to be substantial or at least such that warrants the grant of any relief.

The balance of the second amendments are also best characterised as clarification of particular sections of the Plan of Management. As such, there is no benefit in analysing each change. Overall, they are an attempt to make the Plan appear more obviously to satisfy the requirement of a `plan of management' under <case>, by using the statutory language of "objectives", "performance targets" etc and by making reference to the relevant statutory provisions. As I have said, none of the amendments go beyond matters of clarification.

The relevant change in the third amendment states that the first respondent may grant a lease or license if authorised by a plan of management and notifies a reader of the Plan of Management that a lease/licence has been authorised by Schedule 3. This is an important matter. However, the proposed lease to the third respondent was always the subject matter of Schedule 3.
There was nothing in the amendment to the body of the Plan of Management which altered or qualified Schedule 3. Accordingly, I am of the opinion that the reference to the lease in the body of the Plan of Management did not involve a substantial amendment.

It follows from what I have said that the second and third amendments were not of such a nature as required the Plan of Management to be re-exhibited.

Is the proposed lease of the Bathers Pavilion authorised by the Plan of
Management? 
Counsel for the appellant submitted that even if the Plan of Management complied with the provisions of <case>, the proposed lease was not authorised by it. There were 2 limbs to this argument. First, it was submitted that the purported authorisation was so vague and meaningless as to be no authorisation at all. Secondly, it was submitted that the proposed lease did not provide for improved community access to the building.

The lease authorised by Schedule 3 was as follows: "This Plan of Management - expressly authorises the lease or licence of community land as follows: * Balmoral Bathers Pavilion to enable use thereof as outlined under `Use' above and in accordance with the Conversation Plan dated July, 1994, and prepared by Robert A. Moore Pty. Limited.
. ." 
The "Use" specified in the Plan of Management is reproduced at page 4 above.
The relevant sections of the Conservation Plan are: "The Use of the Building 
Proposed uses for the Pavilion should not require any unsympathetic impact upon the significance of the building, externally and internally, and should if possible be compatible with public access to the building. Use of the building must also be compatible with the significance of the Reserve in which the building is located." 
Public access had earlier been dealt with in the Conservation Plan in these terms: "Public Access 
The importance of public accessibility to the interiors of the building for some residents of the Beach has been discussed. It remains an important criterion for any adaptation proposal. However, it must also be remembered that the building is in Council ownership and if leased under lessee-to-renovate conditions, the building will eventually revert to Council. This longer term view of the Pavilion's circumstances is an essential element of the present process, and it will necessarily influence negotiations over any proposed schemes for the building, and the details of related architectural designs." 
Counsel for the appellant submitted that the following further parts of the
Conservation Plan were relevant to determining whether the proposed lease was "in accordance with" the Conservation Plan.
 "Constraints upon Use 
Investigations for this report suggest that it is not realistic to expect that the survival of the Pavilion can be achieved through its repair and restoration solely for its original purpose - it would simply not be affordable given the returns from the use. Accepting that its interior may be substantially "revised" in an adaptive re-use programme, the building could be argued to impose few constraints upon the selection of uses to which it might be put - except for the regard and esteem in which it is held by most visitors to the Beach, and certainly the visitors to its Restaurant.
. .
 
Opportunities for Interpretation 
The Pavilion, as the older and most substantial of the Council buildings in the Reserve, should and obviously could incorporate a display of interpretative material about itself and the Reserve, and such a facility should form a part of any brief for the rehabilitation and re-use of the building. In a sense, the Pavilion might operate as the "visitor centre" for the important heritage site of Balmoral Beach Reserve.
 
The loss of the remaining original internal fabric of the building - if indeed it proceeds, will place further emphasis on the need to explain what the Pavilion was built for originally, and how its interior was arranged.
Consideration might be given to the use of video recording of the building for archival and interpretation purposes, before any construction work was to begin.
. .

That having prepared a briefing document of advice and information to tenderers, Council invite expressions of interest for the conservation and adaptive reuse of the Bathers Pavilion, in accordance with the Policies of this Plan as adopted by Council; 
That having adopted this Plan and determined to seek expressions of interest for the building's conservation and reuse, the Council advise the present lessee of its new Policies for the building, and invite from the lessee a revised submission for the building's adaptive reuse;" 
The "Use" section of the Plan of Management does not state that the Bathers
Pavilion will be put to any specific community use. Rather, it gives an indication of a broad range of community use to which it might be put and certainly indicates that any proposed use should extend beyond the provision of change/toilet facilities. Nor does the Conservation Plan specify any particular use to which the Pavilion should be put. At most, it gives a guide as to appropriate use.

The proposed lease is of: "[Lot] 3/831359, being land at 4 The Esplanade, Balmoral and the building erected thereon known as Balmoral Bathers Pavilion but excluding those sections made available to the public herein referred to." 
The First Schedule to the Memorandum of Lease defines "the building" and excepts from the definition "public toilets, showers and change rooms on the ground floor of the building". The combined effect of the description of the land leased and the First Schedule is that the toilet and change facilities are not part of the proposed lease. Under the terms of the proposed lease, the permitted use of the building is as "restaurant, public cafe and refreshment room in accordance with Development Consent No. 141/89 issued by the [first respondent]". Relevantly, the development consent is for two larger size restaurants, which could also be used for functions, with a maximum combined seating of 152 people and two cafe/coffee shops (one with a bar) with a maximum seating capacity of 98 persons.

In my opinion, leaving aside the question whether the possible uses for which a lease of the Pavilion is authorised by Schedule 3 are vague or uncertain, it cannot be said that the proposed lease is one for the uses specified under the heading "Use" in the Plan of Management, nor for any of the uses or types of use indicated in the Conservation Plan. In this regard, there is no need to have resort to any argument that the public toilets, change and shower facilities are not part of the proposed lease. Even if they were, on any view of the matter, a reservation of 2% of the building for these purposes falls far short of anything indicated in the Plan of Management or the Conservation
Plan.

Accordingly, I am of the opinion that the proposed lease does not "enable use [of the Bathers Pavilion] as outlined under `Use'" in the Plan of Management.
Nor is it "in accordance with" the Conservation Plan.

It was also submitted that the only lease authorised by Schedule 3 was one granted after the procedures specified in the Conservation Plan had been followed - that is, after tenders for its proposed use had been called. This submission was based upon the wording "in accordance with" in Schedule 3.

The expression "in accordance with" is an ordinary English expression. It means "in agreement or in conformity with": The Macquarie Dictionary; or "in a manner corresponding to": The Concise Oxford Dictionary. See also Re
Federated Furnishing Trade Society of Australasia <case>; [(1993) 113 ALR 137] at 145; Sydney Cove Redevelopment Authority versus Chief
Commissioner of Land Tax  [(1995) 30 ATR 517] at 528. The question of what the specified matter or issue, in this case use of the
Pavilion, is to be in agreement or conformity with, depends upon the context in which the phrase appears. The lease of the Bathers Pavilion authorised by
Schedule 3 was: "to enable use thereof as outlined under `use' [in the Plan of Management] and in accordance with the Conservation Plan dated July 1994." 
The phrase "to enable use thereof" both means what it says and is to be read distributively throughout the passage. In other words, the lease authorised by Schedule 3 was one which was to enable use of the Pavilion as outlined under `use' in the Plan of Management and to enable use thereof as outlined in accordance with the Conservation Plan.

There is nothing in this part of the Plan of Management authorising the lease of the Bathers Pavilion which refers to the manner or procedures by which use of the Pavilion should be decided upon. Accordingly, I reject this submission.

Counsel for the first respondent submitted that, regardless of any submission put on behalf of the appellant, the challenge to the proposed lease was misconceived, as any determination of the validity of the lease must be made at the date of grant. As at the present time, there has been no "grant [of] a lease or license of community land" within <case>, although counsel for the first respondent informed the Court that the terms of the proposed lease which were in evidence in the proceedings are those upon which the first respondent intends to ultimately grant the lease to the second respondent. However, the power to grant declaratory relief in respect of future conduct or rights is well-recognised. It is available where "rights which though not yet in existence are treated by the courts as reasonably certain to come into effect, either on a certain date or on the occurrence of a specified event": De
Smith, Woolf & Jowell: Judicial Review of Administrative Action 5th Ed at 750; Mercury Ltd versus Director-General of Telecommunications <case>; [[1996] 1
WLR 48] at 59. A declaration in this matter would resolve a very real dispute of considerable public importance and would avoid the re-litigation of many of the issues dealt with in this appeal. In my opinion, the appellant is entitled to declaratory relief.
 
Is the development consent valid? 
The appellant further contended that the development consent granted for additions and renovations to the Bathers Pavilion on 14 July 1995 was invalid as <case> of the LGA 1993 provides that pending adoption of a Plan of Management for community land, the nature and use of the land must not be changed.

The development consent permits an extension of the restaurant and coffee shop facilities, involving opening up the first floor of the premises for this purpose, an increase in seating capacity of approximately 40% and the ability to hold conferences and functions on the premises. Counsel for the appellant submitted that such a substantial increase in seating capacity within the building, the expenditure of over $1 million on alterations and use of significant areas of the building for different purposes to that previously permitted, (that is for functions and conferences), involves a change in the nature and use of the land. The amount of expenditure involved in a proposed development cannot constitute a change in the nature and use of the land. At the most, it might provide some evidentiary support where a change in the nature and use of land is alleged. The question therefore is whether an increase in use, involving some change in use to one which may be considered of a like or similar nature, involves a "change in nature and use" within the meaning of <case>.

The trial judge appears to have construed the phrase "nature and use" in s as a composite phrase. His Honour stated, at 15: "Did the nature and use of the land change with the granting of development consent? Clearly its `use' did not change. It was and will continue to be a restaurant. I understand its `nature' to comprehend the qualities or character of the land. Thus understood the `nature' of the community land did not change by reason of the consent. It should be noted that <case> does not refer to a change in the nature of the use, but the nature and use of the land. For that reason, I reject the submission that `nature' entails an increase in `intensity' of the use. The section refers to the nature of the land not changing. The consent does not effect any such change ".

I do not agree with the trial judge's construction of <case>. The purpose of s is to maintain the status quo until such time as a council has prepared and adopted a plan of management for community land under its control. Any proposed change in the nature and use of that community land would be reflected in the Plan of Management and thus subject to public scrutiny.
Either a change in the nature of land or in its use could have a serious impact upon such land. Any such change could render any proposal in the Plan of Management otiose and the notion of public accountability which lies at the heart of the Plan of Management would thereby be undermined.

It follows that to construe the words "nature and use of" in <case> as a composite phrase would clearly defeat the purpose of the section. The word "and" should therefore be read disjunctively: see Re the Licensing
Ordinance [(1968) 13 FLR 143] per
Blackburn J at 146-7; Gillespie versus Ford [(1978) 19 ALR 102] per Forster
J at 107, Sullivan versus R [(1987) 73 ALR 31] at 35-36.

Even if the trial judge did not construe the words as a composite phrase, his
Honour's focus on use as that of a restaurant and separate focus on nature when dealing with the question whether an increase in use involved a change in the "nature and use" of the land led him into error.

Both "nature" and "use" are concepts which can have both qualitative and quantitative aspects. In my opinion, an increase in use can amount to a change in use of land. A slight change may not be sufficient for the purposes of s , or alternatively, or at least, may not be sufficient for a court to grant any relief. However, where, as here, the proposed development involves a substantial increase in seating capacity, I am of the opinion that there has been a change in use within the meaning of <case>. It follows that the combined effect of the increase in seating capacity and the provision of function room facilities constitutes a change in use within <case>. It is not necessary to consider separately whether a change so as to provide function room facilities is a change which, by itself, would have contravened the section. It follows that the development consent is invalid.

The appeal should be allowed with costs and declarations should be made in relation to the Plan of Management and the development consent. Costs in the court below were reserved. If this case had been decided as in my opinion it should have been, costs should have followed the event. I therefore propose orders and declarations in the following form: 
The Court orders that: the appeal be allowed; the respondent pay the appellant's costs of the appeal and of the proceedings below.

The Court declares that: the resolution of the first respondent dated 29 August 1995 adopting the
Plan of Management is invalid; the development consent for alterations and additions to the Balmoral
Bathers Pavilion granted by the first respondent on 14 July 1995 is invalid.
 * * * 
