

Maydwell versus Wfm Motors Pty Limited Matter No Ca 40153/98 [1998] NSWSC 770 (12 October 1998) 
Last Updated: 29 January 1999 
MALCOLM MAYDWELL versus WFM MOTORS PTY LIMITED 
CA 40153/98 October 1998 
Beazley JA, Stein JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division - Einstein J 
FILE NO/S: 40153/98; 2034/93 
DELIVERED: Monday, 12 October 1998 
HEARING DATE: Monday, 12 October 1998 
PARTIES: MALCOLM MAYDWELL versus WFM MOTORS PTY LIMITED 
JUDGMENT OF: BEAZLEY JA, STEIN JA 
COUNSEL: 
Claimant: In Person 
Opponent: T Alexis 
SOLICITORS: 
Claimant: In Person 
Opponent: Gells 
CATCHWORDS: 
APPEAL - Leave to appeal out of time - existence of fresh evidence - whether trial judge improperly exercised discretion or made an error of law.

EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: EX TEMPORE 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
NO OF PAGES: 4 
MALCOLM MAYDWELL versus WFM MOTORS PTY LIMITED 
JUDGMENT 
BEAZLEY JA: This is an application for leave to appeal from a decision of Einstein J in which his Honour refused the appellant leave to appeal out of time from a decision of Master McLaughlin. 
The claimant sought to base its application for leave to appeal out of time upon the existence of fresh evidence. During the course of a considered judgment his Honour categorised that evidence into eleven separate categories, and dealt with each category in turn.

In respect of all categories except three, his Honour considered that the claimant had not satisfactorily explained the delay between that material either coming into existence or coming into the possession of the claimant.

We do not see any error in the manner in which his Honour approached that question, nor do we see any error in his Honour's finding that Mr Maydwell had not satisfactorily explained the delay in the material coming into his possession, and in the making of the application for leave to appeal out of time.

That left three categories of documents, identified by his Honour as the seventh, eighth and ninth categories of documents, which did not either come into existence or come into Mr Maydwell's possession until a relatively short time prior to his making application for leave to appeal.

Mr Maydwell, who has appeared on this application in person, placed before the
Court those three categories of evidence, and we have had the opportunity to consider them.

In relation to the category of evidence identified as the seventh category, Mr
Maydwell relies most particularly on paragraph 22 of the document, which is a statutory declaration of a Mr Ross Alec Jackson, the managing director of
Australian Telephone Distributors Limited. In that statutory declaration Mr
Jackson does not identify the relationship between Australian Telephone
Distributors and the opponent, WFM Motors Pty Limited, in classical terms of agency. Nonetheless, he describes a relationship between those two entities which would have supported the claim made by WFM Motors against Mr Maydwell on the guarantee, which was the transaction sued upon in the proceedings before
Master McLaughlin.

The eighth category of document comprised a series of documents which in summary might be termed an amended proof of debt winding up proceedings, brought against Skink Limited, the company of which Mr Maydwell is the principal, in Hong Kong, together with supporting documents and arguments in relation to that amended proof of debt. Again we have had the opportunity to read that document. It seems to us that, notwithstanding Mr Maydwell's assertion that this document supported the fact which he asserts that there was no agency agreement in existence which would have enabled WFM Motors
Limited to have relied upon the guarantee, the contrary is the case. It appears to us that in that document WFM Motors Limited continues to assert that agency agreement. It may be that to protect its position it was also prepared to put in an alternative argument, but that is not a matter which is relevant to this application.

The third piece of evidence was the ninth category of document identified by
Einstein J in his judgment, which was an affidavit of David Arthur Cowper, sworn 19 July 1995. Mr Cowper was the auditor of both ATD and WFM.

There were certain annexures to that affidavit upon which reliance was made by
Mr Maydwell, for the purposes of this application. In particular, it was submitted that it demonstrated that Mr Jackson's representation to him that the need to bring WFM into the trading relationship between ATD and Skink was because of financial difficulties of ATD could not be accurate, given that a bank confirmation of an existing letter of credit at the time the representation was made showed that there remained in existence an amount of almost two million dollars of an unused facility. That document, however, tells us only that. It tells us nothing about the financial position of ATD at the time that the representation was made, and we have no way of assessing from that material alone whether the representation was false.

For those reasons, as well as for the reasons given by Einstein J, we consider that his Honour's decision was within the proper discretionary range, and no error has been demonstrated to the Court on this application.

Accordingly, the application is dismissed.

Is there any application for costs? 
ALEXIS: There is your Honour, yes. 
BEAZLEY JA: Do you wish to say anything about that Mr Maydwell? 
MAYDWELL: No your Honour. 
BEAZLEY JA: The application is dismissed with costs. * * * 
