

Regina versus Atkins Matter No Cca 60583/97 [1998] NSWSC 273 (27 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 12 August 1998 
REGINA versus MARTIN DAVID ATKINS 
CCA 60583/97 May 1998 
Studdert J, Carruthers A-J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
STUDDERT J: The applicant, Martin David Atkins, pleaded guilty in the Local Court to twelve offences of break enter and steal and also to two offences of disposing of stolen property. He was committed for sentence to the District Court and on 24 October 1997 he appeared before his Honour Judge Kirkham. On that occasion he adhered to the pleas earlier entered. In addition to those fourteen offences to which he pleaded guilty, the applicant asked the sentencing judge to take into account further offences on forms pursuant to <case> of the Criminal Procedure Act. There were twenty scheduled offences of disposing of stolen property and two further offences of break, enter and steal identified on the two schedules. 
His Honour sentenced the applicant to five years penal servitude on the first of the break enter and steal charges specified in the indictment. All of the other counts in the indictment attracted a fixed term of twelve months to be served concurrently with the offence attracting the major penalty. Having found special circumstances, he fixed a minimum term of two years six months commencing on 17 June 1997 when the applicant was first taken into custody and to expire on 16 December 2000. His Honour fixed an additional term of two years six months commencing on 17 December 2000. This was plainly an error in the expiration of the minimum term and the commencement date of the additional term as expressed by his Honour, but this Court has been informed that that has been corrected and requires no further order of this Court. The minimum term set will expire on 16 December 1999 and the additional term will commence on 17 December 1999.

The applicant seeks leave to appeal against the sentences imposed.

Section 112 of the Crimes Act fixes a maximum penalty for the offence of break enter and steal of penal servitude for fourteen years. Section 189 of the Crimes Act provides for a maximum penalty for the disposal of stolen property of three years imprisonment.

The facts concerning the offences can be briefly summarised. On 17 June 1997 the applicant was spoken to by police at the shopping centre at Willmot after his fingerprints were found at the scene of an offence and, having been taken to the Penrith police station the applicant indicated a willingness to take police on what has been described as a "drive-along" to point to premises where he had committed break enter and steal offences. The applicant co- operated in the drive-along and it was by this means that the police were able to present charges against the applicant for twelve counts of break enter and steal for offences committed against residents in the Winston Hills and
Toongabbie area. The dates of the offences ranged from October 1996 through to
June 1997. Compensation was sought in a sum which aggregated in excess of $64,000.

The charges of dispose of stolen property pursued on indictment related to offences committed early in 1997. Then there were twenty further offences of disposing of stolen property that were scheduled and these offences took place between July 1996 and April 1997. Finally, there were two break enter and steal offences which were scheduled and these were both committed on 8 May .

In his remarks on sentence the learned judge described the offences of break enter and steal as being very serious offences committed over a lengthy period. In that assessment I consider the judge to have been correct. His
Honour also observed that the victims of these types of offences, particularly the elderly, suffer emotional setbacks.

His Honour approached his sentencing task by sentencing the applicant on the totality of his criminal conduct and he did this by imposing the five year sentence for the first of the break enter and steal charges. All the scheduled offences were taken into account in arriving at that sentence. The other matters were then dealt with by way of fixed terms of twelve months.

The applicant came before the judge as a twenty-five year old man with a heroin addiction. He had a record for offences of dishonesty which went back further than five years but he said that he had had a heroin addiction for some five years and that these offences for which he was punished in October were offences committed to feed his heroin addiction.

The applicant had in his favour his pleas and his cooperation with the police.
Indeed, with most of the offences his Honour had to consider the prosecution would have had no case against the applicant had he not admitted his guilt. In respect of the two counts of disposing of stolen property, the police did have the applicant's name and address and signature against entries in the purchasers' book of the loan office where he disposed of several items. In addition, the applicant's fingerprints were found on a power board at one of the premises broken into, but otherwise the applicant's convictions depended upon his admissions and subsequent pleas.

His Honour recognised this saying: "I accept the submission of Mr Hancock that the prisoner has saved the community a significant amount of time and money by his pleas and his volunteering to take police to other premises. The probability is but for that concession the perpetrator himself of those offences would never have been known. And it is for that reason alone, apart from the other subjective features in his favour that I have mentioned, the sentence warrants some leniency." 
There were other favourable features that his Honour was alert to and which he addressed in his sentencing remarks. There was a pre-sentence report recording the applicant's remorse and his apparent motivation to deal with his drug dependency. The judge also had reports from an alcohol and drug worker at the
Metropolitan Remand and Reception Centre and a report from Major Day of the
Salvation Army.

The applicant had a de facto wife who was supportive of him and two children, both of tender years and, indeed, the youngest of whom was only days old when the applicant was sentenced. There are reasonable prospects of rehabilitation in this case and the judge specifically addressed them. Indeed, because of them he found special circumstances accounting for the mix of minimum term and additional term at which he arrived.

Mr Buddin of Senior Counsel has submitted that the sentence, and in particular the minimum term, was excessive in all the circumstances of this case. It was submitted that insufficient weight was given to the fact that it was the applicant's conduct and admissions which brought to light most of the offences for which he was being punished. Reference was made to Ellis [(1986) 6 NSWLR ]
in which this court said at 604: "This court has said on a number of occasions that a plea of guilty will entitle a convicted person to an element of leniency in the sentence. The degree of leniency may vary according to the degree of inevitability of conviction as it may appear to the sentencing judge, but it is always a factor to which a greater or lesser degree of weight must be given.

When the conviction follows upon a plea of guilty, that itself is the result of a voluntary disclosure of guilt by the person concerned, a further element of leniency enters into the sentencing decision. Where it was unlikely that guilt would be discovered and established were it not for the disclosure by the person coming forward for sentence, then a considerable element of leniency should properly be extended by the sentencing judge. It is part of the policy of the criminal law to encourage a guilty person to come forward and disclose both the fact of an offence having been committed and confession of guilt of that offence.

The leniency that follows a confession of guilt in the form of a plea of guilty is a well-recognised part of the body of principles that cover sentencing. Although less well recognised, because less frequently encountered, the disclosure of an otherwise unknown guilt of an offence merits a significant added element of leniency, the degree of which will vary according to the degree of likelihood of that guilt being discovered by the law enforcement authorities, as well as guilt being established against the person concerned." 
The further factors identified by Mr Buddin as warranting a lesser sentence were: his admissions to the police; his early pleas of guilty; his remorse; that this was his first appearance in the District Court. It is to be added, and Mr Buddin adverted to this, that only one of the offences of break enter and steal would ordinarily have attracted the jurisdiction of the
District Court; that the applicant was trying to address his heroin addiction and had prospects of rehabilitation.

Indeed, the applicant accounted for his cooperation and his confessions by saying he wanted to "wipe the slate clean" so that when he is released from custody he does not have any further matters to bring him before a court again.

All those matters to which Mr Buddin has adverted were addressed by the learned judge. So far as his drug abuse was concerned, whilst this may explain why the applicant committed these crimes, his Honour was correct not to treat that as a matter of mitigation: see Stanford (unreported, Court of Criminal
Appeal, 23 November 1993) and in particular the judgment of Wood J at 6, and
Valentini [46 A Crim R 23] at 25.

The Crown has referred to a number of decisions in which the offender disclosed offences of break enter and steal and the applicant's sentence, it was submitted, fits comfortably with the penalties in those other cases. See
Calvert (unreported, Court of Criminal Appeal, 18 February 1993), Uren (unreported, Court of Criminal Appeal, 17 March 1992), Cottier (unreported,
Court of Criminal Appeal, 18 December 1990) and Clifford (unreported, Court of Criminal Appeal, 6 November 1990).

In my opinion, notwithstanding all that Mr Buddin has put to this Court, consideration of the remarks on sentence discloses no error of approach and the length of the sentence imposed is not manifestly excessive. I find myself unable to accept that his Honour has paid insufficient regard to the principles to be found in Ellis. I am unpersuaded by the submission that there has been no significant added element of leniency because of the applicant's disclosure of the offences that he had committed.

I regard the sentence here as one which was within the appropriate range of sentencing discretion. So far as the structure of the sentence is concerned, it seems to me that in fixing a minimum term of only fifty per cent of the total sentence his Honour paid due regard to the special circumstances of the case and I certainly could not conclude that in fixing the minimum and additional terms that he did his Honour strayed outside the appropriate range.
On the contrary, the mix arrived at was favourable to the applicant.

In the result I do not regard this as being a case in which this Court should act to disturb the sentence imposed in the District Court. I would grant leave to appeal but would propose that the appeal be dismissed.

CARRUTHERS A-J: I agree. 
STUDDERT J: The orders of the Court then will be as I proposed. * * * 
