

Gregory versus Hudson (No. 2) Matter No 2493/96 [1997] NSWSC 413 (18 September )
 
Gregory versus Hudson (No 2) /96 September 1997 
Young J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division /96 - GREGORY V HUDSON (NO 2) 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: I gave reasons for judgment on 4 April 1997 as to why the bequest in clause 6 of the will of Royce Gregory of 23 May 1995 operated according to its tenor. Because of my determination, the plaintiff, who is the widow of Royce Gregory, says that there has been inadequate provision made for her and seeks an order under [s 7](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s7.html) of the [Family Provision Act 1982](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/) so that adequate provision is made for her. 
The estate of Royce Gregory is a substantial one. The evidence is not very definite as to the total, but it would seem from all accounts it is somewhere in the vicinity of 14 million dollars gross and that as at 30 June 1997, there was 11 million dollars left in the estate subject to an unlimited contingent liability for a possible claim that could be made by the purchaser of the deceased's business. However, for present purposes, the value of that contingent claim could be put at close to nil.

There are various facts that are not in dispute. Royce Gregory died on 9
December 1995 aged 76 years. He left a will made 23 May 1995, probate of which was granted to the defendants, the executors named therein, on 2 April 1996.
Furthermore, on 3 June 1994 (amended 30 June 1995) the deceased set up a discretionary trust in the ordinary form. The potential beneficiaries under this trust were discussed in my earlier judgment, but they certainly include the widow, her son Taiga, the deceased's sons by his former marriage, and the children of those sons. The defendants are also the trustees of the discretionary trust.

The defendants are John Charles Hudson and Ronald Kenneth Heinrich. Mr Hudson is a prominent businessman who was recruited by the deceased to manage his business affairs as from 7 February 1994. Mr Heinrich is a senior partner of the firm of solicitors Tress Cocks & Maddox, who had acted for the deceased since May 1994. Messrs Hudson and Heinrich had become directors of the deceased's companies from June/July 1994 and a large part of the deceased's substantial estate came about because of the sale of the business in December 1994 brought about, to a great degree, by Mr Hudson's efforts.

When the deceased set up his discretionary trust, he executed a document headed "Wishes of Royce Gregory". This was supplemented by a document headed "Supplementary Wishes of Royce Gregory" on 9 November 1994 and finally a
Memorandum of Wishes dated 23 May 1995.

The trustees have indicated that their present intention is to carry out faithfully the wishes in the memoranda of wishes. However, as is clear from both my decision and that of the Court of Appeal in Hartigan Nominees Pty
Ltd versus Rydge (Young, J 10 October 1990, unreported, Court of Appeal [(1992) NSWLR 405)], whilst trustees may in exercising their discretion take into account any such memorandum of wishes, they need not do so. Furthermore, that decision shows that trustees are unable to covenant that they will be bound by the memoranda of wishes because the trust requires them to exercise their discretion according to the exigency of the times and circumstances. I will revert to the terms of the trust and to the memoranda of wishes in due course.

The plaintiff widow was born on 17 November 1941 and is thus 55 years of age.
She had previously been married and there was one child of that earlier marriage, Taiga Nagatomi, to whom I will refer simply as "Taiga". He is now 26 years of age and is currently residing with the widow. The deceased had two children by his prior marriage, David Royce Gregory, who is 49, and Peter John
Gregory, who is 44. Peter Gregory has two children, Richard Gregory and
Alexander Gregory, who are aged approximately 12 and 14 respectively. Richard and Alexander are living with their mother, Mrs Lorraine Gregory, the separated wife of Peter Gregory, for whom the deceased had some affection and she, as a spouse of a beneficiary, is also entitled to be considered by the trustees under the discretionary trust. The deceased had divorced his first wife Nancy and also made some provision for her.

Clause 6 of the will provided: "6. I GIVE DEVISE AND BEQUEATH to my Trustees the rest and residue of my real and personal estate of whatsoever nature and wheresoever situate UPON 
TRUST to pay my funeral and testamentary expenses and debts and all death probate estate succession and other like duties payable in respect of my estate and to hold the residue then remaining UPON TRUST to pay distribute or transfer such residue to the 
Trustee for the time being of the Royce Gregory 
Family Trust created by a certain Deed of Trust made the 3rd day of June 1994 between Ronald 
Kenneth Heinrich as Settlor and Datpie Pty Limited (now known as Royce Gregory Investments Pty 
Limited) (ACN 064 336 232) as Trustee to hold such residue upon the trusts of the aforesaid Deed of Trust dated the 3rd day of June 1994 and as varied from time to time before or after my death." 
It is unnecessary to refer to the discretionary trust in detail in view of what I have said above and in my earlier judgment. Mr Heinrich in his affidavit, provided the court with the memoranda of wishes, as well as some details of what the deceased told him at their first meeting on 31 May 1994.
Mr Heinrich says that the deceased said to him, "I have prostate cancer. I have been ill for some years. My health is deteriorating, I probably only have months to go and it is urgent that I get my affairs in order." He told Mr
Heinrich that he had employed John Hudson to dispose of the business and thought it would realize in the order of 15 million dollars or more. He explained his family situation and then said, "I want to make proper provision for all my family. My sons David and Peter do not get on, and I have only been married to my second wife Akiko for a short time. I am particularly keen to preserve the capital of my estate for the benefit of my family, in particular my grandsons." 
I will summarize the documents expressing the deceased's wishes below, referring to the plaintiff as "Akiko" and the other relations of the deceased by their first names. The wishes of 3 June 1994 provided: 
That Akiko would be provided with a unit of a value of up to $650,000 which was to be held in the estate's name and fully funded by the estate or the trust, the arrangement to continue dum casta or until Akiko left Australia permanently.

Akiko was to have a motor vehicle registered in her name maintained, insured and run out of the income which she was to be granted.

Akiko dum casta or until she left Australia was to receive $50,000 per year indexed each year by the CPI (Sydney Index).

Peter was to receive a house/unit to a value of $750,000 to be held by the estate or family trust at least in the short term.

The deceased's Killara property was to pass to David in due course.

David and Peter were to have the motor vehicles they were currently driving but they had to maintain them themselves.

Peter's overdraft of $100,000 was to be paid out and David was to receive an equivalent sum.

David and Peter were each to be paid a salary of $50,000 a year indexed.

John Hudson was to receive certain benefits for his management skills.

The supplementary wishes of 9 November 1994 dealt with cars to be given to the widow and to Mr Hudson.

The wishes of 23 May 1995 provided, so far as is relevant, that - 
Akiko should have reasonable travelling expenses to Japan in the order of $15,000 per year.

Akiko should have sufficient income from the trust to meet all payments on the mortgage current at the deceased's death and outgoings on her unit in
Yokohama as well as sufficient to pay all rates, taxes, levies and maintenance on Unit 63, 171 Walker Street, North Sydney.

David and Peter were to be reasonably provided for by way of income having regard to their own personal circumstances.

That all of the deceased's grandchildren be provided for and maintained including all educational and living expenses having regard to their personal circumstances.

David should have the opportunity of purchasing at market value the
Killara property; and 
John Hudson was to be provided for.

Mr Heinrich says in his affidavit of 3 June 1997 that it is his intention to use his powers as trustee to benefit Akiko and Taiga as follows: 
To assist with Taiga's education.

To pay for Akiko's immediate family to travel to Australia once only.

To maintain cultural subscriptions for Akiko's benefit.

To discharge the mortgage over Akiko's unit in Yokohama.

To enclose the verandahs of the balconies of Units 63 and 64 at 171 Walker
Street, North Sydney.

At the request of the plaintiff and by consent, I had a view of the premises at North Sydney in which the deceased and the widow lived and in which the widow and Taiga still live. These are two units on the 16th floor of a building about three blocks from North Sydney station, from the balconies of which one has extensive views of the harbour immediately east of the Harbour
Bridge extending at some points to the Opera House. The rooms in the units are well appointed, but are relatively small, so that the main bedrooms with queen size beds in them barely have room for someone to walk around the edges of the beds. By special dispensation from the North Sydney Council, Units 63 and 64 were internally connected, but a condition of the approval by the council was that as the dispensation was given because of Mr Gregory's poor health, on his death, the units would be separated once more. The units have a value of approximately $650,000 each.

In addition to her benefits under the trust, Akiko is entitled to benefits under the will, namely - 
By clause 4 she receives the deceased's Lexus 300 motor vehicle.

Under clause 5(a) she receives the use of Unit 63 free of mortgages together with all household furniture for life or dum casta with the remainder falling into residue.

Under clause 5(b) she receives $50,000 per year dum casta indexed on 1
July each year.

Akiko has indicated she does not wish to live in Unit 63, but she wishes to have a house in her own name in fee simple.

The widow's history is that she was trained as a school teacher in Japan. She commenced working with the Japan Foundation in 1984 and was posted to the
Ministry of Education in Singapore as a Japanese language specialist in 1985.
Her employer sent her to the United States in 1989 and to Korea in 1990 and in she was appointed for two years to be a Japanese adviser to the NSW
Department of School Education. Her salary whilst in Australia was 878,000 yen per month plus $A1,825 housing allowance. This meant that she was earning on average after tax $A14,000 per month or $A168,000 per year, though the actual amount varied with the exchange rate. She left Australia in January 1993 and took some long leave. She was then posted to Malaysia to head the language department of the Japanese Cultural Centre in Kuala Lumpur in October 1993.
Her salary in Malaysia was higher than her salary in Sydney. She also received a housing allowance of $3,500 per month. She left that employment to marry the deceased. She says that her employers were extremely angry with her for taking this course and that her chances of re-employment are close to nil.

The deceased and Akiko were married on 21 January 1994. As the deceased died on 9 December 1995, the marriage lasted about two months short of two years.

The widow says that during that period she and the deceased had a very extravagant lifestyle. Wherever they travelled, and they travelled frequently, they travelled first class. He provided her with about $2,000 per month for food, they dined at restaurants and clubs most days, she had her own Gold
American Express card, a Visa card and a David Jones account card and all the statements were paid by Mr Hudson. Every week, the deceased sent flowers to her, enough to decorate the whole apartment. The flowers came from the Killara flower shop every Friday. The widow says that the deceased actually had a financial interest in this shop, but had sold it to his co-proprietor a couple of years prior to his death. Furthermore, she received expensive gifts of jewellery, shoes and clothing and on one occasion she could remember, the deceased spent $12,000 on kimonos for her whilst the parties were in Japan.
Furthermore, the deceased had house cleaners clean the apartments at his expense and it is only since his death that she has had to clean the apartments herself. She says that her present income is only $4,295 per month (being the indexed $50,000 per year she is to receive under the will) and from those funds she has had to support Taiga, to whom she has also been giving $400 per month for his spending money. She says that she spends $1,000 per week on her expenses, "This is what I spend because it is all that I have to spend. With this budget I am unable to afford to do things which I am accustomed to doing such as going to top Japanese Restaurants where the deceased and I were formerly regular customers, purchasing designer clothes and jewellery and purchasing decent Christmas and birthday presents for friends and family. I cannot afford membership of the clubs we used to attend such as the Australian Golf Club, Pioneers Club, Tattersalls Club, the Opera
Club, the Supper Club at the Intercontinental and the Balmoral Beach Club... .
I no longer have a manicurist and podiatrist at home or fortnightly hairdresser visits ... I am unable to invite friends to the Opera and out to dinner as the deceased and I did prior to his death. ... I am no longer able to afford Japanese pay TV and to purchase Japanese books and magazines ... I can no longer afford to attend charity dinners and parties ... I did not visit
Japan to see my family this year and have had no holidays away apart from weekend drives to the country as I have not had the funds." 
The widow acknowledges that the estate has been willing to fund some of her other expenses including house cleaning and travel to Japan. However, she says that this has always been on the basis that she provide receipts and vouchers.
She says she just cannot do this as house cleaners will not give receipts.
Further, Japan is a cash economy where people are reluctant to give her receipts. Furthermore, she says she should not be in a position of having to "beg" money from the trustees or to have to justify her requests or to suffer the embarrassment of having some of her requests declined. On the evidence, the great majority of her requests were eventually met, but the trustees on a number of occasions asked for further details or documentation at which the widow became annoyed. I am sure that the trustees were acting on these occasions in the best interests of the trust, and they do require that the widow's expenditure be justified and that she just does not get money when she asks for it. They expect her to pay some of her expenses out of her $50,000 per year. On the other hand, the widow just cannot see this and she has now got herself into a frame of mind that she needs to "beg" for what she feels she should have as of right.

This application by the widow was heard together with an application by Taiga for benefit under the Act. I will contemporaneously with the handing down of this reserved judgment hand down judgment in Taiga's application.

At the hearing, Mr Broun QC appeared with Miss Elizabeth Cohen for the widow (and also for Taiga) and Mr Philip Hallen appeared for the defendants.

Mr Broun QC strongly put that this was a widow who gave up secure employment with substantial fringe benefits in order to marry and care for the deceased.
She warned the deceased of the impact on her life, but he pressed his suit and made representations that she would be looked after generously. He requested her to resign her employment, which she did, and now, at 55, it will be difficult for her to get new employment, especially because of the circumstances of her resignation in the eyes of her Japanese employers. She says that the deceased appeared vigorous at the time of marriage. She concedes, however, that at the time he was 73, had been diagnosed with cancer and was observedly ill. However, she says that she could not have perceived that the marriage would have been as short as it was. She says that she married a man of great wealth enjoying his wealth and is entitled to have her lifestyle continued. In fact, since the deceased's death, her lifestyle has very much deteriorated and she feels humiliated in that she has to provide documentation to the trustees. She has been left without proper means of support because, apart from what is given to her under the will, namely, a life estate in a home unit and $50,000 per year dum casta, she has to beg the trustees for further benefits. The estate is a large one of over 11 million dollars even after some distributions have been made to the deceased's sons and there would still be a considerable sum left over, after proper provision was made for the widow, to take care of the grandchildren. In any event, the widow's claim is predominant.

Although it is conceded that the widow did not assist to build up the estate, there is no issue as to her devotion, love and care during the marriage which the deceased recognized by his generosity.

Mr Broun QC suggests that the proper provision would be that the widow receive sufficient moneys to buy a home of her own in fee simple, that she have $400,000 to pay out her mortgage on the Yokohama unit and for various other expenses which she lists in para 112 of her affidavit, and have an income of $150,000 a year. However, a straight legacy of seven million dollars would appear to be sufficient to meet her needs.

Mr Broun QC said that all the deceased has provided for is a right of occupation dum casta, $50,000 a year and a car, and this is a completely inadequate provision by a wealthy man for his widow. He says that a provision under the discretionary trust is not a provision out of the estate.

Mr Broun QC puts that the authorities clearly show that a provision in a will that trustees might pay additional moneys out of the estate for the benefit of the applicant is not a proper provision. He cites Re Brown <case>; [[1972] VR 36.](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1972%5d%20VR%2036 "View LawCiteRecord" ) In that case, after citing some decisions from New Zealand and Canada, together with the note of Re WTN C McLelland, CJ in Eq (1959) noted [33
ALJ 240], Norris, AJ said at 39, "It is true to say that in most of the cases the fact that a discretion to increase a benefit existed was not regarded as rendering adequate a provision which otherwise was inadequate. I think, nevertheless, it is consistent with the authorities to say that such a discretion is not to be excluded from consideration in determining whether or not adequate provision has been made, and that it may in an appropriate case render adequate a provision otherwise inadequate." He then cites Re Allen [[1922] NZLR 218.] 
Dickey on Family Provision after Death (LBC Sydney 1992) says at page 121, "There is some authority for the proposition that where a person is in need of provision but the quantum of provision made for him or her from a deceased's estate is wholly dependent upon the discretion of trustees, this provision is not adequate. In all probability, however, this is not an inflexible rule. In all probability the question of whether provision of this kind is adequate depends upon the particular facts and circumstances of the case." 
Mr Hallen submits that I should take into account the discretionary nature of the benefits which have been provided under the discretionary trust. Mr Hallen got close to submitting that the benefits under the discretionary trust were fairly secure, but no doubt realises that this could not be so in view of the law as decided in Hartigan's case.

I consider, with respect, that Professor Dickey's comment is close to the mark. Ordinarily, a benefit provided under a discretionary trust is a fairly illusory benefit because it can be terminated without reason and there is little likelihood of the discretionary beneficiary being able to force the trustee to pay her a benefit. Hartigan's case shows that even if there is a memorandum of wishes, there is no obligation on the trustee to take that into account. Furthermore, even though the trustees say that they intend to follow the wishes, they are not bound to do so, and indeed, circumstances may change in such a way that they feel it is not proper to continue to follow the memoranda of wishes and carry out the spirit of what the deceased intended. On the other hand, the present trustees are men of great capacity and integrity, and there is no reason to doubt at all their sincere statement that, at least for the present, they intend to carry out the deceased's wishes. I would consider that I am entitled to take the view that for the next five years, the widow will be receiving the benefits under the discretionary trust as if they were benefits under a trust which could be enforced. However, beyond that period, the matter must be one of speculation. The trustees may change, the investments of the trustees might fail, there may be serious problems with one of the other beneficiaries, or new trustees may be appointed who take a set against the widow and reduce her benefits.

It seems to me that where a wealthy man, with an estate of at least 11 million dollars, leaves the bulk of the benefits to his widow under a discretionary trust over which she has no control, he has not made proper provision for his widow. The community would expect that the widow of such a man would at least have a home in her own name and some capital to which she could resort whenever she felt like it.

Before leaving this particular area, I must say that I was rather unimpressed with the plaintiff widow's evidence about being humiliated by having to ask for money and to beg. It may be that I have not fully appreciated the cultural pressures on the widow, but I formed the view that the widow had really talked herself into a position where she would not ask the trustees for money even though she knew that if she asked in the right way, it would almost certainly be made available to her. In particular, I was rather unimpressed with the evidence that Mrs Gregory was unable to obtain anyone to clean her apartment at North Sydney on the basis that the cleaner would give receipts. There are many reputable office and home cleaners in the North Sydney area, and in any event, it does not seem to me to be beyond the wit of man and woman to provide that someone would give a quote for housekeeping work and the trustees would provide the funds to meet a reasonable quote, or that the cleaner would send his or her bill to the trustees once a month, even if the cleaner added a small administration fee to cover the extra paper work. I think the more likely scenario is that the widow has got it into her head that she is entitled to spend as much as she likes when she likes without any requirement to account for her expenditure or otherwise justify it and this is just one example of that attitude. She says that that is a reasonable attitude. I will deal with this in due course.

Accordingly, I find that I should make an order in favour of Mrs Gregory. I now pass to consider how much she should receive.

It is always a source of amazement to me that people who are bringing substantial claims under this Act do not go to the trouble to provide the court with full information as to their real needs. In the instant case, the widow says that she needs a house of her own with a garden. However, there is no evidence at all that the widow has gone to real estate agents in areas where she might like to live and looked at houses and has been able to describe the sort of house she'd like and the price range of its cost. All I have is a submission that a million dollars would probably be sufficient to buy the plaintiff a house that would be in keeping with her status as the widow of a wealthy man. In many cases, judges who do not get sufficient detail take the view that the claim for a house is merely an ambit claim thought up by the lawyers at the last moment which is not really strongly held by the client. Probably, however, a more likely scenario is that the solicitors have not advised the widow as to what she must do to prepare for her case. However, in the instant case, one cannot draw the inference that the claim for the house is a last minute invention and I do not do so.

The principal submission of Mr Broun QC went along these lines, although I am over-simplifying it. Had the widow divorced the deceased (or filed an application for divorce) immediately before his death, she would have been entitled to an order under <case> of the Family Law Act which would have given her a sum of money and other property which would have recognised her non- financial contribution and the detriment suffered by her in entering into the marriage and forsaking her employment. It is against public policy that women should be encouraged to divorce sick husbands. If, under the [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/), judges "gave" less to widows than they would have obtained under <case> of the Family
Law Act in a divorce, potential widows would be encouraged to divorce their husbands. Therefore, the award under the [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/) for a widow should be the amount that she would have received under <case> plus an additional sum for "being a good girl".

I had not heard a submission like this put in an application under this Act before. However, Mr Broun QC reinforced it with reference to a decision of the
Supreme Court of Canada in Tataryn versus Tataryn (1994) 116 DLR (4th) 193.
That is a decision of the Supreme Court of Canada, the judgment of seven
Justices being given by McLachlin, J. The court was dealing with the British
Columbia legislation which provided that "If a testator dies leaving a will which does not, in the court's opinion, make adequate provision for the proper maintenance and support of the testator's wife ... the court may, in its discretion, ... order that the provision that it thinks adequate, just and equitable in the circumstances be made out of the estate of the testator for the wife ...". At 197, McLachlin, J said that she did not "interpret the section as imposing two different tests. The court must ask itself whether the will makes adequate provision and, if not, order what is adequate, just and equitable. These are two sides of the same coin." McLachlin, J then discussed two lines of authority in Canada, (a) that confined orders to what was needful to maintain the wife; and (b) what was an equitable share of the estate even in the absence of need. The tension was resolved (pp 202-3) by viewing the phrase "adequate, just and equitable" in the light of current societal norms.
Two sorts of norms were available and both must be addressed. First, there were the obligations which the law would impose on a person during his or her life were the question of provision for the claimant to arise. Secondly, there were society's reasonable expectations of what a judicious person would do in the circumstances, by reference to contemporary community standards. Her
Ladyship then says at 203, "It follows that maintenance and property allocations which the law would support during the testator's lifetime should be reflected in the court's interpretation of what is `adequate, just and equitable in the circumstances' after the testator's death.
 "The legal obligations on a testator during his or her lifetime reflect a clear and unequivocal social expectation, expressed through society's elected representatives and the judicial doctrine of its courts. Where provision for a spouse is in issue, the testator's legal obligations while alive may be found in the Divorce Act ... family property legislation and the law of constructive trust... . Maintenance and provision for basic needs may be sufficient to meet this legal obligation. On the other hand, they may not. Statute and case law accepts that, depending on the length of the relationship, the contribution of the claimant spouse and the desirability of independence, each spouse is entitled to a share of the estate. Spouses are regarded as partners. ...".

At p 205, her Ladyship said, "In many cases, there will be a number of ways of dividing the assets which are adequate, just and equitable. In other words, there will be a wide range of options, any of which might be considered appropriate in the circumstances. Provided that the testator has chosen an option within this range, the will should not be disturbed. Only where the testator has chosen an option which falls below his or her obligations ...
should the court make an order which achieves the justice the testator failed to achieve." 
At p 206, the court considered that the "legal claims" of the widow entitled her to at least half the estate. Furthermore, since she was a widow of a marriage which lasted 43 years and had assisted in amassing the testator's estate, she had an additional "moral" claim to most of the residue.

Mr Hallen says that this case gives no real guidance at all and even if it does, it does not support Mr Broun QC's submission. First, he says that the
Canadian court focused on the words "adequate, just and equitable" which are not the words used in the NSW statute. The NSW statute, in <case>, makes the barrier in the way of an applicant proof that the testator has provided in a way that is inadequate for her proper maintenance, education and advancement in life. If that barrier is surmounted, then under <case> the court "may order that such provision be made out of the estate ... as, in the opinion of the
Court, ought ... to be made for the maintenance, education and advancement in life of the eligible person.".

Secondly, Mr Hallen puts that where there has been an accepted construction of the [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/) over many years, including decisions of the High Court of Australia and the NSW
Court of Appeal, there is no advantage to be gained by looking at the decisions of other countries in the common law world, especially if their statutes are worded differently, and where they do not refer to Australian authority.

I would agree with these submissions of Mr Hallen. In my experience, it has never been the approach of a court in NSW (or in the rest of Australasia) to first work out what are the widow's legal rights before her husband's death and then add on the value of a moral claim. An allied approach has been taken in some cases under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/dfra220/s20.html) of the [De Facto Relationships
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/dfra220/), but there the exercise is to work out what each party put into the relationship, and what they had when they left the relationship, and to make whatever adjustment is just and equitable. The present Act does not seem to me to approach the matter in that light at all.

The prevailing test in NSW is that the court must assess what, in the eyes of the community, would be the expectation that a testator, in the position of the testator in the case under review, should have made for his or her spouse.
Then the court looks at the will and measures what the testator has actually done against that community expectation, and if necessary, makes the appropriate adjustment.

The point made by McLauchlin, J in Tataryn versus Tataryn at p 205, that there will be a wide range of options open to testators to provide for those who are dependent on them, is a very valid one. The testator has the best knowledge of his or her family and their needs. In some cases, the court can see that that assessment has been virtually nullified by malice or irrational hatred or failure to appreciate some claims or over-emphasis on some needs as opposed to others. However, in many cases, the testator has given years of careful and logical thought to the whole structure of what is to happen to his or her property after death to provide for those for whom he or she cares and the court should interfere with that structure as little as possible. Even in the best presented cases, the court is only able to get a thumb nail sketch of the testator's family and their needs and claims. The testator had far more information available.

In the instant case, the deceased did weigh the various claims on his bounty in a careful and logical way with professional advice. He was obviously concerned that his marriage to the lady who became his widow had only recently taken place, and with one divorce of his own and other separations in his family, he, not unnaturally, was cautious. He also had a problem with the relations between his sons, the relation between his son Peter and Peter's spouse and he wished that all of those conflicts should not affect the proper provision for his grandsons, whom he felt eventually should get the capital of his estate. In the meantime he made provision, through the discretionary trust, for the grandsons' school fees and other needs to be met and for the income needs to be met of his widow and his sons.

This all looks like a very well thought out plan and one that should not lightly be disturbed. The weakness in it is, however, as has already been pointed out, that the widow, who on all accounts has loved and cared for the deceased during their marriage, albeit a brief one, is dependent for benefaction on the discretion of the trustees, and it is this factor which, to my mind, means that there has not been proper provision made for her.

In Australia, the "community expects" test seems first to have been enunciated by Mahoney, JA in a dissenting judgment in Kearns versus Ellis 5 December , which, probably because it was a dissenting judgment, has never been reported. However, as I said in McCallum versus McCallum (Young, J - 2 May , unreported, p 13), the propositions espoused by Mahoney, JA in that case had even at that stage been at least twice endorsed by a unanimous Court of
Appeal. Since then, the words "moral duty" have dropped out of the vocabulary, but apart from this, what his Honour said still remains the test. I quote, "The maintenance which is relevant to the jurisdictional question is not maintenance to be measured simply by the needs of the plaintiff. It is maintenance which is `proper' and consequently the court is required to make a judgment - a `value judgment' White versus Barron <case>; [(1980) 144 CLR 431] at 434-5 per Barwick, CJ, at 449 per Aickin, J - as to what is proper maintenance for the particular plaintiff. In determining what is `proper' in this respect, regard is to be had, as the cases indicate, to all the circumstances ... . Without attempting to delineate what in theory are the circumstances relevant for this purpose, it seems clear that regard is to be had, inter alia, to four inter-related, or more accurately overlapping, matters: the moral obligation of the deceased to provide for her widower or children; whether the particular plaintiff has or has had such a relationship to the deceased that the deceased has, for example, a particular moral obligation to the plaintiff; the standard of living of the plaintiff at the relevant time; and the disposable property of the deceased.
 "The moral obligation of a deceased to provide for her widower or children may not be the test of what she has done: see Pontifical Society for the
Propagation of the Faith versus Scales <case>; [(1962) 107 CLR 9] at 20; but it is at the heart of the legal obligation which the Act imposes upon her. ... In Re Allen [[1922] NZLR 218] at 222, Salmond
J said that the Act is `designed to enforce the moral obligation of a testator ...' ... Certain things may be said about this concept of moral obligation.
 "First, the moral obligation, and the extent of the moral obligation, which a deceased has is, in the end, to be determined according to what is the current community feeling or judgment in that regard. ... This does not mean, I think, that the content of the moral obligation is to be determined by opinion surveys or by the lowest common denominator of community feeling at the time.
No doubt there is no single community feeling or judgment upon the matter. It is to be determined according to the feeling and judgment of the fair and reasonable man in the community, the spokesman of which is and must be the court itself ...".

His Honour then goes on to say, in summary, that the other matters involving "moral obligation" are (2) the conduct of the plaintiff qua the deceased; (3) the freedom of the individual to deal with what is his or hers according to his or her own wishes; (4) that the measure is that of a "wise and just" testator though recognising the testator's basic freedom to do as he wishes with what is his or hers; and (5) that the obligation is a limited one. It is not to be judged by a feeling as to whether it was morally wrong for a person to leave property otherwise than to his or her spouse or children, the obligation which the Act imposes and enforces is the obligation of support.

As I have said, in more recent times, the tag "moral obligation" has fallen out of favour; see eg Singer versus Berghouse <case>; [(1994) 181 CLR 201] and, more strongly, Permanent Trustee Co Ltd versus Fraser [(1995) 36 NSWLR 24] at 31. Sheller, JA at p 46 of Fraser's case made it clear that the abandonment of the term "moral duty" avoided "doctrinal and inflexible judge made rules and fulfils the court's function, adverted to by
Mahoney, JA [in Kearns versus Ellis at p 8] of speaking for the feeling and judgment of fair and reasonable members of the community." 
I will apply what Mahoney, JA said in Kearns' case.

Mr Broun QC referred me to the Court of Appeal's decision in Golosky v
Golosky 5 October 1993, unreported. That was a widow's application. The widow was 30 years younger than the deceased and her marriage to him was her third. The marriage lasted almost two years. The testator made his will on 17
July 1989 and died two days later as a result of a car accident. The widow was younger than the testator's sons by his first marriage. Kirby, P said that five matters needed to be kept in mind when assessing widows' applications, which I will summarize as follows: 
Proper respect for the right of testamentary disposition; 
The purpose of the jurisdiction is not the correction of the hurt feelings or sense of wrong of competing claimants; 
Whilst no hard and fast rule can be adopted, normally a testator should ensure that a spouse or spouse equivalent is provided with a place to live appropriate to that to which he or she has become accustomed. To the extent that the assets available will permit such a course, it is normally appropriate that the spouse or spouse equivalent should be provided, as well, with a fund to meet unforeseen contingencies; 
A mere right of residence will usually be an unsatisfactory method of providing for spouses; 
Considering what is proper, and by inference what is improper, it is appropriate to take into account circumstances such as the nature and quality of the relationship, the character and conduct of the claimant, the present and reasonably anticipated future needs of the claimant, the size and nature of the estate and of the competing claims and any contributions of the claimant to the property or to the welfare of the deceased.

Mr Broun QC also relied on the decision of the Court of Appeal in McKenna v
Solomon 9 December 1994, unreported. In that case, the applicant was a de facto wife who before commencing her relationship with the deceased, had, at the deceased's suggestion, terminated her employment with Telecom. She surrendered her various entitlements as a long term employee and was paid $21,100 for superannuation which she invested in the deceased's businesses which quickly failed. She went back to Telecom but had lost seniority and was being paid a lower salary. The Master rejected the claim and the plaintiff appealed. Kirby, P said at p 15 that it is necessary to take into consideration the distinct contribution made by the applicant to the welfare of the deceased. He said, "The evidence is that the appellant left her established employment at the deceased's suggestion and request. She went with him to Brisbane, leaving a settled job and home to be with him. She performed cooking, shopping duties and other home making activities both in Brisbane and on return to Wollongong. ... She worked without wages in his business in
Brisbane ...". He considered the Master underestimated the significance of this factor in particular. Handley, and Sheller, JJA, who concurred with the
President, both mentioned this particular factor as being the predominant reason why they allowed the appeal. The court gave the applicant a legacy of $40,000.

At some stage of the argument, I got the impression that the widow was seeking compensation for the loss of her position with the Japan Foundation. To my mind, there is no element of compensation in the provision that either the deceased, or in lieu of the deceased doing his duty, the court, is to make under this Act. However, the community would expect that a person who has persuaded his or her spouse to leave the security of permanent employment to reflect that sacrifice when assessing what was proper provision to be made.

Mr Hallen says that it must be remembered that in this case the marriage was of short duration and the widow did not in any sense contribute to amassing the deceased's fortune. He had made his money long before he met the plaintiff widow, and he was in the throes of selling that business and because of the profit of the sale, he was able to live an extravagant lifestyle with her in the last two years of his life. Mr Hallen puts that surely the widow must have known that the deceased was in ill health because he was very ill in Kuala
Lumpur in 1993, when the widow needed to take some long leave in order to assist him. She made the decision to give up her employment and to live a life of great extravagance with a wealthy man for a short period of time. She has been provided with everything she needs under the discretionary trust; all she has to do is ask, but for some reason or other, she won't ask. Thus the court should not make an order in her favour.

However, as I have said before, the plaintiff widow is entitled to an order.
However, I believe that basically what the deceased did was well thought out and an appropriate option for looking after the widow and also ensuring that his capital would be available for his grandchildren. Basically I believe that the proper provision for the widow is along the lines designed by the deceased. However, the community ordinarily expects that even the widow of a short duration marriage to a wealthy man would be given the matrimonial home in fee simple and some capital sum to meet her reasonable whims or contingencies in life.

One can look at the cases in the earlier part of this century and see that courts were extremely reluctant to give widows any capital sums. This attitude was even held in the 1970s; see, for instance, Re Wilson [[1973] 2 NZLR .]
There had been a complete reversal of this philosophy by 1992; see, for instance, Marquet versus Marquet [[1992] 3 NZLR 742], 749.
However, the authorities do show a tendency to favour some form of life interest where there is a recent second marriage and the testator had obligations to his children of his first marriage. Thus in Golosky the court reversed the Master's order of giving a 40 year old widow a fee simple in the family home in lieu of a right of residence, but merely increased her legacy, so that there was minimum interference with the testator's disposition of the remainder of his estate to his grandchildren. Mr Hallen submitted that a capital provision should only be awarded to a widow when it appears that this is the fairest means of securing proper maintenance and referred to
White versus Barron supra at p 444 per Mason, J and 457 per Wilson, J.
However, both those Judges were directing their remarks to the situation of giving a capital sum to an elderly widow and, with respect, I do not consider that Mr Hallen's proposition is generally true or that White versus Barron supports it.

As I have said, the plaintiff widow seeks seven million dollars made up of three components, (a) provision of money to buy a home; (b) $400,000 to pay her debts and expenses; and (c) the provision of $150,000 a year.

So far as a house is concerned, the widow is currently living in Units 63 and , 171 Walker Street, North Sydney. She cannot see why the units have to be separated, but the situation clearly is that the council requires this as a condition of the consent that it gave when the deceased was sick and the court must assume that the re-separation of the two units is inevitable.

The widow is given the use for life, or at least dum casta, of Unit 63. Mr
Hallen says that she has not shown any reason why this unit is not completely suitable. I think there is a great deal of force in this submission.
Furthermore, as I remarked earlier, the widow has not given details as to any search for houses or for her preference for any particular area of Sydney.
Taiga is living with the widow at present. He has made a separate application under the Act and really his needs should be considered separately. Whilst it is appropriate to recognize that the widow has obligations to Taiga, these must be kept within limits and the community would not expect that the deceased's estate should have to subsidize Taiga for a long period of time.
Even to date,it would seem that Taiga has received extremely generous treatment. For instance, there was a dispute as to what sort of computer that the estate or trust should provide Taiga and there was insistence by the widow and Taiga that he should be provided with one at the cost of over $6,000, which would appear to be the top of the range for a computer, which, after all, was only being used by a student in connection with his studies in business and marketing.

However, whether or not Taiga continues to remain with the plaintiff widow, there is a real possibility that she will want her mother to come and live with her. Her mother is currently living in Japan and the plaintiff widow has provided some moneys to support her mother. Whether her mother will qualify for immigration to Australia was a matter which was not explored before me. If the mother is to come to Australia, then it may be that a two bedroom home unit is not big enough, but if Taiga makes his own way as one would expect he would, the two bedrooms should be adequate for two people. Moreover, the unit is one which is in a prestige position and which is easily accessible by elderly people and is protected by a security system. There are no steps for an elderly person to have to manoeuvre.

Bearing in mind that I should interfere with the deceased's provision only so far as it was inadequate, and bearing in mind that I have been given minimal details as to why the widow reasonably requires a home and garden, it seems to me that the proper order is that the plaintiff widow should have the fee simple in Unit 63. She can then sell it if she so wishes and move into other premises. Although the proceeds of $650,000 will not obtain a house on the harbour foreshores, there would be many houses within 20 kilometres of Sydney which could be acquired for that sort of sum.

There is little that can be said about the plaintiff widow's request for $400,000 to pay her debts etc. This would, I believe, have happened anyhow under the arrangements set up by the deceased so I will not spend any more time on this aspect of the case.

The next question is the request for a capital sum equivalent to an income of $150,000 a year. The first point I should mention is that I was concerned during the hearing that the plaintiff widow had earned an extremely high income in her latter years as an employee of the Japan Foundation. She was earning, after tax, $168,000 plus housing allowance and she was a woman without dependants except for Taiga and, to a limited degree, her mother.
Despite earning extremely high income, she says that she has virtually no money at all. She never explained how she managed to get through all the income that she received and one can only assume that she lived a very expensive lifestyle even before she married the deceased.

I do not take this matter any further because the point was not taken up by counsel for the estate. However, to my mind it does mean that I should discount, at least to some degree, the factor that the widow enjoyed a very extravagant lifestyle while she was living with the deceased. It also makes me pause before committing a large capital sum into her hands, though here again
I am not a guardian of her property and my feeling that she might not be a particularly good manager of money should not tell against her entitlement to receive what is proper. It does, however, influence to a degree, the form in which she should receive benefit, as doubtless it influenced the deceased.

It must be remembered that although the plaintiff widow is entitled to $50,000 a year indexed under the will, she is also entitled to distributions from the trust. I can make an order in lieu of the provision made for her in the will, but it seems to me that I should, as a condition of the order that I make, require the plaintiff widow to disclaim any interest under the discretionary trust. Accordingly, the order that is made will once and for all cement her entitlement and the trustees can deal with the trust as if they had no obligation at all to consider the plaintiff widow as a beneficiary.

In working out a capital sum, I think one starts with what is the capital sum which would buy an annuity for a woman of 55 to provide a CPI indexed pension of $50,000 a year? I think that the answer is about $1.05 million on the 3% tables, and that to provide $3,000 a week would require a fund of $3.11 million. I have not been more precise because I would think that actuarial advice is probably required before making a final order. However, I will assume these figures for the moment. The plaintiff widow's list of expenditure in para 113 of her affidavit of 19 June 1996 does not include any provision for income tax. Assuming an income tax rate of 45 cents in the dollar, she would need to receive an extra $66,150 in order to pay the income tax. Thus, she is really looking at a gross income of $4,000 a week rather than $3,000, so the capital sum required would be something like $4.2 million.

I believe the starting point for my assessment is that the plaintiff widow should not receive less than what the deceased thought was proper provision, namely, an indexed $50,000 a year dum casta. Modern communities do not regard dum casta clauses with great affection, so I might even take the step of saying that the court should start with the idea of $50,000 (indexed) per year for life. I do not have any life expectation figures, but I would assume that we are looking at some 30 years. The widow may remarry, but if she does, that marriage may be either a good marriage or a bad marriage.

If a capital sum is to be given to her to compensate her for the $50,000 a year, then it should be something like $1.05 million.

However, it is significant that neither the widow nor the executors have asked for a capital sum. The widow would be quite prepared to take income provided that it is at least treble the income that has been provided in the will.

If the widow is to renounce her rights under the trust, then it is appropriate that the widow receive some extra income to make up for the fact that she is not getting the benefit that the deceased thought that she would get under the trust.

Further, although I would have thought that the indexation clause would have caused the trustees some problems in knowing what capital sum to set aside, no submissions have been directed to this, presumably because the trustees basically want to keep to the line that what the deceased did was fair and proper.

Under the last edition of the memorandum of wishes, the widow was to receive $15,000 per annum for reasonable travelling expenses. She was also to have her mortgage paid. However, this will be removed once the mortgage is paid off with a capital sum. The widow has also been given or offered moneys out of the trust to pay for flowers at the rate of $60 a week, cleaning at the rate of $100 a week, and other benefits such as her son's computer, which she will lose if she has to renounce her benefits under the trust. This in itself means that one must add at least $40,000 to the amount given to the widow under the will. Indeed, I believe more should be added because the trustees have indicated a fairly generous spirit towards the plaintiff widow despite her indication to them that she will only communicate with them through her solicitors.

However, there has got to be some limit. The plaintiff widow cannot just take up the position that she is entitled to continue for an indefinite period spending money at every whim in inviting friends to the opera, eating out every night and buying expensive presents for friends. The community does not expect the deceased's estate to support that sort of expense indefinitely.
Furthermore, the widow is not without the capacity to earn some income and she is in possession of a unit in Yokohama which could be let out or sold.

Bearing in mind these factors and my obligation to interfere with the deceased's provision as little as possible, I would have thought that increasing the annuity to $100,000 per year with the same machinery as the deceased had in his will for adjustment to the CPI would be proper provision.

I should say that in my view the widow is also entitled to have an additional capital sum for contingencies and as compensation for the loss of possible benefit under the trust. $300,000 would seem to me to be a proper sum.

Accordingly, in lieu of the provision made for the plaintiff Akiko Gregory by the will of the late Royce Gregory, and on condition that she renounces and disclaims any further benefit from the Royce Gregory Discretionary Trust, I order that the plaintiff do receive in fee simple the deceased's strata unit,
No 63, 171 Walker Street, North Sydney, a legacy of $700,000, and income pursuant to the following direction: "The defendants are directed to set aside from the capital of the testator's estate a sufficient capital sum in order that 
Akiko Gregory be paid during her lifetime an income from the estate of $100,000 per year to be increased on 1 July each year by the amount of the percentage increase in the 
All Groups Consumer Price Index applicable to Sydney kept by the Commonwealth Statistician for the 12 months ended the immediately preceding 30 June.

Upon the death of the said Akiko Gregory, the capital sum shall fall into residue." 
Short minutes will need to be brought in to deal with the order. It may be that the plaintiff widow, after due consideration, will think that she is better off under the trust. If so, I can be told when the short minutes are brought in. I will need to deal with the question of costs. My present view is that both parties' costs should come out of the estate for the whole of the proceedings. I will list the matter for short minutes to be brought in on
Tuesday 7 October 1997 at 9.30 am, but should this date be inconvenient to counsel, and provided my Associate is given adequate notice, some alternative date can be arranged.
 * * * 
