

Tadeusz Kawicki versus Patricia Ralph and Anor [1997] NSWSC 30 (13 February )

TADEUSZ KAWICKI v. PATRICIA RALPH AND ANOR /95 
THURSDAY 13 FEBRUARY 1997 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
BADGERY-PARKER J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff, Tadeusz Kawicki, brought proceedings against Patricia Ralph and Ian Ralph in the Local Court for damages for detinue and conversion. At the close of the plaintiff's case the defendants, through their solicitor, made an application pursuant to Part 21 Rule 5 of the [Local Court Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolreg/lcr180/) for an order for dismissal of the plaintiff's action - in effect for a judgment of non-suit which would have the effect of putting an end to the current proceedings but would not preclude the plaintiff from commencing again and seeking to make a better case. The application was not an application pursuant to [Part 21](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolreg/lcr180/index.html#p21) Rule 6 for a judgment by direction which would have put an end altogether to the plaintiff's claims. The magistrate granted the application.

The plaintiff appealed to this court by way of stated case. On 6 March 1996, I upheld that appeal and ordered that the matter be returned to the Local Court for determination according to law. I ordered the defendant to pay the plaintiff's costs of the stated case.

The defendant has now made an application pursuant to [s.6](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/s6.html) of the [Suitors Fund Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/) for an indemnity certificate in respect of the appeal. The Act gives the court a discretion to grant or withhold such a certificate and, as Priestley, JA.
pointed out in Regina v. Hookham (No. 2) [(1993) 32 NSWLR 345], does not provide any specific guidance as to the manner of exercise of the discretion.
In the course of his judgment in that case, Priestley, JA. said at p.346:- "Something however, it seems to me, must follow from the very nature of the power which the court is given by the Act. That power includes power to indemnify, within the limits provided by the Act, an unsuccessful respondent to an appeal against the costs that the respondent incurred in resisting the appeal. Absent the power given by the Act, the court would ordinarily order an unsuccessful respondent to pay the costs of the appeal and leave the respondent to bear the respondent's own costs. The Act gives the court the power to change this otherwise ordinary outcome of a successful appeal.

The reasoning behind the Act must be to the general effect that the court system, in what has happened prior to the appeal being upheld, has made a mistake and that there will be at least some circumstances in which cost caused by the fault of the system should not be visited on the respondent.

In light of this, it is possible to see how discretion should be exercised in some obvious cases. In a case for example where the respondent had succeeded below only because the court below erroneously took a view of the law or the facts which the respondent had not put to that court, there could be no reason for withholding exercise of discretion in favour of granting the certificate.
At the other end of the scale, if counsel persuaded the court below to act upon the basis of a decision which had been overruled, it could be said that it was not the system that had been the main cause of the mistake, but the respondent. Discretion would then be exercised against the respondent." 
The error of law which I found on the hearing of the appeal was that the magistrate failed to apply the correct test. As I pointed out in my judgment upon that appeal, aan examination of what the magistrate said in granting the application clearly indicates that what the magistrate was concerned to do what was not to consider whether, if accepted, the evidence would establish those matters which the plaintiff was required to establish but, on the contrary, to deal with the question whether he should accept the evidence adduced by the plaintiff". The learned magistrate had said:- "I do not feel that the plaintiff has, on the balance of probabilities, established ownership, quantum or damages as required; and the application made by the defendants pursuant to Part 21 Rule 5 should be granted. The statement of claim is dismissed." 
As I pointed out, the first sentence of that passage is "the clearest possible indication that the magistrate has applied the wrong test".

The present case, like Hookham, does not fall into either of the categories identified by Priestley, JA. However, a perusal of the transcript of proceedings does indicate that counsel for the defendant, the present applicant, did not advert at all, in her submissions, to the appropriate test established by the authorities as the test to be applied by a court to whom such an application is made, and secondly, at least in part addressed the learned magistrate in terms directed to the quality of the evidence adduced by the plaintiff rather than to the existence or absence of evidence to establish each of the elements of the plaintiff's cause of action. In effect that submission was adopted by the magistrate in his subsequent judgment, and I think it has to be said that counsel for the then defendant must bear some responsibility for the fact that the magistrate went off along the wrong path.

However, the correct position was at once pointed out to the learned magistrate at the conclusion of the defendant's counsel's submission, when counsel for the plaintiff specifically directed the magistrate's attention to the correct test and to the discussion of it or statement of it by Glass, JA.
in his article, "The Insufficiency of Evidence to Raise a Case to Answer" (December [1981, 55 ALJ 842] at 843), the particular passage being one that I extracted in my judgment on the hearing of the appeal. The learned magistrate appeared completely to overlook that matter when he came to deliver his judgment.

In those circumstances, while it seems to me, as I said, counsel for the then defendant must bear some responsibility, it was the responsibility of the learned magistrate to direct himself correctly as to the law, and he had adequate assistance in that task from counsel for the plaintiff. Although counsel for the plaintiff directed the attention of the magistrate to the proper test, the magistrate quite clearly did not attempt to apply it.

In those circumstances, while I regard the matter as borderline, I have concluded that it is a proper exercise of my discretion under the Act to grant to the defendant an indemnity certificate pursuant to s.6 of the Act. Such a certificate, prepared and engrossed in an appropriate form, may be delivered to my Associate in due course for my signature.

I make no order as to costs of this application.
 * * * 
