

Robert John Cruickshanks and Anor -v- Oleg Nemeruck and Anor [1997] NSWSC (30 June 1997) 
ROBERT JOHN CRUICKSHANKS AND ANOR -v- OLEG NEMERUCK AND ANOR /95 
Wednesday 19 March 1997 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
TEMBY AJ 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: Substantial agreement has been reached by the parties through counsel as to the course that should now be followed. That agreement is not, however, entire in certain respects.

Mr And Mrs Nemeruck are seeking to set aside a judgment of this court and a stay of proceedings on that judgment. I am informed from the bar table that until relatively recently, at least so far as the plaintiffs were concerned, the case they had to meet was that due service of process had not been effected. Today the applicants before me have sought a stay on the basis that
Mrs Nemeruck, who is bankrupt, has made an application to the Federal Court in effect for a declaration pursuant to section 116 of the Bankruptcy Act that her interest in the improved land at St Marys, to which these proceedings relate, is protected. It appears to be the case, and this was not contested before me, that if that application succeeded, then the judgment of this court could not stand.

Mr Harris of counsel for the plaintiffs understandably sought to have the issue of service resolved. Mr De Buse of counsel for the applicants has admitted on their behalf for the purpose of these proceedings that due service of process has been effected. It is the original proceedings in the Common Law
Division of this court which I advert to in this respect. I note at Mr Harris' request that at the time that concession was made, Mr and Mrs Nemeruck and their son were present in court.

Counsel for the plaintiffs seeks to have the present application dismissed and suggests that would give rise to an issue estoppel. I am very uncertain as to that, having read the papers. I do not propose to dismiss the proceedings, but rather adjourn them until 30 June 1997 and extend the present stay which has been granted until that same date.

Finally, I propose to order that the costs of the plaintiffs of the hearing today be paid by the present applicants, those costs to be taxed after 30 June
My short reasons for ordering that costs be paid are that the real reason why this hearing has not been fruitful is because this hearing was in effect set up to deal with this question of service which has now been conceded, and the section 116 question has come in at a very late stage. It is clear to me that the plaintiffs are in those circumstances entitled to their costs. However, I concede that there is some reason to not require payment forthwith.

I order that: the proceedings be adjourned until 30 June, 1997; the present stay of proceedings be extended to 30 June, 1997; and the costs of the plaintiffs of the hearing today are to be paid by the present applicants, those costs to be taxed after 30 June, 1997.
 * * * 
