

Regina versus Mati Matter No Cca 60065/97 [1998] NSWSC 329 (16 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 9 September 1998 
REGINA versus VAE FILA MATI 
CCA 60065/97 July 1998 
Grove J, McInerney J, Sperling J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal from District Court (Nield DCJ) 
FILE NO: 60065/97 
DELIVERED: Thursday 16 July 1998 
HEARING DATE: Thursday 16 July 1998 
PARTIES: REGINA versus VAE FILA MATI 
JUDGMENT OF: Grove J, McInerney J, Sperling J 
COUNSEL: 
APPELLANT: In person 
RESPONDENT: L Lamprati 
SOLICITORS: 
APPELLANT: - 
RESPONDENT : S E O'Connor 
RESULT: Appeal dismissed 
CATCHWORDS: 
CRIMINAL LAW AND PROCEDURE - ASSAULT OCCASIONING ACTUAL BODILY HARM - NO
PARTICULAR POINT OF PRINCIPLE 
NO. OF PAGES: 6 
JUDGMENT 
GROVE J: The appellant, who appears in the appeal in person, seeks to challenge his conviction on a count of assault occasioning actual bodily harm and, in accordance with the notice filed, alternatively seeks leave to appeal against sentence. 
Some matters of history should be sketched. The offence relevant to the present appeal occurred on 8 July 1994 and involved a victim named Aung Than.
In short, the victim alleged that at about 9pm on that date, he was leaving the Crescent Hotel at Fairfield when he was the victim of an unprovoked attack by a man who punched him causing him to fall to the ground and who kicked him whilst he was lying on the ground. He described the assailant as a Pacific
Islander of tall, solid, muscular build and with long hair. The attack caused him to lose consciousness and when he regained his senses he found that his coat and about $650 in cash was missing. The appellant was identified as the attacker from a photograph shown to the victim. On the following day, the appellant was arrested and charged. He was released to bail two days later.

The trial took place between 18 and 21 April 1995 when the appellant was found guilty of assault occasioning actual bodily harm, as I have indicated, which was an alternative count in an indictment which charged principally, robbery with striking, the property involved being the coat, a wallet and the $650 which I have mentioned. The jury found the appellant not guilty on that count.

About a month later the appellant was released to bail without being sentenced. He was awaiting trial on certain offences alleged to have been committed at Greenfield Park on 10 March 1993, the date of those offences obviously being about 16 months prior to the assault on Mr Than. Between 11 and 13 November 1996 the appellant was tried in respect of those matters and found guilty by the jury of armed robbery.

Nield DCJ presided at both trials. On 30 January 1997 he sentenced the appellant in respect of both matters. A fixed term of 18 months penal servitude was imposed in respect of the assault occasioning actual bodily harm, such sentence to commence on 13 November 1996 (when the appellant was retaken into custody at the end of the second trial) and to expire on 12 May
A cumulative sentence was ordered to commence immediately thereafter for the offence of robbery comprising a minimum term of 3 years 5 months and 20 days and an additional term of 4 years. Some other matters were taken into account on a schedule in respect of the latter sentence.

The appellant does not challenge the matters relating to the offence of which he was convicted arising out of the events of 10 March 1993 and the matters taken into account on the schedule. It is, of course, apparent that if his appeal is successful against the conviction for assault occasioning actual bodily harm, the commencement date of the latter sentences would need to be advanced and a similar consideration would arise in the event that there was some downward adjustment of the fixed term as a result of leave to appeal against sentence being granted.

I have recounted the above matters because certain documentation filed with the Court contains ambiguity and there should be a clear record of the issues before it. I turn, therefore, to the conviction on 21 April 1995.

The appellant has not filed formal grounds of appeal, but the Crown has responded to written submissions which he has lodged in respect to the response to the Registrar's directions on the basis that he asserted that his conviction was unsafe and unsatisfactory. That was a reasonable basis upon which to proceed and I propose to do likewise.

The argument advanced by the appellant notes that the victim testified that he was attacked at about 9pm. The appellant gave evidence at trial and also called his girlfriend, Ms Lisa Te Rangi who confirmed that they had met at a train station at about 7.45pm and had spent until about 8.45pm in a TAB after which they went to a bank ATM to make a withdrawal. Bank records showed that a withdrawal from a relevant account was made at 8.56pm, after which they walked to a bottle shop arriving at about 9.10pm. The appellant went inside for about five minutes and the general thrust of the testimony advanced by the appellant and Ms Te Rangi was that they were together and therefore he could not have committed the assault as, if he had, she would have seen it.

The appellant advanced other propositions. He noted that when arrested by the police the next day his hands were examined, but there was no evidence of bruising to his knuckles. He added that on that day he was wearing the same coat as he had on the previous evening, but there were no blood stains found upon the coat as might have been expected if he had been involved in an assault on Mr Than. He argued that he had no reason to steal this particular coat as he was almost twice the size of the victim and nothing of relevance to the offence, that is to say either the coat, the wallet, or the money was found at a search of his house the next day. Finally, he mentioned the acknowledgment by the victim that he, the victim, had been drinking spirits and the appellant therefore contended that he would have been too drunk to know anything and give reliable evidence.

As is apparent from the terms of his Honour's charge to the jury, at trial the
Crown invited the jury to find that Ms Te Rangi was lying in order to protect the appellant. That was a matter for the jury to determine. It has also been pointed out that the time-frame given by Ms Te Rangi was not inevitably inconsistent with Mr Than's evidence with the assault occurring at about 9pm.

The absence of bruising was a matter for argument. The advancement of a negative thesis such as that is not determinative of the safety of a conviction.

The same comment may be made about the absence of the finding of any of the proceeds of the robbery in the possession of the appellant on the next day, but it can also be commented that this provides a convincing explanation as to why the jury may have been persuaded not to convict the appellant of the charge on the first count. The absence of the goods was not inevitably contradictory of the appellant being the offender in the assault. The search was made on the following day. Except in special circumstances, and unless identifying numbers are known, currency is not usually identifiable and the jury may well have thought that the coat and the wallet was simply not kept.

Again, the question of the presence or absence of blood on the coat was a matter of argument. It was apparently canvassed at trial and the matter was drawn to the jury's attention in his Honour's charge to them. His Honour also gave the jury clear directions about the relevance of the ingestion of intoxicating liquor to the identification evidence given by the victim.

I have already commented that the appellant has appeared for himself before this Court. It needs to be understood that this is a court of error and intervention is only provoked upon demonstration of this. No error in the conduct of the trial has been identified. I have assumed the appellant's arguments to amount to an assertion that the conviction was unsafe and unsatisfactory. When such a ground is advanced it is the duty of this Court to make an assessment of the evidence for itself recognising the advantage held by the jury in being able to see and hear the witnesses. The test to be applied is whether it was open to the jury to convict in the sense that they ought to have had a doubt about guilt. I am unpersuaded that this has been established and the appeal against conviction ought be dismissed.

The fixed term imposed for the offence of assault occasioning actual bodily harm has, of course, now expired. The appellant had previously been sentenced to a fixed term of 4 months penal servitude at Burwood Local Court in August for assault occasioning actual bodily harm. Prior to that, he had a conviction at Fairfield Local Court for assault upon which he was fined $1000.
He, in fact, was taken into custody for default in payment of at least part of that fine. The assault was serious, and the appellant's prior record denied him any claim for particular leniency. I regard the sentences well within the range of a sound exercise of the judge's discretion.

I propose that the appeal against conviction for assault occasioning actual bodily harm be dismissed; that application for leave to appeal against sentence be granted, but that appeal also dismissed.

McINERNEY J: I agree with the orders proposed by the Presiding Judge and the reasons he has given. 
SPERLING J: I also agree. 
GROVE J: The orders of the court will be, therefore, as I have proposed. * * * 
