

Regina versus I L Hunt [1996] NSWSC 389 (30 August 1996) 
REGINA v. Ian Lewis HUNT /95 August 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
HUNT CJ AT CL, SMART, SIMPSON JJ 
CATCHWORDS: FRAUDULENT MISAPPROPRIATION - WAS MONEY RECEIVED - DRAWING OF COUNTS IN INDICTMENT & SUFFICIENCY OF MATERIALS - DISHONESTY AND EVIDENCE THEREOF - URGENT NEED FOR LAW REFORM OF S.178A, CRIMES ACT 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed 
HUNT CJ at CL, SMART J, SIMPSON J 
HEADNOTE 
The appellant, a solicitor, received a cheque for about $150,000 being family law settlement moneys on behalf of Mrs M. This was banked in his trust account and some expenses and costs paid. The balance was then placed in an account with Chase AMP Bank Limited described as "Ian Hunt - Mulcahy A/C".
Thereafter 4 withdrawals were made by the solicitor and the monies applied for his own purposes.

In 1983 the applicant received a cheque being motor vehicle accident settlement moneys on behalf of W. This was banked in his trust account. The balance, after deductions (by the GIO and the solicitor) was placed in a building society account on 24 hour call. Subsequently various payments were made and in June 1984 the balance was placed in an account with the State
Building Society styled "Ian Hunt & Co ITF for Joy Wilson".

In 1991 the solicitor caused most of the money to be transferred to a new account in the name of "I Hunt & Co". There was no reference to "In trust for Joy Wilson".

Held: 
There was evidence establishing that money had been received and not just a valuable security; 
The indictment neither charged offences unknown to the law nor was duplicitous. The counts adequately stated the connection between the money received and that misappropriated.

As to count 6 there was evidence, which, if accepted established that the money was received by the appellant and that he fraudulently misappropriated it for his own use. The appellant's actions imperilled the economic interests of W and were intended to cause economic loss to her; (per Hunt CJ at CL and Simpson J, Smart J contra) No direction as to a claim of right was required. The essential issue was one of dishonesty and on this issue the judge directed the jury adequately. (per Smart J. while a "claim of right" type direction should have been given, the judge canvassed the issue of dishonesty adequately and the omitted direction would have made no difference).

The transfer of the money from the trust account to an account solely in the appellant's name was eloquent of dishonesty and the Crown was entitled to put that the accused had acted fraudulently because he had transferred W's money to an account in his own name and thereby put the money dishonestly at risk.

The conviction on count 6 was not unsafe and unsatisfactory; 
As there was a real dispute as to the authenticity of the authority allegedly signed by M, the appellant was not entitled to a direction that the jury could not reject beyond reasonable doubt the proposition that the authority gave the accused the authority to deal with moneys in the way he did.
 (per Hunt CJ at CL and Simpson J) the judge should have acceded to the appellant's request to tell the jury that even if the jury rejected the appellant's explanation that he was not responsible for the withdrawals, they nevertheless had to consider, in determining whether he had deliberately acted with dishonesty, whether the Crown had eliminated the reasonable possibility that the authority allegedly signed by M was an authentic authority given by him to do what he did. However, even if the issue had been put to the jury the appellant would inevitably still have been convicted (per Smart J - The direction was not required in the circumstances).

Law Reform - there is a pressing need to review and recast s.178A of the
Crimes Act and make it a vehicle adequate to cover the wide range of fraudulent misappropriations by those entrusted with the moneys of others. The present s.178A is over technical and inadequate to protect the community.

Order 
Appeal against convictions dismissed.
 
JUDGMENT 
HUNT CJ at CL: I agree with the orders proposed by Smart J and, except in relation to two matters, with the reasons which he has given. I prefer to state my own reasons in relation to Grounds of Appeal 6 and 8.

Ground of Appeal 6 
The misappropriations from Miss Wilson upon which the Crown relied were constituted by the transfers of funds from an account with the State Building
Society entitled "Ian Hunt & Co in trust for Joy Wilson" to an account with the St George Building Society entitled "I Hunt & Co", without any reference to a trust in favour of Miss Wilson.

Although there was a dispute in the evidence, there was material before the jury - from the appellant's unsworn statement - that, notwithstanding the actual legal position, he believed that he was authorised to transfer such funds from that account to another where it was to obtain a better rate of interest upon the funds so invested. A claim of right, however, had to go further than that in order to meet the Crown case. It had to amount to a belief by the appellant that he was authorised to change the investment, not only from one institution to another for that purpose, but also from an investment identified as being in trust for the appellant's client to one in the appellant's name without reference to that trust.

Before any legal onus fell upon the Crown to eliminate the reasonable possibility that the appellant had acted in accordance with such a claim of right - and thus that he had not acted with deliberate dishonesty - an evidentiary onus had to be satisfied by the appellant by pointing to or producing material from which such a reasonable possibility could be inferred.
The authorities are collected and discussed in Regina versus Youssef [(1990) 50
A Crim R 1] at 2-4; see also Regina versus Hawes [(1994) 35 NSWLR ]
at 298. There was no material before the jury in this case upon which such a claim of right could be based. The appellant's assertion that "[t]here is no dispute as to whose money it was [in the new account]" did not amount to such material.

In my view, therefore, the only error made by the trial judge was to have left the issue as to a claim of right to the jury at all. The appellant can have no valid complaint in those circumstances that, as the claim was put to the jury, the test to be applied by them in determining the non-existent issue was wrongly stated. I would reject this ground of appeal upon that basis.

Ground of Appeal 8 
This ground of appeal related to the relevance of Ex 3 to the charges alleging misappropriation from Mrs Mulcahy. Exhibit 3 is a photostat document purporting to be a copy of an authority signed by Mrs Mulcahy in favour of the appellant (her solicitor) permitting him to withdraw her funds "as and when required by you for your purposes".

The authenticity of that document was challenged by the Crown upon the basis of the evidence from Mrs Mulcahy denying that the appellant had ever read such a document to her or that she had signed the original. The only material to the contrary was from the appellant's unsworn statement to the jury. He went on to say, however, that the withdrawals in question had not been effected by him, that they must have been effected by members of his staff in his absence by using withdrawal slips which he had signed in blank and left with Mrs
Mulcahy's papers. He did not put forward any alternative case that, had he effected the withdrawals himself, it was pursuant to the authority contained in Ex 3, although he did say this: "The authority which I was given by Mrs Mulcahy set out the extent of what I considered my right to be. I fulfilled that right in accordance with the terms of that authority given both in written form and oral. In fact, even if I had been personally responsible for the withdrawal of cheques and cash, which I certainly was not, my staff would have considered themselves to be acting in accordance with the terms of that authority as the authority clearly states what is required to be done." 
It was conceded at the trial by counsel for the appellant that this was not intended to amount to a claim of right by him.

The direction sought in relation to the Mulcahy charges was that, even if the jury rejected the appellant's explanation that he was not responsible for the withdrawals, they should nevertheless have to consider, in determining whether he had deliberately acted with dishonesty, whether the Crown had eliminated the reasonable possibility that Ex 3 was an authentic authority given to him by Mrs Mulcahy to do what he did.

The judge stated that he would not give such a direction because the appellant had not claimed to have made the payments pursuant to that authority, so that there was no evidence that he had done so. That ruling was, with respect, erroneous. This was not a claim of right, as there was in relation to the
Wilson charges. There was no evidentiary onus upon the appellant to point to or to produce evidence that he had acted in accordance with such an authority. The legal onus lay on the Crown to establish that he had not so acted. Once an issue arose as to whether the appellant could deal with Mrs
Mulcahy's funds for his own purposes - as it did by the tender of Ex 3 - the
Crown had to eliminate any reasonable possibility that he had so acted in accordance with that authority.

Such an issue should therefore have been put to the jury in accordance with that request, even though the appellant had not put it forward expressly in his unsworn statement: Pemble versus The Queen <case>; [(1991) 124 CLR 107] at 117-118, 130; Regina versus Stokes & Difford [(1990) 51
A Crim R 25] at 32. The only direction which related to the situation contemplated by the request was in these terms: "Of course I remind you of one other thing, that in regard to this case, the accused has stated to you in regard to the five Mulcahy charges [that] he did not take any moneys out of the Mulcahy account at all. That it was his staff that did it. He knew nothing of these transactions at all until I think
September 1993 when they were drawn to his attention. That is what he says. So he is not claiming to have acted on any authority. He says his staff may have acted on authorities but he did not claim to act on any authority. He says he knew nothing of the transactions.

However, that does not mean because you do not accept him in that regard that you say `Oh well, I have not accepted him therefore he is guilty'. That does not follow either, because the onus is still on the Crown to establish his guilt, and what it must do is establish the three essential elements that
I indicated to you must be proven, and proven beyond reasonable doubt.

If you disbelieve the accused, I am not saying that you should or you should not, but I am just trying to draw your attention to it, then you have got to look at it in the light of the other material that is placed before you, because the onus is on the Crown to establish the matters that go to constitute this offence, and to do so beyond reasonable doubt." 
The absence of any specific reference to Ex 3 as part of "the other material that is placed before you" renders that direction inadequate.

However, I am satisfied that, even if the issue had been put to the jury, the appellant would inevitably still have been convicted. The authenticity of Ex 3 was highly suspect. The document appears to have been in the handwriting of the appellant. I referred earlier to the denial by Mrs Mulcahy that the appellant had ever read the terms of the original of that document to her, even if she had signed it. The payments made with the funds withdrawn were to satisfy the appellant's own debts. Such an authority would have required a careful explanation to be made by a solicitor before having his client execute it in his favour. Mrs Mulcahy was financially dependent upon the funds invested for her future - the details are referred to in the judgment of Smart
J. There was no suggestion that any money to be withdrawn for the appellant's own purposes was to amount to a loan for which interest was payable by the appellant to Mrs Mulcahy. As Smart J remarks, to suggest that Mrs Mulcahy knowingly gave such an authority in her parlous financial circumstances is absurd. If it had been put to the jury, they must necessarily have regarded the appellant as having acted quite improperly.

I am satisfied, therefore, that the proviso should be applied in relation to this ground of appeal, upon the basis that the appellant lost no real chance (or chance fairly open to him) of being acquitted; an appropriately instructed jury, acting reasonably on the material properly before them and applying the correct directions of law, would inevitably have convicted him: Regina v
Zorad [(1990) 19 NSWLR 91] at 108; Glennon versus The Queen [(1994) 179 CLR ] at -9, 12-13. I would reject this ground of appeal upon that basis.

Law reform 
Finally, reference should be made to the extraordinary technicalities which have now become encrusted on <case> of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/), to which
Smart J has referred.

That an appellant could even argue that he should have been charged with the misappropriation of a valuable security instead of money makes a laughing stock of the law. The Legislature should take urgent action to amend the section so that a conviction does not depend upon arcane distinctions such as are apparent in the authorities which Smart J has discussed. It should not be difficult to select a simply and clearly stated genus of which both money and valuable security are but species and which can be used in the indictment without the Crown having to elect and without arid arguments of duplicity being available. The matter is overripe for law reform.
 
SMART J: Ian Lewis Hunt appeals against his conviction of five counts of fraudulent misappropriation of moneys. Mr Hunt was a solicitor. Counts 1 to 5 related to the moneys he received on behalf of Mrs P.E.Mulcahy and counts 6 and 7 to those received on behalf of Mrs J.H.Wilson. Mr Hunt was acquitted on counts two and seven.

The appellant contends that the facts were not capable, as a matter of law, of supporting the charges laid and he attaches importance to the meaning of the words money and valuable security in s.178A of the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) and their definition in [s.4.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s4.html) He contends that he did not receive money as charged but a valuable security, namely, 2 cheques.

The Mulcahy Moneys 
The dates and amounts of the misappropriations were: July 1990 - $3100 December 1990 - $3503 March 1991 - $5322.38 June 1991 - $4130 
The text of each amended count which included the relevant date and amount as just listed was: "Ian Lewis Hunt on(date) at Hornsby in the State of New South Wales having received certain money upon terms requiring him to account to Patricia
Elizabeth Mulcahy for the balance of such money after any authorised deductions having been made thereout fraudulently did misappropriate to his own use the sum of $(amount)in violation of the terms upon which he the said
Ian Lewis Hunt received the said money, namely, that any payment of monies be authorised by Patricia Elizabeth Mulcahy." 
Mrs Mulcahy had marriage difficulties. She had been in a women's refuge and other temporary accommodation. She consulted Mr Hunt and a settlement under the Family Law Act was negotiated by which she was to receive $150,000 from her husband. The settlement was effected on 21 March 1990, being the date on which Mr Hunt (or an employee) received the cheque for $150,000. That cheque was banked in the trust account of Ian Hunt & Co. with the National
Australia Bank on 22 March 1990. Moneys were deducted for costs.

On 30 March 1990 Mr Hunt had Mrs Mulcahy sign a document authorising and directing him to hold and invest moneys in his name in AMP Chase Bank pending her instructions to him for its withdrawal.

On that day Mr Hunt drew a cheque for the balance of $145,775.60 on his firm's trust account in favour of P Mulcahy. On 10 April 1990 that cheque was deposited to the credit of an account with Chase AMP Bank Limited which was opened that day upon the joint signatures of Mr Hunt and Mrs Mulcahy. The application and the counter deposit slip refer to "Ian Hunt - Mulcahy A/C".
The Bank statements issued in the name of "Ian Lewis Hunt" and were sent to his home address. Her full name and address did not appear on the application.

Mrs Mulcahy said that she arranged with Mr Hunt for her money to be held in the Solicitors Trust Fund until she could find a suitable retirement village and that when she found the retirement village Mr Hunt helped her work out the money she would have for furniture and the kitchen. She also wanted some money for herself. She found a unit in the Astra Retirement Village. The unit cost $80,000.

Settlement of the purchase of the unit took place on 19 June 1990. The moneys came from the account with Chase AMP Bank.

Mrs Mulcahy said that she signed withdrawals as requested by Mr Hunt. Some were blank. He was to use these to pay her debts and meet her commitments.

Count 1 - On 17 July 1990 $3100 was withdrawn from the account, with a bank cheque for $3026 payable to McCulloch Developments Pty Ltd and the balance in cash. The money was used to pay the rent of Mr Hunt's office. This was without
Mrs Mulcahy's knowledge or consent.

Count 3 - On 27 December 1990 Mr Hunt utilised $3503 from the account to purchase a bank cheque for $3500 in favour of Brown & Partners to pay legal fees owed to that firm by Mr Hunt. This was without Mrs Mulcahy's knowledge or consent.

Count 4 - On 28 March 1991 Mr Hunt used $5322.38 from the account to purchase two bank cheques. One was for $1322.38 in favour of Leigh Virtue and
Collins in payment of a debt owed by him to a client of that firm. The other cheque, which was for $4000 was in favour of JC & JI Stevens. It does not appear why the cheque was purchased but it was clear enough that both these withdrawals were without Mrs Mulcahy's knowledge or consent and were not applied for her benefit or for any purpose associated with her.

Count 5 - On 28 June 1991 Mr Hunt withdrew $4130 in cash from the account.
This was without Mrs Mulcahy's knowledge or consent. The moneys were not used for her benefit or for any purpose associated with her.

On 9 September 1991 when Mr Hunt's practice was being wound up Mrs Mulcahy sought payment of the balance of the money due to her. Mr Hunt signed this note on the bottom of the receipt: "We also confirm that the balance of Mrs Mulcahy's settlement moneys continue to be invested for her as instructed and at present amount to approx $22,000 and (indecipherable) interest." 
As at 10 September 1991 there were 10 cents in the account. It was not suggested that there was any money elsewhere.
 
The Wilson Moneys 
Count 6 
The date of the misappropriation was 16 July 1991 and the amount was $22,286. The count was couched in the same terms as the earlier count, the name of Joy Harkway Wilson being substituted for that of Mrs Mulcahy.

In 1980 Miss Wilson retained Mr Hunt to act for her in a third party claim arising out of injuries sustained in a motor car accident. That claim was settled for $64,000. Various expenses were deducted by the GIO in accordance with the usual practice. On 13 September 1983 Mr Hunt received a cheque from the GIO in settlement of Miss Wilson's claim. This cheque was banked in Mr
Hunt's trust account. After further deductions for costs and expenses the balance of $49,256.05 was deposited in a Flexi-Rate Account with St George
Building Society Ltd. In his letter to her of 31 October 1983 Mr Hunt explained that these moneys were available to her on 24 hourly call.

On 7 June 1984 an account was opened in the name of "Ian Hunt & Co ITF Joy
Wilson" with the State Building Society. The address given was 3/24 Florence
Street, Hornsby. Mr Hunt's office was at 32-34 Florence Street, Hornsby. In his letter of 13 June 1984 he wrote that the sum of $18,762.54 was the present balance in an account styled "Ian Hunt & Company in trust for Joy Wilson".
After the merger of the State Building Society with St George Building Society in 1988 the account was given the number 148-923-258.

There is no evidence as to what happened between mid June 1984 and early July
It may be of no relevance. On 16 July 1991 Mr Hunt applied to open a new account with St George Building Society Ltd in the name of I Hunt &
Co. There was no reference to "In trust for Joy Wilson". The form contains a space for such information. The address given was 32 Florence Street, Hornsby.
This new account bore the number 001-086-416. On 16 July 1991 the sum of $22,286.00 was transferred from account 148-923-258 to account 001-086-416. Mr
Hunt signed the transfer. The sum was to be held at call on flexi-rate issue.
After the transfer the sum of $3247.86 remained in the trust account.

As to the Mulcahy moneys, while a cheque for $150,000 was banked on 22 March , $145,775.60 remained in the "Ian Hunt & Co Trust Account" until 10
April 1990 when that sum was transferred to the "Ian Hunt-Mulcahy A/C" with
Chase AMP Bank Ltd. This was a trust account. That transfer of money was unobjectionable. The payments the subject of counts 1, 3, 4 & 5 took place from that account between 17 July 1990 and 28 June 1991.

As to the Wilson moneys, a cheque was banked in the Hunt Trust Account about September 1983 and most of the proceeds remained there until towards the end of October 1983 when $49,256.05 was paid into a flexi-rate account with St
George Building Society Ltd. In June 1984 some of that money was placed in a flexi-rate trust account with State Building Society. Neither of these transfers was objectionable. Over 7 years later moneys in that account were transferred into an account in St George Building Society Ltd in the name of "Ian Hunt & Co", not purporting to be a trust account.

Thus in both cases after receipt of the cheques and their banking into the "Hunt & Co Trust Account" part of the proceeds had been transferred to other accounts. Part of the moneys thus transferred and received into these other accounts had been misappropriated at subsequent dates varying from nearly 4 months to over 71/2 years. This is a case where the appellant received cheques initially but it was the moneys he misappropriated from accounts standing in his name but held in trust for these two clients which was the subject of the trial.

Ground 1 - No Money Received 
This ground alleges in respect of each conviction that there was no evidence capable of establishing that the appellant received "money" and that this essential element of the offence was not proven.

This ground is based on the appellant having initially received a cheque and "money" not covering a cheque.

Section 178A of the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) provides: "Whosoever having collected or received any money or valuable security upon terms requiring him to deliver or account for or pay to any person the whole or any part of: such money or valuable security or the proceeds thereof; or any balance of such money, valuable security, or proceeds thereof after any authorised deductions or payments have been made thereout, fraudulently misappropriates to his own use or the use of any other person, or fraudulently omits to account for or pay the whole or any part of such money, valuable security, or proceeds, or the whole or any part of such balance in violation of the terms on which he collected or received such money or valuable security, shall be liable to penal servitude for seven years.

For the purposes of this section any such money, valuable security, or proceeds thereof, or any balance thereout shall be deemed to be the property of the person who authorised the collection or receipt of the money or valuable security or from whom the money or valuable security was received notwithstanding that the accused may have been authorised to make any deduction thereout on his own behalf, or any payment thereout to another person, or to mix such money, valuable security, or proceeds thereof, or such balance with his own moneys." [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s4.html) contains these definitions: "'Money' includes all coined money, whether current within New South Wales or not, and all bank notes or instruments ordinarily so called, if current as such, and payable to the bearer.
 'Valuable security' includes every order or other security whatsoever entitling or evidencing the title of any person to any share or interest in any public stock or fund ... or in any fund of any body corporate, company, or society ... or to any deposit in any bank; and every debenture, deed, bond, bill, note, cheque, warrant, order or security whatsoever for money or for payment of money ... and every document of title to land or goods ..." 
As the trial judge pointed out these definitions are inclusive. He held that they were not definitive of the meaning of money and valuable security. The judge held "in all the circumstances of this case that depositing of a valuable security into such a bank account does constitute the receiving of money by the accused within the meaning of that word as used in the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) and in particular in regard to s.178A of the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/)." 
The appellant submitted that as money referred only to coins and bank notes, by definition, and as valuable security was separately defined and included a specific reference to every cheque for the payment of money, "money" did not include a cheque. Counsel contended that it must have been intended that 'money' and valuable security were to have separate and distinct meanings. If money meant cheques for the payment of money there would be an impermissible degree of overlapping.

Counsel pointed to the separate use and definition of the terms 'money' and 'valuable security' and to the phrase "the whole or any part thereof" in s.178A. He submitted that it was not possible to deliver or account for "part" of a valuable security. I interpolate that I can envisage cases where this could happen. For example, some shares may have to be sold or transferred and the scrip for the balance delivered. It is correct that it would not be possible to deliver, part of a cheque but it would be possible to account for part of the proceeds of a cheque. The appellant attached importance to the words "the proceeds thereof" contained in sub-para (a) - "such money or valuable security or the proceeds thereof." The concluding paragraph of s.178A is designed to overcome many of the difficulties which could arise.

The appellant contended that the Crown alleged misappropriation of money but proved misappropriation of a cheque. In support of this submission he argued that a cheque for payment of money was a valuable security and not money.

Counsel relied on this observation of Gibbs J in Beckwith v. The Queen, <case>; [1976 135 CLR 569] at 574: "as a general rule a court will adopt that construction of a statute which will give some effect to all of the words which it contains." 
However, Gibbs J added that not every draftsman is able completely to avoid surplusage and that there may be some looseness in drafting and some overlap.
Where the legislation is intended to cover a wide range of situations and a draftsman wants to make sure that this is achieved it is sometimes difficult to avoid some overlapping.

Counsel also relied upon this passage from the speech of Viscount Simon in
Hill v. William Hill (Parker Lane) LD, [1949 AC 530] at 546-547: "though a Parliamentary enactment (like parliamentary eloquence) is capable of saying the same thing twice over without adding anything to what has already been said once, this repetition in the case of an Act of Parliament is not to be assumed. When the legislature enacts a particular phrase in a statute the presumption is that it is saying something which has not been said immediately before. The rule that a meaning should, if possible, be given to every word in the statute implies that, unless there is good reason to the contrary, the words add something which would not be there if the words were left out." 
Viscount Simon pointed out a little later that such an approach would not be taken where it leads to an undesirable (or more undesirable) result, such as undeclared retrospective interference. At 567 Lord Normand referred to the rule not being unbending but yielding to a more compelling rule, for example, not giving a statute retrospective effect.

Viscount Jowitt LC at 543 and Lord Radcliffe at 579 commented that instances of legislative abundance were not unknown. They looked at the overall scheme of the legislation and what was intended to be achieved. I do not detect any difference in basic principles but there was a lively difference as to their application in that case.

Section 178A has an interesting history. It was originally enacted as s.2 of the Crimes (Amendment) Act 1902 which was enacted in consequence of the decision in Slattery v. The King, <case>; [(1905) 2 CLR 546.] This Act was repealed and s.2 re-enacted as s.178A of the [Crimes Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) by s.7 of the Crimes (Amendment) Act 1929. This section was subsequently amended by s.2 of the Crimes (Fraudulent Misappropriation) Act 1929 by reason of the decision in R v. McDonald, (1929) 30 SR 73.

It is helpful to turn to the Second Reading Speech on the Crimes (Fraudulent
Misappropriation) Bill in the Legislative Council on 19 November 1929,
Hansard, p.1444. The Attorney-General ( The Hon. F.S. Boyce) explained that in
Slattery's case the point that succeeded was that unless the solicitor converted the very cheque or the very money with which he was entrusted for the specific purpose directed he was not guilty of larceny as a bailee.
Slattery's Act was passed to get over this difficulty by making the fraudulent misappropriation of moneys collected or received an offence. The Attorney-
General further explained that the point that had recently been taken successfully (McDonald's case) was that under the Slattery Act the words "whoever having collected or received any money or valuable security under any authority" had no application to the case where money was paid direct to the solicitor by his client for investment. Such moneys were not paid "under any authority." The section was only applied where the money was paid "under authority" by a third party. The amending Act deleted these words.

On 28 November 1929 the Premier (Mr Bavin) delivered the Second Reading Speech in the Legislative Assembly. Mr Bavin explained, amongst other things, that as a result of the proposed amendment the section would apply generally to any case in which a solicitor or trustee received money to be dealt with in a certain way. The amendment was regarded as one of urgency, the decision of the
Full Court having been given on 5 November 1989. Parliament was concerned about persons who ought to be punished escaping punishment.

The history of s.178A is also discussed in R. v. Heavener 1933 33 SR 101.
An argument was rejected that s.178A should be read down so as to fit in with s.165. Street CJ with whom the other judges agreed said at 103-104: "We must give effect to the wide words of s.178A even though this may involve some overlapping, and on the words of that section and having regard to the course of legislation I think it is plain that the intention of the legislature was that it should be a general provision covering all kinds of fraudulent misappropriation." 
Gleeson CJ in R v. McQueeny [39 A Crim R 56] at 59 while observing that what was said in Heavener about the general effect of s.178A was correct in its context drew attention to the section creating a number of different offences and the obligation of the trial judge to explain the ingredients of the particular offence charged.

At 60 the Chief Justice remarked that it may well be that when a solicitor misuses his clients' trust funds he will, in the circumstances of a particular case, be guilty of more than one of the offences created by s.178A.

Section 178A was intended to have a wide operation and to cover many different situations. By definition "valuable security" covers items which do not fit into the conventional meaning of "valuable security". That definition is further expanded by the definitions of "document of title to goods" and "document of title to land". This is the kind of situation where an attempt to cover the field may involve some overlapping. Valuable security is not defined to include money on drawing account at the bank.

In Regina v. Preddy & Ors <case>; [1996 3
WLR 255] at Lord Jauncey pointed out "the money in a bank account standing at credit does not belong to the account holder. He has merely a chose in action which is the right to demand payment of the relevant sum. I used the word money for convenience but it is of course simply a sum entered into the books of the bank." 
Thus on the solicitor banking the cheque and it being cleared a sum stood to the credit of the solicitor in the books of the bank and the solicitor had a chose in action. As Lord Jauncey stated "when a sum of money leaves A's account his chose of action quod that sum is extinguished." In the instant case the sums of money left the general trust account of the solicitor and were transferred to the other accounts earlier mentioned.

It is useful to have this reminder and analysis of the technical principles but it is not just a matter of their application. The question is what does "money" mean in s.178A. In general speech the sum of money entered in the books of the bank standing to the credit of a customer is described as money.
Mainly, only lawyers and tax accountants speak or think of choses in action.

The definition of "valuable security" includes every order or other security whatsoever entitling or evidencing the title of any person to any share or interest to the items earlier listed "or to any deposit in any bank". This case was concerned with the fraudulent misappropriation of the deposit itself rather than an order or other security whatsoever entitling or evidencing the title to any deposit in any bank.
 "Money" is a word which is capable of many meanings. The context in which it is used usually determines its meaning. The meaning of "money" has often arisen in will cases and those of statutory construction.

Money in its strict legal sense includes cash in hand and money on drawing account at the bank. This proposition emerges from In re Collings [1933 Ch ] and In re
Taylor [1923 Ch 99](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=1923%20Ch%2099 "View LawCiteRecord" ) at 108 per Warrington LJ. Both were will cases. Farwell J thought that money could include money on deposit. Earlier in In re Price [1905 2 Ch 55] Farwell J had, it seems, taken the view that if money on deposit was available on 24 hours' notice or less it could be classed as money.

The Crown contended that the evidence established that the appellant had received a cheque and subsequently money and that the manner of framing the charge on which the Crown finally relied made it more understandable for the
Court and the jury as throughout the trial reference was made by the witnesses to the money the appellant received on trust.

Notwithstanding the analysis of Lord Jauncey, given the ordinary meaning of the word "money" and the context in which it is here used, once the cheques were banked and cleared the appellant received "money" albeit that the money was the proceeds of the cheques.

That money was subsequently transferred. By the appellant's actions it was received into the trust accounts on which the appellant could draw with the
Chase AMP Bank and the State Building Society respectively. The misappropriations did not occur until the money the subject of the five counts was transferred out by the appellant. In one instance that was over 7 years later. The most proximate receipt to the misappropriations was the receipt of money into the trust accounts at the instance of Mr Hunt.

This is a case where the Crown could have alleged the receipt and misappropriation of the cheque or the proceeds of a cheque or money. The trial centred upon whether the appellant, for his own purposes, fraudulently used money which had been placed in his care on terms, without the authority of his two clients. The trial was concerned with the money received and what was done with that money not the valuable securities. In my opinion there was ample evidence to support the offence charged.

This ground fails.

Grounds 2 & 3 - Alleged Defects In Indictment 
In respect of each conviction the appellant alleged: 
Ground 2 - the appellant was charged with offences unknown to the law in that the indictment did not allege that the sum misappropriated was either the original money or valuable security received by him or that it was the proceeds of the original money or valuable security received by him.

Ground 3 - Each count was duplicitous in that it did not allege that the sum misappropriated was either the original money or valuable security received by him or that it was the proceeds of the original money or valuable security by him.

In support of the second ground the appellant submitted that there must be a connection between the money or valuable security received and that which had been fraudulently misappropriated. It must be "...the whole or any part of such money, valuable security or proceeds, or the whole or any part of such balance..." The appellant further submitted that the connection must be alleged in the charge. The appellant complained that the charge was deficient in that it alleged that the appellant "having received certain moneys ...
fraudulently did misappropriate to his own use" a specified sum of money and that as the required connection was not alleged, the counts did not allege an offence known to the law.

These submissions do not sufficiently summarise the counts. Each count alleges that the moneys were received upon terms requiring the appellant to account to
P.E. Mulcahy for the balance after authorised deductions and that the fraudulent misappropriation to the appellant's own use of the specified sum was in violation of the terms upon which he received the said money namely, that any payment be authorised by her. The terms were that the appellant "account" for the "balance" of "such money". The words "the said money" are used in the context of the violation of the terms upon which the appellant "received the said money." 
The counts adequately state the connection between the money received and that misappropriated. This ground fails.

As to the third ground the appellant, in relying on latent duplicity submitted that it was necessary to allege that which had been misappropriated is one of: "...the whole or any part of such money valuable security or proceeds or the whole or any part of such balance..." 
It was submitted that the necessity to do so was illustrated by the counts used which just referred to an amount of money without stating that it was in one of the necessary ways connected to that money or valuable security.

I have earlier indicated why I think that there was the necessary connection.
Having regard to the terms of the counts there was no latent duplicity. It was plain that the count was alleging that the appellant had misappropriated a specified sum out of the balance of moneys originally received after allowing for all authorised deductions.

It is inappropriate to use the example of a general trust account as the appellant sought to do. The misappropriations were from a separate bank account in the name of the solicitor or those of the solicitor and complainant so that there was in fact a connection between the funds received and those withdrawn. It is not to the point that the cheques received were paid into a general trust account and that after deductions moneys were paid into separate bank accounts which attracted interest. Ground 3 fails.

Ground 4 
This relates to count 6 and alleges that there was no evidence that the appellant had fraudulently misappropriated to his own use $22,286 alleged.

As earlier mentioned, on 16 July 1991 the appellant transferred the sum of $22,286 from an account standing in the name of Ian Hunt & Co ITF Joy
Wilson opened in 1984 to one in his own name. As noted one section of the application form contained specific provision for the person opening the account to state for whom the moneys were held in trust. It states "C/- or in trust for" 
That part of the application form was left blank. The appellant signed a short distance below that part of the form. It would be hard to miss it. That and the transfer suggested that the appellant was treating the moneys transferred as being his, albeit wrongly and dishonestly. There were some curious circumstances. The money had been left in the original account (except for renumbering on the merger in 1988). The transfer took place after the appellant had used some of Mrs Mulcahy's money to meet his personal obligations. About 6 September 1991 a receiver was appointed of the appellant's practice. He took charge of the records and documents of the practice. This was sold and wound up about this time.

Miss Wilson agreed to the balance of the money remaining in the St George
Building Society. It seems that she did not know that the money had been transferred to the State Building Society. That may not be of moment given the subsequent merger. She said that she never discussed the figure of $22,286 with Mr Hunt, that she was quite happy with the arrangement that the money be in St George and that the movement of the money never appealed to her. She said that she definitely did not have a conversation with Mr Hunt about his using any of her funds for his own purposes and that she never gave him any instructions to transfer any of her monies to any personal account of his. She agreed that she was desirous of earning the maximum amount of interest available. However, she said that she had never had any discussions with the appellant about transferring the money into another account where she might earn higher interest. She was unaware of the transfer until much later.
 
There was no evidence as to what happened to $22,286.

The appellant submitted that there was no evidence that he intended to act fraudulently on 16 July 1991. I am unable to agree. By the application and transfer of 16 July 1991 the appellant placed himself in the position where he appeared to be both the legal and the beneficial owner of $22,286. He was, of course, not the beneficial owner.

The evidence, if accepted, established that the money was received by the appellant on terms and that without Miss Wilson's authority or knowledge the appellant dishonestly appropriated the money for his own use when he deposited the money into an account in his own name and failed to disclose the trust although provision was made for such disclosure. In the circumstances the transfer was an act of misappropriation in itself under s.178A. No later or further act of misappropriation was required.

The appellant contended that there was no evidence that he intended by the transfer of the funds to the new account to cause Miss Wilson any economic loss nor was there any evidence that that did in fact occur.

The relevant mental element in s.178A is that the appellant acted fraudulently or dishonestly. The judge directed the jury in the usual way as to the meaning of "fraudulently" explaining that it meant dishonesty according to the ordinary standards of reasonable and honest people and that they, the jury, had to be satisfied that the appellant knew he was acting dishonestly; the appellant must know that what he was doing was dishonest.

The judge declined to direct the jury in accordance with R v. Allsop [64 Cr
App R 29] that it is sufficient to constitute fraud if the actions taken imperil the economic interest of the person the subject of the fraud.

The Crown contended that primarily this was not an Allsop case even though the judge accepted a Crown submission based on Allsop in rejecting a submission that there was no case to answer. In the alternative, the Crown submitted that Allsop was correctly decided and could be applied.

In Allsop the appellant contended that the jury should have been directed that the appellant must have intended to cause economic loss to the victim. It was held that a direction which referred to an intention to do acts which were likely to cause economic loss was too wide. The Court at p.31 said: "Generally the primary objective of fraudsmen is to advantage themselves. The detriment that results to their victims is secondary to that purpose and incidental. It is 'intended' only in the sense that it is a contemplated outcome of the fraud that is perpetrated. If the deceit which is employed imperils that economic interest of the person deceived, this is sufficient to constitute fraud even though in the event no actual loss is suffered and notwithstanding that the deceiver did not desire to bring about an actual loss." and at 32 continued: "Interests which are imperilled are less valuable in terms of money than those same interests when they are secure and protected. Where a person intends by deceit to induce a course of conduct in another which puts that other's economic interests in jeopardy he is guilty of fraud even though he does not intend or desire that actual loss should ultimately be suffered by that other in this context." 
With the appellant appearing as the legal owner and there being no notation indicating that the moneys were held in trust this would facilitate the appellant applying the moneys for his own purposes. If the money had remained in what was apparently a trust account queries could have arisen and the bank or building society may have been hesitant about meeting a withdrawal which was obviously for the appellant's benefit.

I am of the opinion that the appellant's actions did imperil the economic interests of Miss Wilson and, if it were necessary, that there was a goodly body of evidence establishing that the appellant did intend to cause economic loss to Miss Wilson.

This ground fails.

Ground 6 - Alleged Claim of Right 
The appellant contends that the jury should have been directed that whether he acted dishonestly was not to be answered following consideration by them of the morality of his actions but rather following consideration of whether he believed he had a legal right to do what he did and that he could be convicted only if the Crown proved beyond reasonable doubt that he did not believe that he had a legal right to do what he did, because such belief is inconsistent with acting dishonestly.

The appellant raised a claim of right in respect of count 6 asserting that he had the authority or right to transfer $22,286 to the new account because of
Miss Wilson's instructions that she wished to earn the best rate of interest available. His claim of right went further than the actual authority which he had received. His claim of right was based on the further premise that he believed genuinely that he had the authority to transfer the money from one account to another account. The appellant contended that the jury had to be told in direct terms that the Crown had to prove beyond reasonable doubt that the accused did not believe that he had a legal right to do what he did.

The appellant relied on R v. Love <case>; [(1980) VR 401.] Love involved a charge under s.178BA of the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) of dishonestly obtaining for himself a valuable thing, by deception and a further charge of attempting to dishonestly obtain a valuable thing. In a joint judgment Gleeson CJ, Newman, & Loveday JJ said at 614-615 that there were many cases in which the standards of reasonable and decent people provide an adequate guide in determining whether a person has dishonestly obtained property. Their Honours at 614 had pointed out that there were cases where a person was setting out to obtain something to which he genuinely believed he was legally entitled but it did not necessarily follow that he also entertained a belief in his legal entitlement to employ the particular means (which may involve deception) which he was using to obtain it. Their Honours stated that the ordinary standards of reasonable people can be an unreliable guide as to what constitutes "dishonesty" in such a case and that many right thinking people would find themselves perplexed if called upon to evaluate the honesty of such conduct.

The court continued: "...especially in cases where what is involved is something in the nature of a claim of right, a test which is simply expressed in terms of the standards of ordinary people will leave a jury with inadequate instruction." 
The facts in Love revealed a different situation. In that case the methods used to obtain the property involved deception. A cheque was given for the property, the deceiver always intending that the cheque would be dishonoured.
There was a claim of right to the property which could be regarded as having substance.

The Court in Love said at 615: "Of course in many cases the deception will be powerful evidence of dishonesty. However, when a claim of legal right of the kind now in question is raised, the issue is whether there was a belief in a legal right to obtain the property, not whether there was a belief in a legal right to practice the deception. Fullagar J said <case>; [(1980) VR 401] at 440]: '...a claim of right... does not require a belief in the accused in a right to obtain the property by deception or by the particular deception employed. It is the obtaining that the Crown must prove was done dishonestly, not the practising of the deception.' " 
By the use of the phrase "something in the nature of a claim of right", the
Court was indicating that there should not be a narrow approach but a broad approach to a claim of right.

While these are important observations it is necessary to keep the facts of the present case in mind. Two points stand out, namely, whether the appellant believed he was entitled to change investments without consulting Miss Wilson and, perhaps even more importantly whether he was entitled or believed he was entitled to transfer money out of a trust account into an account in his name in respect of which no trust was noted. Before turning to the summing up to see whether it gave the jury sufficient guidance I should note the Crown's approach.

The Crown relied on this statement in Howard's Criminal Law (5th ed, 1990) at 253: "If D takes or converts property with an intention which is prima facie fraudulent he is not regarded as acting with an intent to steal if he is exercising a claim of right, which means acting under the influence of a belief that he has a right to the property or to take it or convert it." and this observation of King CJ in R v. Langham [(1984) 36 SASR 48] at 53: "The essential notion is that the claim of right must be of such a nature as to negative fraud or dishonesty in the taking of the property." 
The Crown submitted that while the defence of a claim of right had been raised and applied to a variety of property offences including offences involving the taking or conversion of property no case could be found where it had been raised in respect of the offence of fraudulent misappropriation under s.178A.
The Crown submitted that it would have to be an unusual case for a claim of right to become relevant to a case of fraudulent misappropriation. The Crown contended that the claim of right had its origin in larceny type offences.

I have earlier pointed out that the Court in Love referred to raising a defence in the nature of a claim of right. In cases of fraudulent misappropriation by a solicitor he has often converted the property of a client to his own use or that of someone else. Fraudulent misappropriation is allied to offences within the larceny family.

The appellant denied that he had misappropriated Miss Wilson's money. He asserted that he did not appropriate it to his own purposes. The Crown contended that the issue was whether what the appellant did was consistent with the authority which she had given to him. The appellant never suggested that he was entitled to the moneys the subject of count 6. In his dock statement he said: "That authority from Miss Wilson was for the balance of her money to be invested to earn the best rate of interest...and in accordance with that authority I considered that I had a right to invest those monies to earn...the best interest that I could for her..." and: "...implicit in those instructions was authority to withdraw money in relation to the account to do just that. The terms of the authority was to get the best rate of interest and I was authorised to transfer monies, obviously from one account to the other, if that facility was available. It was." 
The appellant did not attempt to relate what Miss Wilson said about the transfer of moneys. He made a bald assertion as to the position. He asserted that he kept records in his office and that it was the practice in the office to write the name on the passbook. He stated that there was simply a transfer from one account to another of Miss Wilson's monies and that there was no doubt that it was her money.

The appellant gave no explanation as to why the second account was not recorded as a trust account and why he had not inserted the relevant trust details in the space provided on the application form to open the second account.

The judge put to the jury the appellant's claim of right that he had authority to transfer the money from the existing account to another in his own name as part of obtaining a higher rate of interest. The appellant's submission comes to this. The jury were not but should have been told that if the Crown failed to prove that the appellant did not believe bona fide that he had authority to change the investment of the money from one account to another to obtain a higher rate of interest then he should be acquitted. The appellant contended that it was not essential that the new account should be stated to be a trust account for Miss Wilson. It would be surprising if a judge or jury accepted that view. It is necessary to refer to the Summing Up in a little more detail.

In his revised and fuller directions on 8 February 1995 the judge explained that the jury had to be satisfied that the appellant received the money of
Miss Wilson upon terms requiring him to account to her for the balance of that money after any authorised deductions. The judge pointed out that there was no real issue as to those two matters. The judge further told the jury that they had to be satisfied that the appellant fraudulently misappropriated to his own use the sums of money identified in each charge and did so in violation of the terms upon which he received the money. The judge stated that it was that third matter which was in dispute and that the denial extended to both limbs of the third element.

On 8 February 1995 the judge gave these directions as to acting fraudulently: "To act fraudulently is to act dishonestly. In other words fraud and dishonesty are synonymous in the criminal law. In determining whether the
Crown has proved that the accused acted dishonestly, you have to determine whether according to the ordinary standards of reasonable and honest people, that his actions, if any, that the things that he did if proven, or he [is] alleged to have done if proven, were dishonest. If it was not dishonest conduct by those standards, that is the end of the matter and you must bring in a verdict of not guilty in regard to each of these charges. If it was dishonest conduct by those standards, then you have to consider where [whether?] the accused must have realised that what he was doing was by those standards dishonest. In most cases where the actions of a person are obviously dishonest by ordinary standards, there will be no doubt about it. It would be obvious that the accused in those circumstances knew that what he was doing was acting dishonestly.

It is dishonest for an accused to act in a way which the accused know ordinary people would consider to be dishonest. Even if the accused asserts or genuinely believes he is morally justified in acting in the way he did." 
The judge had on 7 February 1995 summarised the Crown's case on the 6th count: "...the evidence indicates that that money was withdrawn from an account entitled in the accused's name as trustee for Miss Wilson, it was transferred from that account into an account entitled in the name of Ian Hunt and Co on July 1991 and that that was done without Miss Wilson's authority or her knowledge and in doing that the accused took money from in effect a trust type account, put it into an account in his own name and so placed that money at risk. We do not know what happened in regard to the utilisation of that money, whether it stayed in that account or whether is was spent from that account, we just do not know, there is no evidence in regard to that. The Crown says it does not matter, the facts speak for themselves in regard to that charge. The unauthorised transfer of that money, the lack of any records in regard to the transfer of that money except in the bank statement allow you to infer that the accused fraudulently misappropriated that money to his own use in violation of the terms upon which he had received the money, he having received it on the terms that he would account to Miss Wilson in relation to it." 
The judge briefly summarised the appellant's case on count 6 on 7 February
He put it in these slightly fuller terms on 8 February 1995: "Well I took that money out of the trust account, the designated trust account that I'd opened on behalf of Ms Wilson, to put it into another account in the name of Ian Hunt & Co for the purpose of getting a higher rate of interest". He says "That was in accordance with the authority that I had and I certainly didn't misappropriate it, fraudulently misappropriate it to my own use. I didn't act dishonestly in regard to that money and I certainly didn't act in violation of the terms upon which I received the said money".

After the summing up had been delivered and prior to the jury retiring counsel sought the direction mentioned in this ground. The judge in his own restatement of the direction sought indicated his appreciation of the thrust of it, adding that if the appellant had the belief which he professed it was inconsistent with him acting dishonestly.

The Crown Prosecutor after referring to Love at 615 stated that he would not object to the judge telling the jury that the issue was whether the accused believed he had the legal right to obtain the property. The judge then persuaded the Crown Prosecutor that it was not really a claim of right but a claim that the appellant acted in accordance with the authority which Miss
Wilson had given him.

The judge appears to have thought that a claim of right could not exist in the present case because the appellant legally had the right to withdraw the money. He contrasted that with a belief by an accused that he had the right to take a motor vehicle. The judge declined to give the direction sought. I am unable to agree with the judge's approach and analysis. There were two possible situations. If the Crown failed to prove that the appellant did not have the authority which he claimed, a verdict of acquittal followed.
Secondly, if the Crown proved that the appellant did not have the authority claimed but failed to prove that the appellant did not bona fide believe that he was authorised to do what he did a verdict of acquittal resulted. While this is the theoretical situation it is necessary to decide whether there is a reasonable possibility that the absence of the direction requested could have made a difference in the verdict in the present case. I conclude that there is no reasonable possibility of the direction making a difference and that there has been no miscarriage of justice for these reasons: 
As the case was left to the jury their verdict involves these findings: 
The appellant did not have authority to transfer the money out of the trust account with the St George Building Society into an account in his own name; and 
The appellant acted dishonestly in making the transfer.

It is not credible that the appellant had authority to transfer moneys belonging to Miss Wilson from an account in which he held moneys in trust for her to an account standing in his own name. There is the added point that the application form for the new account contained provision to note the new trust. The appellant did not suggest that as a result of a clerical error or some other slip the notation was inadvertently omitted. It was the appellant's case that he was entitled to do what he did and that was his belief.

The appellant never obtained any written authority to justify or confirm the extraordinary authority which he claimed to hold.

The timing of the transfer was important. The moneys had remained in the same trust investment account for over 7 years. The transfer was made less than two months before the receiver was appointed and at a time when some of the appellant's debts had been paid out of the moneys of clients.

The account at the building society was a controlled moneys account and under [s.61(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s61.html) and s.[62](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s62.html) of the [Legal Profession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/) and the
Regulations proper accounting records had to be kept. While the solicitor has that money under his control he is bound to notify the client of any change in the arrangements under which the money is held or deposited [Regulation (4)]. He would thus be bound to notify any change in the account in which the money was held. Miss Wilson was not aware of any change. The appellant did not suggest that he had discussed the matter with her or notified her. He relied on the authority which he claimed she had given.

While acknowledging to the full that questions of fact and of guilt or innocence are for the jury, no reasonable jury could entertain as a reasonable possibility that the appellant believed genuinely that, without consulting
Miss Wilson, he had authority to transfer her money out of an account standing in his name in trust for Miss Wilson to an account standing in his name alone.

While the direction sought should have been given I am of the opinion that no miscarriage of justice occurred. This was a clear case of dishonesty of a simple and straight forward kind. The issue of dishonesty was posed in direct terms for the jury. It needed no elaboration.

Ground 9 - The appellant contends that in respect of each count the trial judge should have reminded the jury that the appellant was not charged with breach of the trust account and controlled money regulations but with specific offences.

I do not agree that this was necessary. The jury's attention was directed to each count in the indictment and they were told of the elements of the offences and what matters the Crown had to prove. The judge went further. He explained that the real issues were whether Mr Hunt acted dishonestly and in violation of the terms upon which he had received the moneys of Mrs Mulcahy and Miss Wilson.

The judge explained the effect of the [Legal Profession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/) and the
Regulations as to trust moneys and controlled moneys. There had also been evidence from an experienced solicitor from the Law Society on these points.
This background was helpful in evaluating whether the appellant had acted dishonestly. The material never assumed undue importance. Both the trial and the summing up focused upon the issues of dishonesty and the authority given by the complainants. The direction suggested was neither required nor advisable. There was no prospect of the jury becoming confused or failing to understand the issues.

This ground fails.

Ground 10 - The appellant contended that in respect of count 6 the judge should have directed the jury that that part of the Crown's address to the effect that the accused had acted fraudulently because he had transferred Miss
Wilson's money to an account in his own name and thereby put the money dishonestly at risk was not open to the Crown.

This submission is unsound. The transfer of the money from the trust account to an account solely in the appellant's name was eloquent of dishonesty. The circumstances in which the transfer took place underlined the dishonesty.

This ground fails.

Ground 5 - The appellant contended that the conviction on count 6 was unsafe and unsatisfactory for these reasons taken individually and in combination: 
Miss Wilson stated that she and the appellant had agreed that it was desirable that her funds earn the maximum rate of interest; 
No evidence was called by the Crown as to the rate of interest payable on the account opened on 16 July 1991.

The Crown had not discharged the onus of disapproving that the accused was acting with Miss Wilson's authority in the sense that she had told the appellant that she wanted to earn the best interest possible.

There was no evidence as to the way in which the accused had dealt with $22,286 after it had been transferred to the new account; 
The directions were capable of confusing the jury into thinking that because the particular transfer was "unauthorised" in the sense that Miss
Wilson did not know about it, that that was sufficient to establish that the appellant had fraudulently misappropriated the funds to his own use; 
The directions referred to in grounds 6, 9 & 10 were not given.

It does not follow that because a person wants to obtain the maximum rate of interest available she is authorising a person to transfer money from one account to another.

The appellant used guarded terms in his dock statement when he said "In 1991 it came to my attention that there were facilities at St George capable of attracting a greater rate of interest." Later he referred to "monies...placed in another account to obtain a greater rate of interest." There was no evidence to support this bald unsworn statement. No particulars were given of this "greater rate". No evidence was called from St George Building Society.
Given the lack of any detail, the bare unsworn statement which was unsubstantiated, the guarded terms used and the lack of prior transfers from to 1991 it would not be surprising if a tribunal of fact regarded that matter as a smoke-screen having nothing to do with the transfer.

There was no evidence to support the accused's contention that "the account that I opened, the second account at St George had reference to the first account." There was no explanation by the appellant as to why the second account was not stated to be a trust account for Miss Wilson. Absent a convincing explanation the transfer of the money after so many years into his own name weighted heavily against him. It left little room for doubt.

The complaint as to "confusion" is not made out. The judge was careful to put the issue that the transfer was alleged to be in violation of the terms of the authority. He also summarised at length the appellant's statement and arguments that he had the requisite authority and the evidence and the Crown contentions to the contrary.

I have earlier dealt with the absence of the directions mentioned in grounds ,9 and 10.

I have made my own independent assessment of the evidence. While it is possible to criticise the evidence of Miss Wilson there was no evidence to the contrary. In my assessment there was ample evidence on which to convict the appellant on the 6th count. I would have been surprised if a jury had not done so. The appellant's guilt on the 6th count was proved beyond reasonable doubt.

Ground 5 fails.

Grounds 7 and 8 
Ground 7 as amended at the hearing reads: "That the jury should have been directed that they could not reject beyond reasonable doubt the proposition that Ex 3 gave to the accused the authority to deal with the moneys in the way he did." 
Ground 8 as amended at the hearing reads: "That the trial judge should have reminded the jury of that part of the defence case to the effect that they could not reject beyond reasonable doubt the proposition that Ex 3 gave the accused the authority to deal with the moneys in the way he did." 
Exhibit 3 had a history. It is not an original document but a photocopy of a document. On the night of Wednesday 1 February 1995, the third day of the trial, the appellant was searching through his papers stored in the garage of his father's home. He came across exhibits 2 and 3 and showed them to his father. The appellant said that they could be relevant and that he would give them to his barrister.

The document, which became Exhibit 3 (over the Crown's objection), bears date "18/6/90", is addressed to Ian Hunt and reads: "I, Pat Mulcahy, hereby authorise and direct you to withdraw the following moneys from my a/c:- ) $72,192.55 being settlement monies; )$ cash of $2,000.

You are further authorised to withdraw cash & cheques from the Chase a/c as & when required by you for your purposes.
 x P Mulcahy 
P Mulcahy 
I also acknowledge receipt of the above, being cheque & cash x P Mulcahy 
P Mulcahy " 
The text of the document appears to be in the handwriting of the appellant with only the apparent signatures appearing to be in different handwriting.

Mrs Mulcahy denied that Mr Hunt read the original document to her and that she signed it. There was no evidence that she did so but there was material to this effect in the appellant's dock statement.

As to counts 1 to 5 (the Mulcahy related moneys), the accused in his dock statement said that he was not responsible for any of the withdrawals and that they must have been effected by members of his staff when he was absent from the office by using withdrawal slips which he had signed (in blank) and left with the passbooks. He claimed that he was not aware of any of the withdrawals until the police spoke to him about them on 3 September 1993. He said that it was the practice of his staff to attend to the payment of debts and to requests for money from clients. This lack of knowledge was difficult to accept given the purpose of the payments and the recipients. Some were used to satisfy Mr Hunt's debts for rent, legal fees and work done. They had nothing to do with Mrs Mulcahy.

In his dock statement the appellant claimed that Exhibit 3 was written out in her presence and explained to her. He claimed that it set out the authority which he was intended to have and that he had the right to act in accordance with that authority. He claimed that his staff was entitled to act in accordance with the authority. In dealing with each of counts 1 to 5, the appellant relied upon his staff having made the payments without his knowledge. He did not suggest that he made the payments acting on the authority.

I doubt if any tribunal of fact would contemplate that the authority enabled the solicitor to use his client's funds to pay the solicitor's personal debts.
It may well cover the payment of monies due to the solicitor for costs and disbursements and items purchased on her behalf at her request.

The evidence of Mrs. Joyce, who accompanied Mrs. Mulcahy to some interviews with the appellant, was to the effect that the appellant was avoiding accounting to Mrs. Mulcahy for her funds and fobbing her off. He declined to pay her the balance of moneys which he held for her.

A jury may well have rejected the photostat copy document of 18 June 1990.

In his Summing Up the judge summarised the appellant's dock statement on exhibit 3 thus: " . . . the authority which I [the appellant] was given by Mrs. Mulcahy set out the extent of what I considered my right to be. I fulfilled that right in accordance with the terms of that authority given both in written form and oral. In fact even if I had been personally responsible for the withdrawal of cheques or cash, which I certainly was not, my staff would have considered themselves to be acting in accordance with the terms of that authority, as the authority clearly states that is required to be done." 
In summing up the arguments put by counsel for the appellant the judge said: "And [counsel for the accused] said that the state of the evidence from the
Crown's point of view is most unsatisfactory, particularly in the light of exhibits 2 and 3. He says they've clearly established that so far as Mrs.
Mulcahy was concerned the accused had authority to deal with her monies as he saw fit, even for the payment of his own debts.

He says not that the accused was aware that those monies were used in the five charges. And that you will accept his explanation that in regard to those five matters it was his staff who dealt with those withdrawals. . ." 
As appears from the discussion after the Summing Up was virtually completed, counsel wanted the judge to go further and tell the jury that even if they were satisfied that the appellant was responsible for the payments and did know of them when they were being made, nevertheless on the basis of Exhibits and 3 the jury should consider whether they were satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused had acted in violation of the terms on which he was authorised by Mrs. Mulcahy to deal with the moneys.

The judge declined to put that to the jury. He thought that it was inconsistent with the way in which the appellant had spoken to the jury from the dock, namely, that the appellant did not know of and had nothing to do with the payments - they were all the work of his staff. The accused had never said to the jury that if they did not believe this explanation, they should nevertheless find him not guilty because exhibits 2 and 3 allowed him to spend
Mrs. Mulcahy's moneys in paying his own debts.

The evidence elicited by the appellant established that Mrs Mulcahy was a lady who had been ill-treated by her husband and ended up in a women's refuge. She was seriously ill and facing further medical bills. She was dependent upon a divorce settlement of $150,000 to buy herself a modest retirement unit, obtain furniture and other items, and repay moneys she owed to people who had assisted her. She was to receive a social security pension. To suggest that she authorised the appellant to use her moneys to pay his personal debts would be absurd. She needed the money which was left to eke out an existence.

The judge could hardly gloss over the matter by putting this alternative, which was not put to the jury by the accused, without alluding to the facts and what this alternative involved. That would have been harmful to the appellant.

The judge in his summing referred to the accused's case as he had stated it to the jury. He was not bound to do more in the present case.

Grounds 7 and 8 as amended emerged out of the discussion at the trial, the original grounds 7 and 8 and the oral argument in this court. The appellant did not seek directions in terms of the amended grounds 7 and 8. I have earlier outlined what was sought at the trial.

The appellant was not entitled to the direction outlined in amended ground 7.
It was a matter for the jury whether there was an original document in terms of Exhibit 3, what it meant, its intended field of operation and whether it was adequately explained to Mrs. Mulcahy. It is hard to believe that she would have signed it if it had been adequately explained. Nor do I think that the judge was bound to give the direction outlined in amended ground 8.

The judge adequately directed the jury on the elements including the issue that what was done was in violation of the terms of the authority. This was a good way to deal with the matter. A direction along the lines of that indicated in ground 8 would have had to be placed in context and that would have been adverse to the appellant.

If contrary to the view I have expressed the additional direction should have been given I would apply the proviso for the reasons given by Hunt CJ at CL.

These grounds fail.

A Pressing Case for Reform 
Section 178A has proved to be fraught with technical complexities which have been exploited by those to whom it was intended to apply. The section is in pressing need of radical amendment.

To have a prosecution stand or fall on whether the indictment alleged that money or a cheque in the same amount was received and to spend time on these niceties at the trial and on appeal is bizarre.

S. 178A was first introduced when an agent was acquitted on technical grounds of fraudulent conduct.

When it was amended at the instigation of the Bavin government after there had been another acquittal on technical grounds the opposition led by Mr J. T.
Lang asserted that the amendment did not go far enough. The object has always been to ensure that solicitors, accountants, agents and trustees receiving or handling the money, goods and assets of others who ought to be punished would not escape punishment. Their advisers are astute in finding technical loopholes.

The section creates a number of different offences each with its own ingredients. The section involves precise concepts of some difficulty which give rise to artificialities in its application and administration.

Drawing a sound indictment under s.178A has become a work of art. If the indictment is drawn too narrowly proceedings may fail because the evidence as it ultimately emerges may diverge somewhat from what was anticipated. If the indictment is drawn too broadly it is liable to be attacked for duplicity.

In South Australia the words "money" or "valuable security" were not used.
Instead, the words "any property" were used - s1(1) of the Criminal Law
Amendment Act 1902. In Stephens versus The Queen <case>; [139 CLR 362] at -334 Gibbs J discusses some of the principles which apply and the problems which arise.
 
R versus Johnston [87 FLR 18] involved an insurance broker and illustrates the unsatisfactory results which can flow where a fiduciary element is required before there can be a conviction. Such a requirement often leads to subtle distinctions and analysis. Those who handle the moneys of others should be required to act honestly.

A careful and comprehensive review is required. There is a helpful discussion of the various approaches and pitfalls in a related area in the speech of Lord
Goff in Regina versus Preddy & Ors, <case>; [1996 3
WLR 255] at -263. What is contemplated will need to be related to other provisions in the [Crimes Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) dealing with fraud type offences.

What is needed is a new and workable section not beset by technical difficulties and fine distinctions.

The verdicts of guilty on counts 1,3,4 5 and 6 were inevitable as the Crown case on these counts was overwhelming. The verdicts of not guilty on counts 2 and 7 were readily explicable. Despite much ingenuity on the part of counsel for the appellant the facts were intractable.

The present case provides the ultimate illustration of the problems associated with the section. The extensive amendments to the indictment made early and late in the trial indicate the great difficulty the Crown experienced in framing the indictment. To give but one illustration, count 3 initially alleged receipt and fraudulent misappropriation of a valuable security, to wit a cheque in the amount of $3503. The amendments to this count included the deletion of the reference to a valuable security to wit a cheque and the insertion of a reference to money. This amendment by the Crown was said by the accused to be erroneous and to entitle him to an acquittal because the amendment resulted in the wrong offence being charged.

The appeals against conviction should be dismissed.
 
SIMPSON J: I have had the advantage of reading in draft the judgment of Smart J, and the additional observations and reasons of Hunt CJ at CL. I agree with the orders proposed and, except in relation to grounds 6 and 8, agree with the reasons advanced by Smart J. I agree with the reasons given by Hunt CJ at CL in relation to ground 8.

I have found ground 6 more troubling. It is framed in the following terms: "In respect of count 6: 
That the jury should have been directed that the question as to whether the accused acted dishonestly is not to be answered following consideration by them of the morality of the accused's actions, but rather following consideration of whether the accused believed he had a legal right to do what he did, and that the accused could be convicted only if the Crown proved beyond reasonable doubt that the accused did not in fact believe that he had in the circumstances a legal right to do what he did, because such a belief is inconsistent with acting dishonestly." (emphasis added) 
The last clause in the ground as framed denotes a recognition of the reality of what the ground of appeal is - it raises merely a specific question about the dishonesty alleged by the Crown in this particular case, and more particularly the answer made by the accused to the Crown case on that ingredient of the offence charged. The offence charged was the transfer of money the property of Miss Wilson from an account which noted her interest as beneficiary, to an account in the name of the appellant with no such notation.
The clear inference that the jury was asked to draw was that the transfer was made in the way it was for the purpose of securing to the appellant the use of the money.

The answer made by the appellant has been characterised as a claim of right, but, in my view, in this case that merely confuses the proper analysis of what he sought to put before the jury. In my view, a claim of right, wherever raised, is no more than a denial of relevant dishonesty. So it was in R v
Love [(1989) 17 NSWLR 608], where the relevant dishonesty alleged lay in the obtaining of the property, and not the (admittedly deceptive) method by which it was obtained.

I do not understand it to be contended that his Honour's directions on dishonesty, (or the meaning of the word "fraudulently") were incorrect. But were those directions adequate for the circumstances of this case? For the answer to this question it is necessary to look to what the appellant said in his unsworn statement: "The balance of the moneys were subject to discussion between Miss Wilson and myself. I was authorised by Ms Wilson to invest the balance of her moneys into an account. And when requested should she require specific sums of money, cheques or cash, a request would be received. In the interim that money would be invested to earn interest. That authority from Miss Wilson was for the balance of her money to be invested to earn the best rate of interest. That was her intention. That was the reason she authorised me to invest that money.
And in accordance with that authority I considered that I had a right to invest those moneys to earn interest, the best interest that I could for her, which Ian Hunt and Company did.

In 1991 it came to my attention that there were facilities at St George capable of attracting a greater rate of interest. Miss Wilson had instructed me to invest her moneys to obtain the greatest rate of interest and implicit in those instructions was authority to withdraw money in relation to the account to do just that. The terms of the authority was to get the best rate of interest and I was authorised to transfer moneys, obviously from one account to another, if that facility was available. It was.

And in accordance with those instructions I opened up an account in the name of Ian Hunt & Company for Miss Wilson. Ian Hunt and Company knew whose account this was. It was the practice of the office to write the name of the client on the passbook. The passbook being held in the office. It was the practice of the office to keep records in relation to these accounts. I opened up another account with St George in the name of Ian Hunt and Company but there was one thing I had to do before that account became a current account and that was that I had to transfer the money from one account and put it into another. That is all that happened.

Moneys have come out of one account in accordance with the instructions of my office and placed in another account to obtain a greater rate of interest.
There is no dispute as to whose money it was. There were records kept in the office that confirmed that. The account that I opened, the second account at
St George had reference to the first account. The material in relation to the first account was more than likely kept with the details of the second account. It was Joy Wilson's account. And as I've said in accordance with her instructions to earn a greater rate of interest or the best rate of interest for her the moneys were transferred simply from one account to another. I had authority to do that. And that is all that happened. There is no doubt that it was her money and never any suggestion otherwise." (T10-11, 6 February 1995) 
The appellant claimed to have had a legal right "to do what he did" in some respects, and, indeed he did have a legal right to do much of what he did in relation to Miss Wilson's funds. He had a legal right to hold and invest her funds; he had a legal right, within the Trust Account Regulations, to transfer the funds to an investment producing a better rate of interest; he did not have, and did not and could not have claimed to have had, a legal right to transfer those funds into an account held beneficially in his own name. The appellant avoided any reference to the critical difference between the identification of the investment account in which Miss Wilson's money was held up to at least June 1984, (Ian Hunt and Co ITF Joy Wilson) and the identification of the account in which the money was held from 16 July 1991 (I
Hunt & Co). But this was the critical indicium of dishonesty on which the
Crown relied.

Had his Honour been persuaded to give the direction sought, it would then have been necessary for him explicitly to focus upon what was encompassed in "what he did", including that feature indicative of dishonesty. All of this illustrates the circularity of the present argument.

What was said by the appellant in his statement to the jury amounted to a denial that he had placed, or had intended to place, the money in an account of which he was the beneficiary. He denied the dishonesty but made no attempt to explain that one fact from which the inference was sought to be drawn. He made no claim that he was entitled, legally, to do that critical thing.

All of this is no more than a question of dishonesty. There was nothing that could amount to a claim of right made in his statement. The judge directed the jury adequately on dishonesty. It is quite different from the situation which arose in Love in which what may have been an honest purpose was sought to be achieved by dishonest means, a circumstance which demanded the kind of direction which drew such a distinction. I therefore agree with Hunt CJ at CL that the direction sought was not called for and could not have been supported on the facts claimed by the appellant.

I agree that this ground fails.
 * * * 
