

Conway versus Critchley (No 2) [2012] NSWSC 1542 (14 December 2012) 
Last Updated: 18 January 2013 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Case Title: 
Conway versus Critchley (No 2)  
Medium Neutral Citation: <case>  
Hearing Date(s): November 2012  
Decision Date: December 2012  
Jurisdiction: 
Equity Division - Expedition List  
Before: 
Pembroke J  
Decision: 
See paragraph [2]  
Catchwords: 
COSTS - indemnity costs - separate question - knowingly false allegations of fact relating to severable claim - prolonging litigation - sanction to mark improper conduct 
COSTS - payable forthwith - separate question - departure from rule justified - just, quick and cheap resolution of real issues  
Cases Cited: 
Ajkay versus Hickey & Co Pty Ltd <case> 
Australian Transport Insurance Pty Ltd versus Graeme Phillips Road Transport
Insurance Pty Ltd <case>; <case> 
Conway versus Critchley <case> 
Fiduciary Ltd versus Morningstar Research Pty Ltd <case>; <case>; <case>; <case>; <case> 
Wentworth versus Rogers (No 5) [(1986) 6 NSWLR 534]  
Category: 
Costs  
Parties: 
David Conway - plaintiff 
Stephen Christopher Critchley - first defendant 
Mudgee Wines Pty Ltd - second defendant 
Eurunderee Wines Pty Ltd - third defendant 
William James Whaley - fourth defendant 
Jane Margaret McLean - fifth defendant 
Mark Norman Thompson - sixth defendant  
Representation - Counsel: 
Counsel: 
G W McGrath SC - for the plaintiff 
C D Freeman - for the first to fifth defendants 
No appearance for the sixth defendant  - Solicitors: 
Solicitors: 
Hall Partners - for the plaintiff 
Leonard Legal - for the first to fifth defendants 
No appearance for the sixth defendant  
File Number(s): /282302  
JUDGMENT
On 15 November 2012 I gave judgment in relation to two separate questions: Conway versus Critchley <case> The matter was then listed for directions in order for the parties to prepare short minutes of order. On 30 November 2012 the parties made competing claims for costs both in relation to my judgment and to an earlier judgment of Debelle AJ in Conway versus Critchley <case> I directed the defendant to provide submissions in relation to the following issues: 
Whether the plaintiff should pay the costs of the first to fifth defendants of the proceedings on an indemnity basis in relation to the claim for the 33 wine storage tanks; 
Whether the order for costs made by Acting Justice Debelle made on 5
June be set aside.
The defendant provided those submissions on 5 December 2012. I make the following orders: 
The plaintiff should pay the costs of the first to fifth defendants of the proceedings on an indemnity basis in relation to the plaintiff's claim for ownership and possession of the wine storage tanks.

The plaintiff should pay the costs of the first to fifth defendants of the proceedings on the ordinary basis in relation to the agreement alleged in paragraph 18 and 19 of the second further amended statement of claim.

I set aside the order for costs made by Debelle AJ on 5 June 2009 and substitute that order with an order that the first to fifth defendants pay 50% of the plaintiff's costs of and incidental to the application for summary judgment.

I order that these cost orders (Orders 1, 2 and 3) be assessable forthwith.

I refuse the plaintiff's application for a stay of the enforcement or execution of any assessed costs.
My reasons for those orders are what follow.

Indemnity Costs
The defendants seek an order for indemnity costs in relation to their costs incurred in litigating the separate question regarding the existence and ownership of 33 wine storage tanks. The principles that attach to the exercise of discretion to award indemnity costs are well known. The discretion is absolute and unfettered but must be exercised judicially: Australian Transport Insurance Pty Ltd versus Graeme Phillips Road Transport Insurance Pty Ltd <case>; [(1986) 10 FCR 177] at 542 (Kirby P, Hope and Samuels JJA agreeing). The plaintiff's claim in relation to the wine storage tanks also deceived an Acting Justice of this Court on an application for summary judgment. 
I have now found that the relevant wine storage tanks did not exist and that the plaintiff made false declarations and provided false documents to the Bank of Queensland based on the supposed existence of the wine tanks: Conway versus Critchley <case> at <case>- <case>. In these proceedings the plaintiff sought to maintain the fiction of the non-existent tanks and brought a claim in respect of them. The conduct of the plaintiff in this regard calls for the imposition of an indemnity costs order. The defendants are entitled to be indemnified because the claim should never have been made. The exposition and undoing of the plaintiff's conduct was in the interests of more than just the parties to the litigation. And the claim for the wine tanks represents a sufficiently severable claim justifying the separate treatment of the costs of that aspect of the proceedings. 
Setting aside costs order of Debelle AJ
The same reasoning applies in relation to the proceedings before Debelle AJ. His Honour heard and determined the summary judgment application on a wrong basis. He was significantly misled in relation to the plaintiff's claims for possession of the wine storage tanks. The defendants seek to have the costs order made by Debelle AJ set aside and a substitute order made. A judgment or order can be set aside if the judgment or order was entered irregularly or against good faith: UCPR 36.15. Setting aside the costs order of Debelle AJ is within my discretion. 
The plaintiff submitted that the Court of Appeal specifically considered the costs of the summary judgment application and made no costs orders in that respect. However, it is clear that the Court of Appeal, in finding that there was a triable issue on this point and remitting it for determination, left open the possibility of reviewing the costs order by Debelle AJ after the issue had been tried. This is the usual practice. The plaintiff also submitted that the defendants should not "be permitted to remedy early costs penalties well after the event, by curing deficiencies in their earlier evidence or case". This submission fails to take into account my finding that the plaintiff did more than just make a claim that he knew was false, but also relied on his fraudulent conduct in obtaining finance from the Bank of Queensland. That the defendants were circumspect in making an allegation of fraud reflects only the care with which the serious allegation was made, in the context of the considerable extent to which the plaintiff went to support his case.
The costs order made by Debelle AJ should be set aside and substituted with an order that the defendants pay 50% of the plaintiff's costs in respect of the application for summary judgment. This amount reflects the fact that the plaintiff was successful in respect of other items claimed in the summary judgment application. 
Stay of execution
I accept that the plaintiff's entitlement to 50% of its costs incurred in relation to the hearing before Debelle AJ should be assessed forthwith. So should the assessment of the defendants' entitlement to their costs in relation to the separate questions determined by me. I refuse the plaintiff's application for a stay of those costs orders until after the final resolution of the balance of the proceedings. The separate questions are sufficiently discrete elements of the proceedings to enable the costs assessment in relation to them to be undertaken conveniently before the conclusion of the proceedings: Fiduciary Ltd versus Morningstar Research Pty Ltd <case>; <case>- <case> and [28]-[29], delaying costs orders in relation to a determined separate question does not assist the just, quick and cheap resolution of the real issues in the proceedings. A discrete aspect of the proceedings has been determined finally and the consequent liability for costs should not be left in limbo: Fiduciary versus Morningstar at 4 (Barrett J). * * * 
