

Wily and Anor versus Thomson Media Group Pty Ltd Matter No 3850/97 [1997] NSWSC (4 December 1997) ` 
Andrew Hugh Jenner Wily & Anor versus Thomson Media Group Pty Ltd` ` 3850/97` `4 December 1997` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales` `  `
 `3850/97 - ANDREW HUGH JENNER WILY & ANOR versus THOMSON MEDIA GROUP PTY
LIMITED` `  `
 `JUDGMENT` 
HIS HONOUR: It is unnecessary to delve closely into this litigation because the motion that is before the Court, which was filed by the defendants on 22 October 1997, asks whether there is a binding contract whereby the litigation has been settled between them. The position the defendants take is that they want specific performance of that agreement. 
The plaintiff, who is the liquidator of a company that in its lifetime was called Equine Press Pty Limited, denies that the litigation has been settled and asks that directions be given so that the original litigation can proceed.

The settlement, if it be that, is set out in a very elementary way in the defendants' solicitor's affidavit of 22 October 1997. The liquidator wrote, making an offer as follows: "Our clients are prepared to make an offer to settle the proceedings on the following terms: 
The mastheads for the publications 'Australian Horse News' and 'Sire's
Guide' are to be transferred to the control of Mr Hugh Wily, as the liquidator of Equine Press Pty Limited.

The Summons filed 3 September 1997 be dismissed with no order as to costs, save and except for the costs orders of His Honour Mr Justice Santow on 26
September 1997, which is to stand." 
The reply was: "We are instructed to accept your clients' offer...".

There is no doubt that that correspondence displays all the external signs of the making of an agreement in that there is an offer and corresponding acceptance. The contract, if it exists, was that the mastheads for the two publications I have mentioned were to be transferred to the liquidator. There were four defendants. However, the power behind the defendants' camp, as far as I can see, is the administrator of the first defendant and I will, in these reasons, simply refer to those interests as "the administrator".

The administrator says that there was a contract for settlement which should be enforced. He says that the policy adopted by the courts is to shy away from the proposition that an apparently serious commercial bargain is a nullity at law; a fortiori this is so in the case of a contract to settle litigation. He says that there was a complete contract here and it should be enforced. The liquidator says there was no contract. His counsel, Mr Chippindall, said that there was no meeting of minds and thus no consensus ad idem, or alternatively, there was an operative mistake.

The central problem is that it would seem that the parties had different matters in mind when they contracted about the "masthead" in respect of publications. There is some ambiguity about that term. There is some material to suggest that the liquidator thought he was buying the right not only to use the design that featured at the top of the front page of each of the publications, but also buying the right to use the name, and that the administrator thought he was only selling the design and intellectual property rights but not the right to use the name. In fact, the evidence discloses that at no stage did the administrator or the defendants own the business names which are featured on the masthead but that one of the defendants, Owen Mackay
Thomson, is the proprietor of the business name "Australian Horse News Sire's
Guide" and that "Australian Horse News" as a business name was deregistered on August 1996, though it was once controlled by Hamish Thomson who was the son of Owen Mackay Thomson. No-one seemed to have any trademark or industrial design in respect of the masthead.

Miss McDonald, for the administrator, points to the definition of "masthead" at page 1077 of the Macquarie Dictionary as: "A statement printed at the top of the front page in all issues of a newspaper, magazine, etc., giving the name, owner, staff etc".

There does not appear to be any definition in any Australian case. The word "masthead" is defined in vol 26A of the United States book on Words and
Phrases (West, St Paul 1953). The only case referred to is American
Photographic Publishing Co versus Ziff-Davis Publishing Co [127 F (2d) 308] (1942), and on appeal, [135 F (2d) 569], 572 (1943). I have read those judgments, the first instance decision being from a Court of Customs and Patent Appeals and the appeal decided by the 7th Circuit of the US Court of Appeals in 1943. They really do not seem to take the matter much further than the Macquarie dictionary definition.

Miss McDonald also cited two recent cases which dealt with mastheads: Peter
Isaacson Publications Pty Ltd versus Nationwide News Pty Ltd [(1984) 6 ATPR -499], in which Beaumont J dealt with the masthead of two rival newspapers called "Sunday Territorian" at pages 45,738-45,739 and Commercial
Dynamics Pty Ltd versus M Hawke Nominees Pty Ltd [(1996) 18 ATPR 41-503], dealing with the masthead of the "Canberra Trading Post" and the "Local
Trading Post" in the ACT, but these, again, do not take the matter any further.

The parties did not define what they thought was meant by "masthead". I do not really consider that it matters very much what the definition of masthead is because I believe that when one looks at the contract as a whole, including the implied terms, the property that was sold is fairly clear.

Miss McDonald objects to me deciding this matter on the basis of an implied term because she points out that none of the criteria set out in BP Refinery
Pty Ltd versus Hastings SC (1977) 180 CLR 266, 283 are established.
That may or may not be so but, with respect, her submission really misses the mark because the relevant term here is one implied by law. See Liverpool
City Council versus Irwin <case>; [[1977] AC ] and particularly Mears versus Safecar Security Ltd [[1983] QB 54], 78, where
Stephenson LJ said: "There are contracts which establish a relationship...which demand by their nature and subject matter certain obligations, and those obligations the general law will impose and imply, not as satisfying the business efficacy or officious bystander tests applicable to commercial contracts where there is no such relationship, but as legal incidents of those other kinds of contractual relationship. In considering what obligations to imply into contracts of these kinds which are not complete, the actions of the parties may properly be considered. But the obligation must be a necessary term; that is, required by their relationship. It is not enough that it would be a reasonable term." 
I also considered this type of implied term in Carlton & United
Breweries Ltd versus Tooth & Co Ltd [(1986) 7 IPR 581], 605. The decision in that case did not survive unscathed in the Court of Appeal, but that passage did.

The reference to relationships might at first sight seem to indicate that one is not dealing with the ordinary contract between buyer and seller. However, if one looks at some of the examples, such as the Carlton & United
Breweries case, but more particularly the leading case of Trego versus Hunt [[1896] AC 7], it can be seen that the principle is of quite a wide application. In Trego v
Hunt it was made clear that whenever a person sells a business, the seller also sells the goodwill even though it is not particularly mentioned in the contract, so that if the seller commences a business which eats away the rights that he or she has sold, then there can be an injunction. As other judges have said, the principle is really just another illustration of the concept that a grantor shall not derogate from the grant. See, for instance,
Harmer versus Jumbil (Nigeria) Tin Areas Ltd [[1921] 1 Ch 200], 225-6. Thus a person who sells a masthead but does not confer the necessary right to use the name gives with one hand yet takes away with another.

Accordingly, in my view whatever the meaning of the word "masthead", any contract by which it was sold required the administrator to pass to the liquidator the right to use, not only the designs, but also the names.

The mere fact that someone has a business name, as distinct from a trademark or industrial design, does not confer on the proprietor of the business name any particular rights other than those which are actually set out in the [Business Names Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/bna1962168/). If a person is seeking to protect a name, the action is either an action in passing off or an action in deceit. For the former, there must be more than mere registration of a business name. Goodwill in the name must be demonstrated; see Warwick Tyre Co Ltd versus New Motor & General Rubber Co Ltd [[1910] 1
Ch 248], -6 and Linell on Names (Butterworths, London, 1938) at page 128.

Even if the implied term in the Trego versus Hunt sense was not included, in my view there would surely be a warranty to title to use the name as part of the design in what might be called the masthead proper.

With that analysis, many of the problems in the case are swept away but I should deal with them because they were the subject of learned and skilful argument by both counsel.

Really, the conclusion I have come to means in one sense both parties lose, in that the contention made initially by each of them has not been accepted. I do not feel particularly concerned about that because as Lord Wilberforce said in Saif Ali versus Sydney Mitchell & Co [[1980] AC 198], 212: "Judges are more than mere selectors between rival views - they are entitled to and do think for 'themselves'." 
I agree with Miss McDonald's submission that the Courts do tend to lean towards finding that there is a contract where parties have apparently made a bargain, either by exchange of letter, or by shaking hands, or otherwise showing that commercially or even domestically they have settled their differences. There are well-known authorities which support that view, the most quoted of which of course is Upper Hunter County District Council v
Australian Chilling and Freezing Co Ltd <case>; [(1968) 118 CLR 429], 437, and see also the test laid down by Hope JA in
Biotechnology Australia Pty Ltd versus Pace [(1988) 15 NSWLR 130], 143, which shows the limits to which the Court will go.

Miss McDonald also referred to the unreported decision of the Court of Appeal in Geebung Investments Pty Ltd versus Varga Group Investments No 8 Pty Ltd, 11
October 1995 unreported. In that case Kirby P, at pages 41 and 42 of his judgment, usefully sets out a series of principles which the Court applies as guidelines when looking at this sort of problem. Having referred to the general principle, his Honour said at par 3 on page 42: "This principle is particularly applicable to the settlement of contentious litigation. ...
Settlement of litigation is generally welcomed and facilitated by courts.
... Courts should avoid adopting a re-interpretation of the facts of an alleged agreement which undoes settlement of litigation, formerly arrived at.
..." 
His Honour then referred to the facts of the case and continued at page 43: "Here the actual parties to the dispute deliberately met together. They settled their dispute. They did so to avoid litigation. It will be a serious wrong in this case if the law were to deny the parties that facility...".

Of course, every case is different and those principles are merely guidelines as to how the matter is approached. Essentially the matter is one of fact as to whether the parties have settled litigation by a binding contract. However, in dealing with that question of fact, those observations are helpful. Indeed,
I applied a similar type of approach recently in Juhlin versus Foley (31
October 1997, unreported).

As I have said, in the instant case there is sufficient indicia to show that the parties intended to contract. Did then the problems that I have referred to and the views that the different parties took of the word "masthead" mean that that intention was not fulfilled? I should point out that there is actually very little evidence to demonstrate that the liquidator and the administrator did in fact have different views as to what was bought or sold, but I would proceed on the basis that this is so, because, in the end result, it makes little difference.

The academics have worried for centuries over what happens in commerce when X makes an offer which is ambiguous and Y accepts it in circumstances where Y puts on X's words a reasonable construction, but not the one which was X's intention. The classic way of dealing with that sort of problem is to say that if X seeks to enforce the contract as X meant it, X must demonstrate that his meaning is so clear that Y cannot be heard to say otherwise. That proposition really comes from Falck versus Williams <case>; [(1925) 36 CLR 60], 69, when discussing the decision of the Court below, that decision meant that wherever words: "are reasonably capable of more than one meaning, evidence is admissible to show what meaning each party attached to the words when signing, although his understanding of the meaning was not communicated to the other party. The corollary is that unless both parties understood the words in the same sense, they were not ad idem and there is no contract".

The learned Chief Justice then went on to say: "I find myself unable to assent to this proposition, which seems to me not to be warranted either on principle or by authority".

If, however, one applies the principle in Falck versus Williams in every case, one could possibly get into a situation where neither party if he or she bore the onus could actually win the case. I do not think this has ever happened in practice but it is a theoretical possibility.

In recent days it seems to me the courts have emphasised with greater vigour the principle that the courts should, whenever possible, interpret what the parties meant by a term, usually by working out what a reasonable person would objectively have thought the parties would have meant and it is rare indeed that the solution will be reached where the Court will say that the parties were so far apart that there should be no contract, but the most recent case tending in this direction is the High Court's decision in Collector of
Customs versus Agfa-Gevaert Ltd <case>; [(1997) 71 ALJR 123], 127.

This seems to me to be the approach taken by the High Court in Taylor v
Johnson <case>; [(1983) 151 CLR 422], in which it considers that there is almost always a contract in this type of situation and one then works out whether there should be equitable relief given under the doctrine of mistake.

The case that tends in the other direction is the well-known case of Raffles v Wichelhaus <case>; [(1864) 2 H & C 906]; 159
ER 375. The case involved two ships, each proceeding from Bombay to England, carrying cotton and each called "Peerless", one which left in October and one which left in December. It is very sketchily reported, but the real significance of it is thoroughly dealt with by Professor A W B Simpson in his
Leading Cases in the Common Law (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1996) at pages and following. It would seem that the most important fact not set out in the judgment is that there was a great fall in the price of cotton between
October and December in the year in question. The standard exegesis of that case for many years was that if one did not have a meeting of the minds as to which ship was meant, as in Raffles'case, there is just no contract. I considered Raffles versus Wichelhaus very carefully in Borg versus Howlett, the interlocutory injunction decision being handed down on 24 April 1996 and the final injunction being dealt with on 24 May 1996, as yet unreported. The conclusion I came to at page 5 of the second judgment was that unless there are such serious problems of interpreting the contract, and the equivocation is so serious that the gap which the parties have left cannot be filled in, then there is a contract and the contract must be enforced as interpreted by the Court. As that judgment shows, it was greatly influenced by the article by
Professor William F Young Jr, "Equivocation In the Making of Agreements" [(1964) 64 Columbia Law Review 619], particularly at 642-647. The article discusses many of the cases that have been decided in England and America up until that time and reaches the proposition that I set out in Borg versus Howlett. At 647, the
Professor says: "The courts should use restraint in applying the rule of the Peerless case, and over the first century of its history most of them have done so.
I make a count of fewer than a dozen reported cases in which the use of equivocal terms thwarted a clear intention to contract, and some five others in which the rule was applied with some justification. Courts not yet convinced of the necessity of confining it to exceptional situations should take note of the conclusion of contemporary linguistic studies that vagueness is a pervasive and nearly ineradicable quality of language. Realizing this they will understand that the effective administration of contract law requires disputes about meaning to be resolved by processes of interpretation and construction unless there is no sensible basis for choosing between conflicting understandings of the agreement. Only when this last point is reached may a court fairly say that, because of an equivocation, no contract exists...".

In the instant case, as I have said, the processes of interpretation are able to give meaning to the contract.

Mr Chippindall also relied on mistake. However, I cannot see here that mistake is a defence to actions on the contract generally. One really has to look at the matter in two sections. First, the general law of mistake, and secondly, mistake as a defence to proceedings for specific performance. In the first, one usually has to find some matter which affects the conscience of the person seeking to enforce the contract and which makes it unfair that the contract should be enforced in the form in which the "plaintiff" would have it enforced. I cannot see anything in the conduct of the administrator or his solicitor which would enable me to form the view that there was that type of mistake.

Mistake is also a defence to specific performance. If parties are at cross- purposes, the Court may well decline to give specific performance and leave the parties to their rights at law. See Boulas versus Angelopoulos (1991) 5 BPR as an example.

I also dealt with this problem in the second judgment in Borg versus Howlett.
However, it should be noted that authorities such as Tamplin versus James [(1880) 15 Ch D 215], which have stood as good law for over a century and which are instantly applied, limit quite severely the situations in which the Court will decline to give specific performance because of some misunderstanding and usually it is only if the misunderstanding was brought about by the plaintiff or if the plaintiff knew or ought to have known of the defendant's mistake but did nothing about it, that the Court will decline specific performance. In any event, the only consequence is that damages must be paid, rather than specific performance.

Having found that there was a contract subject to the Trego versus Hunt type term, the end to the problem posed in the notice of motion is that there is a contract and thus the parties' former rights of action, which were the subject of the current litigation, have been subsumed in the contractual regime which they have set up. Accordingly, the liquidator's submission that the current litigation should proceed, must fail.

The contract as originally sought to be enforced by the administrator also cannot be enforced because that was not the contract. When I indicated this last week, Miss McDonald took instructions and said that the administrator was prepared to perform the contract as the Court has now declared it to be. Mr
Chippindall then took instructions and this morning informed me that the liquidator is also prepared to carry out the contract.

Thus, there can be a declaration that the contract as found in these reasons ought to be specifically performed; an order that further consideration be reserved as to what directions should be made to implement the order for specific performance and that, I think, only leaves the matter of costs.

The formal orders are then that I make orders 1, 2, 3 and 4 in the notice of motion, deleting from order 4 the words "until 8th October 1997", and I order that further consideration of the implementation of order 1 be reserved and any exhibits can be retained.
 * * * 
