

Wood versus Ansett Transport Industries Operation Pty Ltd Matter No 10329/92 [1997] NSWSC 651 (15 December 1997) 
Robert William Wood versus Ansett Transport Industries Operations Pty Ltd /92 December 1997 
Howie AJ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
This is a claim for damages for personal injury arising from an incident which occurred on 14 September 1990. There is no doubt that the plaintiff did suffer an injury as a result of an accident during the course of his employment, however, there is a dispute as to the circumstances in which the plaintiff came to be injured and whether the defendant was liable for the injuries sustained by the plaintiff. There is also a dispute as to the quantum of any damages to be awarded to the plaintiff if I found that the defendant was liable for those injuries.

At the time of the incident, which gives rise to the causes of action, the plaintiff was employed on a probationary basis with a freight company called
MSAS Cargo International Pty Ltd (MSAS). As part of the duties of his employment as a truck driver and warehouseman, the plaintiff was required to attend at premises owned and controlled by the defendant in order to load freight. Notwithstanding that the plaintiff was not employed by the defendant in any way, the plaintiff's action is based principally upon an allegation that the defendant failed to provide the plaintiff with a safe work place and a safe system of work. The plaintiff claims that the defendant was in breach of two provisions of the Factory, [Shops and Industries Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/saia1962237/). It is also alleged that the defendant was in breach of a common law duty of care owed by the defendant to the plaintiff. The plaintiff accepts that in determining the issue of damages I am to apply the provisions of the [Motor
Accidents Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/).

The facts of the matter are in a very short compass. On or about 10 September the plaintiff began working for MSAS. He was engaged on a 3-month probationary period. As part of his employment he was required to attend the airport to pick up freight from the defendant's storehouse and take it back to the premises operated by MSAS. The plaintiff worked alone and drove a tabletop truck. The freight, which was to be loaded on to the truck, was of two types - bulk pallets, where the whole of the pallet was loaded on to the truck by one of the defendant's forklifts, and individual cartons which had to be taken from pallets and manually placed on the truck by the plaintiff himself.

On 14 September 1990 the plaintiff drove to the defendant's premises and parked at a bay. The freight was brought to the place where the truck had been parked by a forklift operated by an employee of the defendant. The freight loaded first was made up of four or five bulk pallets. The plaintiff gave evidence that when the first two pallets were brought by the forklift to the truck, on each occasion the driver placed the pallet on the ground in such a manner that the pallet overturned onto its side. The plaintiff said that he was required to get off the truck and push the pallet upright so that the forklift operator could place the tines of the forklift through the base of the pallet in order to lift it onto the back of the plaintiff's truck. He said that these incidents led him to doubt the competence of the forklift operator.

However, the plaintiff gave evidence that the remaining bulk pallets were placed on the truck without further incident. His said that a number of pallets were then brought out which were stacked with individual cartons.
These pallets were standard size whereas the bulk pallets had been narrower.
The appellant individually removed the cartons from the pallets and stacked them on the back of the truck. He thought that there were five or six pallets of this kind. The plaintiff said that he indicated to the forklift operator that he should raise the pallet level with the side of the plaintiff's truck and at a height of about three foot from the top of the back of the truck, level with the plaintiff's groin and about eight feet from the warehouse floor. The plaintiff said that with the pallets maintained in this position, he unloaded each individual carton of freight onto the tabletop truck, starting behind the cabin and working to the back of the truck. During this process he was at times standing on cartons which he had already placed on the truck.

The plaintiff's evidence was that in the course of unloading either the fifth or sixth pallet of loose cartons, he reached the position where there was only one carton remaining on the pallet. He said the package was at the back of the pallet, near the guard of the forklift. He estimated that the package was two foot square and the pallet was about four foot deep. He said that as he stood at the edge of the truck with his groin against the pallet he tried to reach the carton but was unable to touch it. He then put his left foot on to the pallet and pushed himself up. He said that he brought his right foot up onto the pallet and, as he leant forward to take hold of the carton, the pallet tilted to the left. The plaintiff said he lost his balance, tried to turn around to get back on the truck but fell to the left between the truck and the pallet. He landed on his right hand side on the floor of the warehouse. He said that when he looked up, the pallet was hanging straight down in a vertical position on one tine of the forklift.

The plaintiff described where exactly he had climbed on to the pallet. He said that he placed his left foot on the front of the pallet just to the left of the middle. In cross-examination he said that he did not step on the very edge of the pallet but roughly between the centre and the outside edge. He confirmed that the pallet tipped to the left as his right foot came onto the pallet. It was put to him that the accident occurred when he slipped on the boxes that he had already loaded on to the truck and that he fell on to the pallet before landing on the ground. The plaintiff denied that this was the way in which the accident occurred. He agreed that just before he fell he had been standing on cartons on the edge of the truck about three feet above the truck's tray. He also agreed that he was at the time of the incident the holder of a forklift operator's licence and that he knew that he should not climb onto a raised pallet on a forklift.

As a result of the plaintiff's fall he suffered a fracture of the right neck of the femur of his right leg. The fracture was treated by the insertion of a hip screw and plate, which the plaintiff still retains. When seen by his treating surgeon Dr Pollack shortly before the hearing, the plaintiff was still complaining of some throbbing in his leg associated with cold weather, prolonged walking or carrying heavy weights. However, Dr Pollack considered that his prognosis was fair to good. Generally the plaintiff appears to have made an excellent recovery from the injury but there is a dispute between the parties as to the impact of the injury on his capacity to work. The plaintiff's only complaint in evidence was that he suffers from intermittent pain after working for two full days, but he said that with rest the pain disappears over night. Although he feels that the injury has limited his involvement in sports and leisure activities, this appears to be a result of his concern about further injury to his leg rather than any inability to actually carry out the activities in which he was involved prior to the accident. The impact upon his enjoyment of life appears to be a modest one.

In support of his version of how he fell, the plaintiff called an expert witness, Dr Adams, a specialist in ergonomics and occupational safety. A report prepared by Dr Adams was tendered and this report was supplemented by oral evidence given by him. The plaintiff's version of the incident was put to the witness on the basis that he should assume that those were the facts which led to the plaintiff falling to the ground and he was asked to express a view as to the cause of the pallet tipping, as the plaintiff said it did. Dr Adams said that, assuming that the plaintiff had stepped onto the pallet in the direction with the forklift facing him, the pallet tipped because the tines of the forklift would have been too close together in relation to the width of the pallet. The width between the two tines of the forklift can be varied depending upon the size of the pallet to be transported. In the case of a pallet, such as the plaintiff said was used for the loose cartons, the tines should have been set at 90 centimetres apart. In Dr Adams' opinion, if the tines were set at 60 centimetres (as may have been the case for the bulk pallets), a standard pallet would become unstable if any significant force were placed near the outer edge of the pallet. Dr Adams came to the view that the tines must have been much closer together than 90 centimetres for the plaintiff's weight to have caused the pallet to tip to one side.

In his report, Dr Adams set out what he believed to have occurred diagrammatically by representing one of the forklift's tines as the fulcrum of a lever and the edge of the pallet as the place where the plaintiff stepped onto it. If the tines were set at 60 centimetres for a standard pallet, then on his calculations a force of 85 kgs or more applied to the outer edge of the pallet would cause the pallet to tip on that fulcrum to the side to which the force had been applied. On the other hand, if the tines were set at 90 centimetres a force of over 300 kgs would need to be applied to the edge of the pallet before it would tip. This led Dr Adams to conclude that, if the pallet tipped, it was because the tines were at 60 centimetres and the plaintiff (who weighed more than 85kgs) had stepped onto the very edge of the pallet.

The difficulty with Dr Adams' opinion as to the reason why the pallet tipped is that it does not accord with the evidence of the plaintiff. Even in the account of the plaintiff's version he gives at the start of his report under the heading "The assumptions on which this report is based", there is no reference to the plaintiff having stepped onto the very edge of the pallet.
Further, the assumption that anybody would step on the to very edge of the pallet in the situation in which the plaintiff found himself seems to me to be an affront to common sense. Even on the version of the facts contained in the report, it would hardly be logical for the plaintiff, when confronted with a parcel at the very back and roughly in the centre of the pallet, to mount the pallet on the very side edge of it in order to lean across to take hold of the parcel. It seems to me that the most immediate reaction of a person in the position of the plaintiff would be to mount the pallet opposite the parcel so that it was at the point closest to him when he reached across.

In any case the evidence of the plaintiff is clear. He stepped on to the pallet about half way between the centre of the pallet and the left hand side.
As the relationship between the tines and the pallet is depicted in the diagrams contained in Dr Adams' report, this would be roughly in the position where one of the tines would be if they were set at 60 centimetres apart. Dr
Adams conceded that if force were applied at that position the pallet should not tilt. However, he made some suggestion, which was not followed up by either counsel, that his calculations would have been different if the tines of the forklift were not in the centre of the pallet as he assumed. There is no evidence of what force would be required to tip the pallet in those circumstances. In does not seem to me that the evidence of Dr Adams as it stands gives much support to the plaintiff. But neither does it necessarily lead to the conclusion that the plaintiff cannot be telling the truth. It is perhaps unfortunate that the matter was left in this state of uncertainty.

Generally I did not think that the plaintiff was being untruthful in the witness box. His version is not inherently improbable, but rather it has the ring of truth because he accepts that to mount the pallet was a dangerous act and one which he knew he should not have done. There is nothing to suggest any inconsistency in his accounts to the various experts he has been asked to see for the purpose of this action. Further, there is some support for his version that the pallet tipped in the fact that different size pallets were being used in loading the truck and that the first pallets were the smaller ones which would have required the tines of the forklift being set narrowly. This may explain why the tines were at their narrow setting notwithstanding that the pallet onto which the plaintiff stepped was of the normal size.

It was put on behalf of the defendant that I should not find that the plaintiff is telling the truth. The submission was based principally upon two matters in his evidence. Firstly, it was put that his account of being unable to reach the box was improbable given his physique and his estimations of the size of the parcel and the size of the pallet. But the improbability of this account is based upon accepting that his estimations of the size of the carton and the height and size of the pallet are accurate and I would not be prepared to act upon the basis that they are.

The other matter relates to one aspect of the plaintiff's evidence which I find troubling. I have already referred to his evidence that two of the bulk pallets were turned onto their sides by the forklift driver when he delivered them to the plaintiff's truck. Dr Adams had difficulty in explaining how this could have happened although he was prepared to accept that it was possible.
The evidence is to some extent a two-edged sword for the plaintiff. While on the one hand it perhaps supports his case in that it may enhance the prospect of a finding of negligence by the forklift operator, on the other hand it is surprising that, if these things happened and gave rise to a doubt in the mind of the plaintiff about the competence of the operator, the plaintiff would later mount the pallet on the assumption that the tines were appropriately spaced. It may be a relevant matter in any assessment of the issue of contributory negligence if that issue were to arise. But in the end I feel that I should accept the plaintiff's account because I find it improbable that the plaintiff, who has been an experienced forklift operator himself, would fabricate so unlikely a scenario.

The defendant submitted that in coming to a decision about the cause of the accident I should consider a document which was admitted into evidence in the defence case. The document purports to be a statement by the operator of the forklift. The document is unsigned and appears to represent the version of the witness as dictated to another person and then read back to the witness. That statement was tendered as first person hearsay on the basis that the witness was unavailable, see [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/s63.html) of the [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/).
Although no objection was taken to the form of the statement and it was assumed at the hearing that it was within the scope of [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/s63.html), on further consideration of the statement I doubt that it is first person hearsay and admissible under the section. However, I will put any question as to the admissibility of the document to one side and consider the contents of the document and the weight to be given to them. The statement gives a version of the incident which is to the effect that the plaintiff lost his footing on the cartons which he had stacked on the back of the truck. According to this statement the pallet was resting upon the edge of the truck in order to stabilize it but it was struck by the plaintiff when he fell which caused the pallet to dislodge from the tines of the forklift.

I do not find this material to be reliable at all and I could not give it any weight when determining how the plaintiff came to fall. The statement was made more than a year after the accident by a person who was involved in the incident and who clearly had a reason to attribute blame to the plaintiff. I have not had the opportunity of seeing the witness or even the person who took down the statement. The statement is unsigned and I know nothing about the circumstances in which the statement came to be made. I find it difficult to accept that the plaintiff's fall could have knocked the pallet of the forklift, particularly if it was resting on the side of the truck. There is a statement from Dr Adams in evidence in which he expresses the view that this could not have occurred. I should note that the plaintiff also maintains that after he fell he saw that the pallet had almost come off the tines. Again Dr
Adams found this difficult to explain unless the pallet had been damaged.
However, there is no suggestion that the pallet was damaged before the plaintiff fell and no such allegation is contained in the statement of the claim.

I have the general impression that the plaintiff was an honest witness and there is no other reliable account of the accident other than his version. As
I have said, that version seems to me to be generally credible and is to some extent against his interests in that it does not deny negligence on his part in mounting the pallet. Ultimately, applying the appropriate standard of proof, I believe that it is more likely than not that the plaintiff was injured in the way he says he was, that is that the pallet tilted when he put his full weight onto it in lifting himself onto the pallet from the truck. I find also that the tilting of the pallet caused him to lose his balance. It necessarily follows that, if the pallet tilted, it must have been by reason of the negligence of the forklift operator in the way he picked up the pallet.

The plaintiff contends that the system which operated in the defendant's warehouse for the loading of freight onto the plaintiff's truck was in breach of ss 38 and 40 of the Factories, [Shops and Industries
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/saia1962237/). There has been no dispute by the defendant that the Act does apply, although it was submitted on behalf of the defendant that these particular provisions do not operate to impose a liability on the defendant on the facts of this particular matter, whatsoever I might find those facts to be. In particular there was no dispute that the defendant's premises were a "factory" for the purposes of the
Act.

Section 38 of the Act is relevantly as follows: 
S 38 All goods, articles and substances which are stored or stacked in a factory shall be stored or stacked .....
 on firm foundations not liable to settle and in such manner as not to overload the floors; in such manner as will best ensure stability and prevent any collapse of such goods, articles or substances or their support,...

The plaintiff alleges that this section was breached because, the pallet having tipped, it could not be said that the goods on the pallet were on firm foundations nor (using the words of the section) were they stacked in a manner as would best ensure stability and prevent any collapse of their support. I doubt that this section has anything to do with the movement of goods around a factory floor. But there was nothing wrong with the stacking of the goods on the pallet and there was no suggestion that they were unstable in any way. Nor was there anything wrong with the pallet. The pallet tipped only because the plaintiff got on to it. I do not believe that this section applies to the factual situation in this case even giving the section the widest possible interpretation. In my opinion there was no breach of the section by the defendant.

It is next submitted that there was a breach of <case> of the Act. That section is relevantly as follows (1)There shall so far as reasonably practicable be provided and maintained in every factory safe means of access to every place at which any person has at any time to work.

The contention is that the plaintiff had to work at the pallet and the defendant was under a statutory duty to give him safe access to it. It is said that the defendant should have provided netting, rigging or bays so that the plaintiff could work safely at the pallet. The alleged breach of the section is said to have been occasioned by the fact that that the plaintiff was required by the defendant to work at height where he might fall. I do not believe that this is a correct interpretation of the factual situation in this case.

The section is normally concerned with stairs, ladders, corridors and the like, although I accept that it is not limited to such areas. But the section is concerned with safe means of access to the place of work and not the safety of the place of work itself. Safety of the work place is controlled by other provisions, such as <case>. The importance of distinguishing between the place of work, on the one hand, and means of access to the place of work, on the other, was made clear in Trimp versus S.A. Butler Pty Limited [[1964] NSWR ] at
Of course, whether the location of an industrial accident occurs at the place of work or at a point of access to a place of work is a matter of fact (or perhaps a mixed question of fact and law) to be determined upon the particular circumstances before the court. But the distinction is one which must be maintained and will normally be determined by a proper identification of the nature of the work with which the court is concerned: Australian Iron & Steel Pty Limited versus Luna <case>; [(1969) 44 ALJR 52] at 53.

In the present case the work which has to be considered was the unloading of the pallet and the loading of the truck. In my view the place of work was not the pallet itself but where the pallet was being unloaded. In this case it was the area on or around the truck. Depending upon the circumstances at any particular time, the place of work would have included the floor of the warehouse and the back of the truck. The pallet itself may have been part of the place of work although this was not necessarily so as it was not necessary that the person unloading the pallet mount the pallet as the plaintiff did.
However, in my view, it is artificial in the extreme to confine the place of work to the pallet itself. Certainly areas of the place of work may have given rise to some risk to the safety of the plaintiff because of the height at which the pallet had to be unloaded or the truck loaded, but that is not a matter with which <case> is concerned. Movements by the plaintiff around the truck and the pallet were in my view clearly movements around the place of work and not movements between different places of work.

The plaintiff's contention that the pallet should be considered as the place of work was in my view an attempt to circumvent the terms of <case>. That subsection requires that certain steps be taken to ensure the safety of a person required to work at height. But the section only applies where the person is liable to fall a distance of more than 3 metres and the evidence in the present case is that the plaintiff was never more than 3 metres above the ground, even when he mounted the pallet. Further, the contention is based upon an assumption that the defendant required that the plaintiff work at height by raising the pallet above the truck level. But that assumption is not correct.
The plaintiff's own evidence was that the pallet was brought to the truck and then it was for him to determine how he should unload it. There was no reason, except the plaintiff's own convenience, why the pallet could not have been unloaded on the floor of the warehouse and the parcels lifted onto the truck.
In my opinion the provisions of <case> have no application and, therefor, there was no breach of the section.

This then brings me to the cause of action based upon an alleged breach of a common law duty owed by the defendant to the plaintiff. The basis upon which it was said that the defendant owed a duty of care to the plaintiff was that the defendant was the occupier of premises upon which the plaintiff was working as an invitee. It was submitted that in the circumstances of this case the duty of care owed by the defendant to the plaintiff was akin to that which would flow from the relationship of employer and employee. Of course the plaintiff was not the employee of the defendant nor was he an independent contractor engaged in doing work for the defendant. Yet it was submitted that the high duty of care owed by an employer to those who are engaged in work on his or her behalf should apply between the defendant and the plaintiff because the plaintiff was on the defendant's premises as part of the defendant's business of moving freight.

Reliance was place upon the decision of the High Court in Stevens versus Brodribb
Sawmilling Co Pty Limited <case>; [(1985) 160 CLR 16], and in particular the passage in the judgement of Mason J at -31. It was held in that case that, although the duty to prescribe and provide a safe system of work has been regarded as one attaching to an employer, it is not confined to an employer. The duty in that case was owed by the defendant to the plaintiff notwithstanding that the plaintiff was an independent contractor doing work for the defendant. Mason J said: 
If an entrepreneur engages independent contractors to do work which might as readily be done by employees in circumstances where there is a risk to them of injury arising from the nature of the work and where there is a need for him to give directions as to when and where the work is to be done and to co- ordinate the various activities, he has an obligation to prescribe a safe system of work. The fact that they are not employees, or that he does not retain a right to control them in the manner in which they carry out their work, should not affect the existence of an obligation to prescribe a safe system.

Wilson and Dawson JJ at 45 found that there was a duty of care on the defendant to provide a safe system of work for independent contractors engaged by him although the extent of the duty would have to take into account the independent functions of the contractors and would be something less than that owed by an employer to his employees. Brennan J at 47 also noted that the duty of the entrepreneur to those who he engages to do work is more limited than that owed by an employer to an employee. Deane J found that there was a duty owed by the defendant to the plaintiff in that case not by reason of the status of the plaintiff but by applying the general law as to proximity when determining whether a duty of care was owed by one person to another.

I do not believe that there is anything in this case which requires that the defendant in this matter should be found to have had a duty to provide a safe system of work or a safe work place in relation to the plaintiff's task of loading cartons onto his truck from the pallet. Clearly the defendant, in relation to the plaintiff, was neither an employee nor an entrepreneur. All he did was to provide the plaintiff with access to the freight so that he could take possession of it on behalf of his employer, MSAS. In so far as this necessitated entry by the plaintiff into the warehouse then the defendant owed a duty of care to the plaintiff as occupier of their warehouse.

But I cannot find that the defendant owed any duty to provide the plaintiff with a safe system of work in taking possession of the cartons and in loading them onto the truck. It was not for the defendant to determine how the plaintiff would go about that task but rather that was a matter for the plaintiff's employer. Although it is not decisive on the issue, the defendant had no control over the manner in which the plaintiff loaded his truck. Nor was the defendant in a situation analogous to that of the defendant in
Stevens versus Brodribb Sawmilling Co Pty Limited. The task of the appellant in loading the cartons onto his truck was not part of the carrying out of the defendant's business as were the activities with which the High Court was concerned. There was no requirement here that the defendant co-ordinate the activities of his employee and that of the plaintiff. All that the defendant was obliged to do was to make the cartons available to the plaintiff so that he could take possession of them by loading them onto his truck. How he fulfilled that task was of no concern to the defendant, and he owed him no duty of care in relation to it. In any event, because the plaintiff was not an employee of the defendant nor was he engaged by him as an independent contractor, the standard of care owed by the defendant to the plaintiff was much more limited than that which would be owed by an employer to an employee: Quinn versus Rocla Concrete Pipes Ltd [(1986) 6 NSWLR 586.] 
In particular it was contended that the defendant was negligent in that it failed to provide any warning by way of notice or otherwise to the plaintiff as to the dangers of mounting the pallet. The plaintiff relies upon a comment by Dr Adams during the course of his cross-examination that it was common that workers stepped onto pallets in the course of loading or unloading boxes. The plaintiff's argument is that, in light of this common practice, the defendant should have foreseen the possibility that the plaintiff would mount the pallet and should have taken steps to warn the plaintiff not to do so. Whatever might be the merit of this argument generally or in some other factual situation, I do not believe that any warning to the plaintiff by way of a sign would have made the slightest difference in this case. The plaintiff was very well aware of the hazardous nature of what he did. I have no doubt that he was aware of the risks as he mounted the pallet, but he determined to run the risk in all the circumstances. He said in evidence he assumed the tines would have been in the proper place - that is that the pallet was stable on the forklift. This shows a conscious evaluation of the risk he was running even if that evaluation was almost instantaneous. To mount a pallet suspended above the ground was inherently hazardous and he knew that it was irrespective, of how the tines of the forklift were placed.

An employer is not obliged to give warnings of every possible danger, especially where the risk of injury is as apparent to the employee as it is to the employer: Raimondo versus State of South Australia [(1979) 23 ALR ]
at 518. Despite Dr Adams's general experience, there is nothing in this case to suggest that employees or other persons in this particular warehouse were making a practice of ignoring the obvious danger of mounting a pallet such that it give rise to a duty on the defendant to give such a warning: see
McLean's Roylen Cruises Pty Limited versus McEwan (1984) 58 ALJR 423 at 425. In any event the onus is on the plaintiff to show that the giving of a warning or the erection of signs would have protected him from danger: Vozza versus Tooth & Co Limited <case>; [(1964) 112 CLR 316] at 319. I am far from satisfied that this was so in this case. Nor did the forklift operator have any opportunity to take action or warn the plaintiff. The plaintiff had unloaded at least five pallets without having had the need to get onto a pallet. What he did was unexpected and immediate.

In my opinion the only basis upon which the defendant is liable to the plaintiff for the injuries sustained by him is by reason of the negligence of the forklift operator in not ensuring that the tines were set at a proper distance apart and placed in the centre of the pallet. The negligent lifting of the pallet was exacerbated by allowing the pallet to be suspended in the air and not placing it on the rim of the plaintiff's truck. This is notwithstanding that it was the plaintiff who directed the operator to place the pallet in that position. It was clearly foreseeable that, if the tines were not set to the proper width with the result that the pallet was unstable on the tines of the forklift, injury could be occasioned to a person who was working from the pallet.

Although I have found that the injuries to the plaintiff were occasioned as a result of the negligence of the defendant in my view there was contributory negligence by the plaintiff. The plaintiff was an experienced forklift operator himself. He was well aware at the time that he ought not to mount a suspended pallet because of the inherently hazardous nature of that activity.
He had control of where the pallet was placed and he had directed the forklift operator to place it where it was, at his groin level. He could easily have required that the pallet be lowered so that he could more easily reach the parcel. I cannot accept the submission that what he did was inadvertent. He made a conscious decision to get on the pallet even though that decision may have been made without much thought as to the danger involved by putting himself at risk of falling and on the assumption that the pallet itself was stable. I assess his contributory negligence as 30 per cent.

I should now return to the injuries suffered by the plaintiff and his personal circumstances in order to assess the quantum of damages flowing from my finding that the defendant was liable for the injuries occasioned by the plaintiff as a result of his fall from the pallet. The plaintiff was aged 40 years at the time of the accident, he having been born on 3 April 1950. Before he commenced work with MSAS in September 1990, the plaintiff had been employed in various occupations but from 1981 to 1988 he was engaged mainly in the transport industry driving trucks or forklifts. In 1988 he worked in a chemical factory but in that year voluntarily ceased that employment in order to take an extended holiday in Queensland. For some months he lived on his severance pay from an earlier position that he held with Comet Couriers. He returned to Sydney in 1989 to seek work. As I have indicated, in September he obtained employment with MSAS on a probationary basis.

As a result of the fall, the plaintiff suffered what was described by Dr
Pollack as "an angulated Garden III fractured subcapital right neck of femur with significant angulation". He was operated on almost immediately and a dynamic hip screw and plate system was used to fix the fracture. He was discharged from hospital on 26 October on crutches, that is after about six weeks after his admission. His period in hospital included some rehabilitation. In November 1990, when seen by Dr Pollack, the plaintiff complained of some pain after excessive walking or shopping. He had voluntarily ceased to use his crutches but Dr Pollack advised him to continue with their use although he found it inconvenient. In December of that year he was still complaining of pain when walking distances and he was advised to use a walking stick. In January of 1991 Dr Pollack considered that he would have been fit to return to work except for the fact that he was required to do some lifting and so it was considered that he would be unfit to return until the end of February that year. However in February the plaintiff was still complaining of pain and there was no significant improvement in the range of movement. As a result Dr Pollack considered that he should not return to work until the end of March 1991.

The plaintiff returned to rehabilitation in March 1991 at the Industrial Unit of the Rehabilitation Department of Royal South Sydney Hospital. Dr Jones of that unit assessed that he had made "an extraordinarily good recovery". The plaintiff complained to her only of mild discomfort in his hip if he twisted or walked in an unusual manner. He was not as dedicated to rehabilitation as he should have been and his attendance at the unit was described as "somewhat erratic" and his motivation as poor. But by 14 May of 1991 he was considered fit to return to work but was to avoid lifting or repetitive lifting greater than 22.5 kg. He returned to MSAS but there had been a downturn in work at that time and the plaintiff was made redundant effective from 24 May. There is no suggestion that he was laid off work because of his injury or any lack of physical capacity to do the work for which he had been employed. Any suggestion that the termination of the employment of the plaintiff was due to the fact that he was injured or that he had been on workers compensation payments was specifically refuted by Mr Wolf, the Human Resources and Quality
Manager for MSAS, who was called by the plaintiff.

After he left MSAS the plaintiff was unemployed until January 1992 when he obtained a position as a labourer with a firm of recyclers. He lost that position after 10 days mainly because he was absent for a time with the flu and when he returned to work he was retrenched. Although he gave evidence that the nature of the work placed undue stress upon his leg and caused him discomfort, the fact is that the loss of that employment was unconnected with his injury or any limitation on his capacity to perform manual work. From
January 1992 until October 1994 he remained unemployed and was in receipt of unemployment benefits. However, to his credit, he sought to be retrained through the Commonwealth Employment Service and undertook courses in the hope of obtaining work in the security industry or as a nursing aid. Unfortunately he was unsuccessful in obtaining such employment because of his lack of experience in these fields.

In September 1993 he was seen by Dr Mendelsohn for the purpose of preparing a report. The plaintiff still complained of some discomfort in his hip and groin and said that he limped when he became tired. The results of his surgery were described by the doctor as excellent with only a slight restriction in the hip and a slight limp being evident. The doctor estimated that the plaintiff had lost about 15% of the permanent effective use of his right lower leg, however, he was found to be fit for most duties except those which involved heavy lifting. In October 1993 the plaintiff was again seen by Dr Pollack. He complained of a limp and some pain to the groin. Dr Pollack thought that he had a percentage loss of efficient use of his right lower limb of 15%.
Although he was fit for light duties the plaintiff remained unemployed for the rest of 1993 and the early part of 1994.

In May 1994 he was seen by Dr Roebeck for the purposes of preparing a report for the court. He formed the view that the plaintiff had a permanent disability as a result of the accident and that he had a 22% permanent loss in the efficient use of his right leg at and above the knee. Dr Roebeck thought he was fit for light work but not work involving heavy or repetitive leg movements or walking. In October of that year the plaintiff obtained employment as a courier driver. However he lost that position because of a bout of tennis elbow in March 1995. He was placed on sickness benefits for a period but then returned to unemployment benefits in the middle of 1996. In
March 1996 he was again seen by Dr Pollack for assessment of his then current position. The plaintiff complained of groin pain and reported that he limped when carrying and occasionally when walking. There was little change found in his capacity to work and it was thought that he should avoid a position requiring heavy lifting, jumping or jarring. In May of that year he was reviewed by Dr Mendelsohn. The doctor reported that the plaintiff had a slight limp but otherwise had made a good recovery. Dr Pollack and Dr Mendelsohn both came to the conclusion that he was unfit to return to his pre-injury employment.

In April 1997 the plaintiff obtained a permanent casual position working two days a week as a driver with Overseas Shipping and Services Pty Limited, his current employer. He drives a truck and forklift moving containers and is not required to do any manual lifting. He says that he still gets pains in his legs and groin after working two days straight but the pain goes in a short period with rest. He takes no pain killers of any kind for this pain, even though he will take Panadol for headache. In August 1997 he was seen by Dr
Rockman on behalf of the defendant. The doctor reported that he observed no obvious limp and that the plaintiff had good movement in his lower limbs. Dr
Rockman believed that the plaintiff had made an excellent recovery and could return to duties as a truck driver although he should avoid lifting objects more than 15-25kgs. The doctor found that the plaintiff was suffering no pain or discomfort at the time of the examination but he accepted that it was feasible that he could have intermittent pain and discomfort.

I have earlier described the effects of the plaintiff's injury on his general enjoyment of life as being modest. Although he says that he can no longer participate in certain activities which he occasionally enjoyed before he suffered his injury, such as water skiing, playing touch football, surfing or tenpin bowling, these were not activities which were central to his recreational time prior to the accident. Certainly these are activities which he should now not undertake if he wished to do so, but I do not believe that the loss of these activities to the plaintiff is very significant in his case.
Although he still suffers some discomfort, it is relatively minor in its impact on his general ability to carry out his normal daily activities. He does not need to take analgesics and has not done so since shortly after the injury was sustained. However, this is not to indicate that the injury was not a serious one and that for a period after the accident it was very debilitating. The injury and its impact upon his enjoyment of life are probably permanent. But even so, in my opinion, the impact is not now, and will not be in the future, a substantial one.

It has been accepted by the parties that I should apply the provisions of the [Motor Accidents
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/), and in particular [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s79.html)
There is no doubt that the plaintiff's ability to live a normal life has been significantly impaired for a period of not less than 6 months. I do not understand Mr Parsons, for the defendant, to contend otherwise. I calculate that impairment as against a most extreme case as 25 per cent. Applying the relevant table, that is that applicable to an accident which occurred before September 1995, this means I should award a sum for general damages in an amount of $48,250.

The plaintiff was effectively unfit to return to work until May 1991. On behalf of the plaintiff it was submitted that I should calculate his past wage loss on the basis of the difference between, on the one hand, the amount he would have earned had he continued at MSAS in the position he was prior to the accident and, on the other hand, that which he would have earned had he been employed as a light truck driver working three days a week. The medical evidence is consistently that the plaintiff has been unfit to return to employment which requires him to lift heavy weights but that he is fit to work as a truck driver involving light to medium physical work.

Although I think that this is generally the appropriate way to determine his past loss of earning capacity due to his injury, I cannot accept the submission that I should calculate the amount on the basis that he could only work three days out of five. Although the plaintiff gave evidence suggesting that he was only capable of working a three day week, I do not accept that evidence. He worked full-time between October 1994 and March 1995 as a courier without difficulty except that he suffered from an injury unrelated to the injuries suffered in the accident. The medical evidence does not suggest that he is fit only to work three days a week. Further in relation to his current employment it was not his evidence that he was working only one or two days a week because he was incapable of working more days than this. Rather I had the impression that this is the only work available to him. His evidence was only that after working two days in his current position he gets some pain, depending upon how much lifting he does, but that the pain subsides after a short period in the evening and the next morning he is fit to work again. I have taken into account this discomfort in calculating his non-economic loss but it does not seem to me that I should treat him as having been incapacitated to the extent that he could not work a full week in his current position or any other position involving light duties as a truck driver or forklift operator.

Since May 1991 the plaintiff was fit to work in light duties but he says that unfortunately he was unable to find such work. He lost the position at MSAS not because of the accident although he would have been unable physically to continue in that employment in any event. He is entitled to the loss of wages from the accident until he was fit for work. I have calculated this as 38 weeks at a net salary of $445.44. On my calculations this is an amount of $16,926. Although on behalf of the defendant it is put that I should take into account, when calculating past and future wage loss, that the plaintiff was not anxious to work full time, I am not prepared to accept that submission. I do not believe that there is evidence which indicates an unwillingness to work full time if appropriate work were available. I think the most appropriate way to deal with this matter is by giving a buffer to take into account the loss of his capacity to work in the type of work he was employed in at the time of the accident. Taking the figures presented to me for what he would have earned at MSAS had he continued working there and taking into account what he could have earned as a Grade 2 truck driver (working for 5 days a week), less tax, for the period from 1 June 1991 to present, the appropriate amount is $62,000.
I also take into account in assessing the past economic loss $10,639 for hospital and medical expenses and $2274 for Fox versus Wood component. This a total for past economic loss of $91,839.

As to future economic loss, the only matter to be assessed is future loss in earning capacity. It seems to me that the appropriate figure is a buffer based upon the future loss by reason of his reduced earning capacity in that he is unlikely to be able to return to heavier work and will have to seek employment as a truck driver or a forklift operator. Again I am not prepared to assess his future loss on the basis that he is not capable of doing any more that three days work a week in the type of activity for which he is fit to work. I do take into account that over the period of 18 years of his remaining working life, he may, by reason of his more limited capacity, have difficulty finding work at times because of the nature of the employment which he is able to perform by reason of his limited skills and education. But he has experience in driving trucks and operating forklifts and has appropriate licence qualifications. He is capable of carrying out light courier work. I do not accept the submission that he was limited before the injury to performing heavy physical work and, therefore, the result of the injury was to significantly limit the type of work available to him. It seems to me that I should take a figure of $150 per week as being a fair estimation of the diminution in earning capacity for the period of 18 years, taking into account the 5 % discount factor and allowing 15% for vicissitudes of life. This gives a sum of approximately $80,000, which seems to me to be an appropriate amount for future economic loss.

The damages, therefore, should be $220,089 made up of the following amounts: general damages - $48,250 past economic loss - $91,839 future economic loss - $80,000.

In light of my finding that there was contributory negligence by the plaintiff of 30 per cent, judgement for the plaintiff should be for the sum of $154,062.30.

I order that judgement be entered in favour of the plaintiff for the sum of $154,062.30. The defendant is to pay the plaintiff's costs.
 * * * 
