

Regina versus D J K Matter No Cca 60354/96 [1997] NSWSC 465 (8 October 1997) 
Regina versus D J K /96 October 1997 
Hunt CJ at CL, Ireland J, Dunford J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal from District Court (Rummery QC DCJ) 
FILE NO/S: 60354 of 1996 
HEARING DATE/S: 2 October 1997 
DELIVERED: 8 October 1997 
PARTIES: REGINA versus D J K 
JUDGMENT OF: HUNT CJ at CL, IRELAND J, DUNFORD J 
COUNSEL: 
APPELLANT - MS Doyle 
RESPONDENT - RD Cogswell 
SOLICITORS: 
APPELLANT - Wiradjuri Aboriginal Legal Service 
RESPONDENT - SE O'Connor, Solicitor for Public Prosecutions 
RESULT: Appeal allowed; convictions quashed. New trial on third and fourth counts. 
CATCHWORDS: Criminal law and procedure - Child complainant gives evidence of events which took place a significant time ago - no complaint - judge gives direction in accordance with <case> of the [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) - no reference made to effect of delay upon credit of complainant - whether required in circumstances of the case - Regina versus Davies [(1985) 3 NSWLR 276] considered - Crown case relies solely upon evidence of child complainant - evidence given by accused denying her evidence - whether verdict of guilty must be deemed to be unsafe. 
No. of pages: 15 
REGINA versus D J K 
JUDGMENT 
HUNT CJ at CL: The appellant (DJK) was charged in the District Court at Lismore with one offence of indecent assault upon, and four offences of sexual intercourse with, his grand daughter (SLD).[1] The jury found him guilty of two of the sexual intercourse offences and not guilty of the remainder. Judge Rummery QC imposed two concurrent total sentences of penal servitude for five years, each consisting of a minimum term of two years and nine months and an additional term of two years and three months. 
The appellant subsequently stood trial in the District Court at Lismore upon a charge of indecent assault upon another grand daughter (KLS), a cousin of the first complainant, and another jury found him guilty of that charge also.
Judge Rummery imposed a fixed term of imprisonment for six months, to be served concurrently with the two terms of penal servitude.

The appellant has appealed against his convictions in both trials, and alternatively (in relation to the first trial only) he seeks leave to appeal against his sentence.

The Crown case in the first trial depended solely upon the evidence of the complainant (SLD). The judge described her as the "linchpin" of the Crown case. She gave evidence of the events which gave rise to each charge, and of other events with a sexual connotation which were admissible to make her evidence more credible in relation to the events upon which the charges were based,[2] and to place the evidence of those events into their true context as part of the essential background against which the evidence of the complainant and of the appellant necessarily fell to be evaluated.[3] 
The complainant was almost sixteen years old when she gave evidence, and she had made no complaint of any misconduct by the appellant until after a significant delay, and then only when she made a statement to the police.
There was some evidence which supported her evidence in peripheral matters, but none of a strictly corroborative nature. The appellant gave evidence denying any sexual relationship. There was no evidence of any admissions. It is unnecessary to go into any of the detail of the evidence tendered to establish the charges.

The indecent assault (which constituted the first count) was alleged to have occurred at some time during the first half of 1986, when the complainant was seven years old, about seven years before her complaint was made. The jury gave a verdict of not guilty in relation to this count. The first sexual intercourse (the second count) was alleged to have taken place in the second half of 1991, when the complainant was thirteen years old. It was a digital penetration. The jury again gave a verdict of not guilty. The next sexual intercourse (the third count) was alleged to have taken place at some time during 1992, when the complainant was either thirteen or fourteen years old.
It was a penile penetration. The jury gave a verdict of guilty. The next sexual intercourse (the fourth count) was alleged to have taken place between
July and September 1992, when the complainant was fourteen years old. It too was a penile penetration. The jury again gave a verdict of guilty. The last sexual intercourse (the fifth count) was alleged to have taken place at some time between July 1992 and July 1993, when the complainant was fourteen years old. It was a digital penetration. The jury gave a verdict of not guilty.

The appellant has filed three grounds of appeal against conviction. The first is that the verdicts were inconsistent. As is usual in such cases, it is argued that, as the jury did not accept the complainant's evidence in relation to three of the five charges, and as the remaining charges also depended solely upon the jury's acceptance of her evidence, the verdicts must have resulted from a compromise. To succeed in such an argument, the appellant must persuade this Court that the verdicts of guilty on the third and fourth counts cannot stand together with the verdicts of not guilty on the first, second and fifth counts - in the sense that no reasonable jury applying their mind properly to the facts of the case could have reached the conclusion that he was guilty of the offence charged in the two counts if he were not guilty on the other three counts.[4] 
In considering this issue of inconsistency, it is not the role of this Court to substitute its view of the facts for that view which was open to the jury.
Juries cannot always be expected to act in accordance with strictly logical considerations and with the strict principles of law which have been explained to them. This Court could in an appropriate case conclude that the verdicts of not guilty to some of the counts resulted from the jury's "merciful" view of the facts in relation to those counts, applying their innate sense of fairness and justice in place of the strict principles of law. Sometimes, it may appear to a jury that, although a number of counts have been technically established, justice is sufficiently met by convictions for less than the full number.
Appellate courts should not be too ready to conclude that, because different verdicts cannot be reconciled as a matter of strict logic, the jury had acted unreasonably in arriving at the verdict of guilty. Where, however, the different verdicts represent an affront to logic and common sense which is unacceptable and which strongly suggests a compromise of the performance of the jury's duty, and where intervention becomes necessary to prevent a possible injustice, the relevant conviction will be set aside.[5] Success upon this ground of appeal ordinarily leads to a new trial of the count or counts upon which the appellant was found guilty as a result of the compromise, although the relief which is appropriate in the particular case will depend upon the facts of that case.[6] 
All that is put on behalf of the appellant in the present case is that, as reliability was crucial to the complainant's evidence, consistency required that the lack of reliability flow through to all counts. That submission does not (with respect) meet the test of what is required. The way in which the trial proceeded demonstrates a quite rational explanation for the different verdicts. In his final address, the Crown prosecutor very fairly and properly said that there was little satisfactory evidence to establish just when the event giving rise to the second count had occurred, and he invited the jury to give to the appellant the benefit of the doubt and to find him not guilty on that count. In relation to the fifth count, he said that the jury may think that the evidence had not sufficiently proved that the event occurred within the period specified in the count, and again he invited the jury to give to the appellant the benefit of the doubt and to find him not guilty on that count as well.

In relation to the first count, the Crown prosecutor drew the attention of the jury to the fact that, at that time, the complainant was but a young child, although this was said in a context of explaining the difficulties which she would have had seven years later in identifying the time of the assault when she made her first complaint to the police. There is often a problem with the reliability of the evidence of child witnesses, and in particular where their evidence relates to events which are alleged to have taken place many years earlier. That is not to say that allowances for such unreliability should be made by the jury at the trial in determining whether the offences were committed, for the onus on the Crown remains one to persuade the jury of the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt, and evidence which is unreliable remains so whether given by an adult or a child. But the existence of the problem is relevant in determining whether a demonstrated unreliability of a child's evidence in relation to one matter should lead to a conclusion that the child's evidence in relation to other matters is dishonest.[7] 
The judge took up this issue in his summing up. In discussing the important distinction between the honesty and the reliability of a witness, the judge drew the attention of the jury to the time gap between when the event giving rise to the first count was alleged to have occurred and when the complainant spoke to the police. He suggested that they would keep that very much in mind.
He also said that the time gap may be more important where the witness is young than it is when he or she is in their thirties or forties. That direction was an appropriate one to be given in the circumstances of this case.[8] 
I see no unacceptable affront to logic or common sense in the different verdicts, and I am not persuaded that there was any compromise involved in them. I would reject the first ground of appeal.

The second ground of appeal is that the verdicts of guilty were unsafe and unsatisfactory. The ultimate question which must be answered by this Court in relation to such a ground is whether, having made its own independent assessment of both the sufficiency and the quality of the whole of the evidence, and notwithstanding that as a matter of law there is evidence to sustain that verdict, it is persuaded that it was not open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant was guilty.[9] 
It was submitted that, in every case where the issue is oath against oath, a reasonable doubt should be deemed to exist as a matter of law - particularly in the case of a youthful complainant. The issue, of course, is never a choice between the evidence of the complainant and the evidence of the accused; the jury must accept the evidence of the complainant as being true beyond reasonable doubt notwithstanding the sworn denial of the accused, and they do not have to believe that the accused is telling the truth before he is entitled to be acquitted.[10] What I understand counsel for the appellant to be submitting is that, in any case where the Crown case relies solely upon the evidence of the complainant (particularly a youthful one), if the accused gives evidence denying his guilt any verdict of guilty must be deemed to be unsafe.

No authority has been found to support that submission - which is conceded to be a bold submission - and this case will not become such an authority. It would mean that, no matter how well the complainant may fare in her evidence and how badly the accused may fare in his evidence, the mere fact that he has given evidence will require a verdict of not guilty. This Court has often enough said that the absence of sworn evidence by an accused frequently proves to be a serious obstacle to success in demonstrating that a verdict against him is unsafe and unsatisfactory.[11] The converse, however, does not hold true.

It was also submitted that the criminal courts should adopt the procedures of the Family Court by which (so we were informed) the evidence of children is assessed by counsellors out of court who spend hours with each child witness in order to determine the truth or probability of that child's assertions. I doubt whether such a procedure would be practicable in the criminal courts.
Even if it were practicable, I doubt whether an accused person would feel that justice has been done where an assessment made by such a counsellor in his absence turns out to be adverse to his interests. In any event, it is not a procedure which is presently available.

Complaint is made that the task of counsel for an accused in such a case is insuperable, in the absence of the right to "explore" issues of a sexual nature at the committal proceedings and in the light of the limitations placed upon cross-examination in any event by <case> of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/). Neither of those matters gives rise to a conclusion that a verdict of guilty reached in such circumstances is necessarily unsafe and unsatisfactory. Nothing has been put forward which would have assisted the appellant in his defence which would otherwise have been excluded by <case>.[12] Nor is it likely that there would have been in the circumstances of this case. The High Court has emphatically denied the proposition that the limitations imposed by <case> can of themselves found an argument that the trial was unfair or that the verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory.[13] 
I would reject this ground of appeal also.

The final ground of appeal is that the judge gave an incomplete direction in relation to "complaint". As previously stated, there was no complaint made by the complainant until she went to the police. This was in June 1994. She gave various explanations for not speaking to anyone, such as the difficulties which she had in her relationship with her mother. The judge directed the jury in accordance with <case> of the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/), that the absence of such complaint did not necessarily indicate that her allegations were false and that there may be good reasons why the victim of a sexual assault - especially one of the age of this complainant and who is related to the accused - may hesitate in making or may refrain from making a complaint about the assault.

The judge did not direct the jury that, in evaluating the evidence of the complainant and in determining whether to believe her, they could take into account her failure to make a complaint at the earliest reasonable opportunity as reducing her credibility.[14] Such a direction remains appropriate notwithstanding the provisions of <case>,[15] as the High Court has recently re-affirmed.[16] This Court had said that such a direction should as a general rule continue to be given,[17] at least where the delay may be of significance in the particular case to the credit of the complainant.[18] The High Court - accepting that such a direction is appropriate - has now said more specifically that the duty to give such a direction arises only where the peculiar facts of the case or the conduct of the trial suggests the need for a warning to restore a balance of fairness; it has also said that the warning to be given must not suggest a stereotyped view that complainants in sexual assault cases are unreliable or that the delay in making a complaint is invariably a sign that the complainant's evidence is false.[19] If it did, of course, it would conflict with the <case> direction.

Counsel appearing for the appellant at the trial raised the issue in his final address (albeit not very elaborately).[20] In my opinion, such a direction should have been given in this case. The judge, having given the <case> warning (which tended to shore up the credit of the complainant in relation to her delay in making a complaint), said nothing at all in relation to the possible adverse effect of that delay upon the credit of the complainant, a delay which was in this case significant even in relation to the events which led to the charges of which the appellant was found guilty - approximately two years - as the Crown has very properly conceded on appeal. In the circumstances of this case, in my view, common fairness demanded that both sides of the coin should have been drawn to the jury's attention.[21] The duty to give a direction in the circumstances of this case arose whether the test be that adopted by this Court before the recent decision of the High
Court (which was delivered after this trial had concluded) or that now stated by the High Court.[22] 
No such direction was, however, specifically sought by counsel for the appellant in express terms. A direction that it was dangerous to convict was sought by him, based inter alia - as the Crown prosecutor encapsulated the argument - upon the period which had elapsed between the first offence alleged and the statement made to the police. That is the closest which the parties came to the point. Counsel for the appellant did suggest that the nature of the direction to be given was a matter within the judge's discretion. That is not a sufficient compliance with counsel's obligation at the trial to seek in terms the direction which is later made the subject of a ground of appeal.[23]
Leave to rely upon this ground of appeal is therefore required, but it will be granted if the absence of such a direction has led to a miscarriage of justice.[24] I will return to this issue shortly when I have dealt with the absence of two other directions which, it is submitted, should have been given (although neither omission is made the subject of a ground of appeal).

The judge did not direct the jury that the delay by the complainant in making a complaint in this case created difficulties for the appellant in meeting the allegations because of the absence of any opportunity to investigate the circumstances in which the events were alleged to have taken place.[25]
Counsel for the appellant raised the issue in his final address, in some detail, and he did seek such a direction. In my opinion, it should have been given in this case. The Crown has argued that counsel then appearing for the appellant may well have been happy with the way the issue had been dealt with in the evidence and in the addresses, and that there has been no miscarriage of justice. However, the fact that an issue is well dealt with in the evidence and in the addresses does not excuse the absence of a direction which had been sought and which should have been given in the circumstances of this case. The lack of any reliable time frame may well have assisted the appellant in relation to the second and the fifth counts, but that was only because of the very fair and proper concessions made by the Crown prosecutor in his final address. It did not assist the appellant in relation to the third and fourth counts. There is a real chance that, if given, the direction sought would have led to an acquittal.

The other direction sought was, as stated earlier, that it was dangerous to convict in this case. Not only was there reference made to the period which had elapsed between the first offence alleged and the statement to the police, there was also reference made to the difficulties caused to the appellant by the delay in making the complaint, the age of the complainant and the inconsistencies in her evidence. The judge did direct the jury that, because the only evidence against the appellant was that of the complainant, her evidence must be scrutinised with great care before finding him guilty.[26] In my view, there was no error by the judge in declining to direct the jury that it was dangerous to convict in this case. The judge, however, added to the direction which he gave by saying that he did not intend by it to imply that the complainant's evidence was in any way unreliable.[27] The purpose of the warning to scrutinise the evidence of a complainant with great care is to ensure that the jury understand that the evidence may be unreliable.[28] The effectiveness of his direction was therefore significantly qualified.

I return then to the issue as to whether the absence of a direction in relation to the significance of the delay in making a complaint to the credit of the complainant has led to a miscarriage of justice in this case. I have already expressed the view that, in common fairness, it should have been given by the judge in the circumstances of this case. That is sufficient to establish a miscarriage in this particular case. In my opinion, such a direction could have led to an acquittal on all counts in this case. Even if the absence of that direction were not sufficient by itself to establish a miscarriage, the addition to that error of the absence of a direction as to the difficulties created by the delay and the significant (if unintended) qualification of the direction to scrutinise the complainant's evidence with great care is more than sufficient to demonstrate a clear miscarriage of justice in the present case. It is not a suitable case in which the proviso should be applied.

In those circumstances, I would uphold this ground of appeal. I propose that the following orders be made in relation to the first trial:
An extension of time in which to appeal is granted.
The appeal is allowed and the convictions are quashed.
There is to be a new trial of the third and fourth counts.

In relation to the appeal against conviction in the second trial, no grounds of appeal have been filed. It has not even been given a separate number. It was not listed for hearing with the appeal from the first trial, but counsel for the appellant asked that, in the event that the appeal against conviction in the first trial succeeded, this appeal be listed for hearing.

I have read the summing up in the second trial. The circumstances of the offence charged in that trial were substantially different from those involved in the first trial. Most significantly, there was a complaint made by the complainant to her mother, about two months after the event which gave rise to that charge. Whether or not the considerations which have led me to propose upholding the appeal in the first trial would lead to a successful appeal in the second trial has not been the subject of argument or consideration by me.

I propose, therefore, that an order be made in relation to the second trial that it be listed for mention before the Registrar on 27 October 1997.

REGINA versus D J K 
JUDGMENT 
IRELAND J: I agree with the orders proposed by Hunt CJ at CL for the reasons given by him. 
REGINA versus D J K 
JUDGMENT 
DUNFORD J: I agree with Hunt CJ at CL. [1] The [Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1987261/), by <case>, prohibits the publication of any report of the proceedings which leads to the identification of any child to whom the proceedings relate or who is mentioned or otherwise involved in those proceedings. As the judgments of this Court are now published on the Internet, without editing, it is necessary to use pseudonyms so as to ensure that there will be no breach of <case>.
 [2] Rex versus Ball [[1911] AC 47] at 71; Regina versus Beserick <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 599] at 610 (see also at 602-603); Regina versus Beserick (at 515).
 <case>; [(1996) 141 ALR 70] at 83-84.
 [5] Ibid (at 83-85).
 [6] Regina versus Kerry James Watson (CCA, 17 October 1990, unreported) at 4-5;
Regina versus Shane Franz Hauke (CCA, 27 March 1995, unreported), per Hunt CJ at CL (at 2-3) [SLAR 15 March 1996]; cf Mackenzie versus The Queen (at 84-85).
 [7] Regina versus Ian Robert Coombe (CCA, 24 April 1997, in the course of being reported) at 34.
 [8] cf [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s165.html) [9] M versus The Queen [(1994) 181 CLR 487] at -495; Regina versus McKnoulty [(1995) 77 A Crim R 333] at -339.
 <case>; [(1985) 159 CLR 507] at 515, 519; Regina versus Beserick (at 528); Regina versus E [(1995) 89 A Crim R 325] at .
 [11] Regina versus Sidney Warren Blade (CCA, 1 May 1991, unreported) at 3;
Regina versus Gordon [(1991) 57 A Crim R 413] at ; Regina versus Masters [(1991) 26 NSWLR 450] at 468;
Regina versus Clough [(1992) 28 NSWLR 396] at 404;
Regina versus Dellapatrona [(1993) 31 NSWLR 123] at -147.
 [12] cf Regina versus Morgan [(1993) 30 NSWLR 543] at 554.
 [13] William Graeme Berrigan versus The Queen (High Court, 23 November 1995, unreported) at 12; see also Patrick Gerard Grills versus The Queen; PJE versus The
Queen (High Court, 9 September 1996, unreported) at 15.
 <case>; [(1973) 129 CLR 460] at 465-466, 469; Regina versus Zorad [[1979] 2 NSWLR ]
at 772.
 [15] Regina versus Davies [(1985) 3 NSWLR 276] at -278.
 <case>; [(1996) 186 CLR 427] at 435-436, 449-452. This decision was given after the trial in the present case.
 [17] Regina versus Davies (at 278).
 [18] Regina versus Murray [(1987) 11 NSWLR 12] at 18.
 [19] Crofts versus The Queen (at 451).
 [20] It was not counsel who appeared for him on the appeal.
 [21] The reference to both sides of the coin is taken from my judgment in
Regina versus Davies (at 277-278).
 [22] Regina versus Davies (at 277-278); Regina versus Murray (at 18); Crofts v
The Queen (at 451).
 [23] [Criminal Appeal
Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/), r 4;
Regina versus Abusafiah <case>; [(1989) 168 CLR 79] at 91.
 [26] cf Regina versus James William Glencourse [(1995) 78 A Crim R 256.] [27] It may be that the judge had meant only to say that he was not intending to imply that he thought that her evidence was unreliable; unfortunately the direction suggests that the jury should not regard her evidence as being unreliable.
 <case>; [(1986) 161 CLR 315] at 319, 324.
 * * * 
