

Lovick Engineering Pty Ltd versus Toohey Matter No 14483/96 [1997] NSWSC 385 (8
September 1997) 
Last Updated: 27 February 1998 
Lovick Engineering Pty Ltd versus Toohey /96 September 1997 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /96 - Lovick Engineering Pty Ltd versus Toohey 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: In 1993, John Toohey (the plaintiff) brought proceedings in the Local Court against John Deane (the first defendant) and Lovick Engineering Pty Ltd (the second defendant). The first defendant filed a Notice to Co-Defendant. 
Settlement was reached between the plaintiff and the first defendant. By consent, the plaintiff obtained judgment against the first defendant in the sum of $10,000 inclusive of costs. It is not clear when this took place.
However, material contained in the Stated Case suggests that the judgment was obtained prior to the hearing of the claim against the second defendant. The claim as made against the second defendant proceeded to a hearing. The hearing took place before Mr Smith LCM. It commenced on 21 September 1994 and occupied some days. On 10 January 1996, the Learned Magistrate entered judgment against the second defendant in the sum of $8,000 plus interest.

The Learned Magistrate was asked to State a Case. It was signed on 7 November
On 13 November 1996, the second defendant commenced these proceedings by the filing of a Summons. The Summons brings an appeal from the decision of the
Learned Magistrate.

The hearing took place on 14 August 1997. It was vigorously contested and took up most of the day (even though the amount in issue was $8,000 plus interest).

The Court has before it the Stated Case (it is a lengthy document of some 14 pages plus annexures), certain of the Exhibits which were tendered before the
Learned Magistrate (Exhibit A), a copy of the Amended Ordinary Statement of
Claim and a copy of the Terms of Settlement.

The Amended Ordinary Statement of Claim has justifiably been the subject of considerable criticism. It may be that the conduct of the hearing saw a considerable departure from the pleadings before the Court. Whilst, inter alia, the words "In the alternative" may be found in the pleadings, the
Learned Magistrate took the view that joint and several liability was alleged against the defendants. He regarded paragraph 6 as pleading a separate count against the second defendant. Paragraphs 16 and 17 contain the makeup of the claim pleaded by the plaintiff. The paragraphs are expressed to be in the alternative. Paragraph 17 claims a total sum of $22,771.64 (it is the larger of the alternative claims).

The Learned Magistrate found that a contract had been made between the plaintiff and the second defendant. It was a contract that related to the repair of a crankshaft of a White 9000 truck owned by the plaintiff. It is accepted that he found breach on the part of the second defendant (see 2.55 of the Stated Case and the contract alleged, inter alia, in paragraph 6 of the pleading). He assessed the damages in the sum of $8,000.

He had before him certain expert evidence. He regarded the only relevant evidence relating to cost of repairs as having been given by Messrs Lovick and
Petsis. Mr Lovick gave evidence concerning the cost of replacing a crankshaft.
Mr Petsis gave evidence which related to the complete overhaul of the engine consequent upon the ultimate failure of the crankshaft. The Learned Magistrate formed the view that the relevant work was somewhere between a partial and a complete overhaul of the engine. He found that the second defendant was liable at least for the survey of the engine, replacement of crankshaft and rectification of any damage to other components. His ultimate finding on the compensable loss appears to have been expressed in 2.71 of the Stated Case.
There were evidentiary deficiencies which made his task difficult. He concluded that the figure for the assessment of damages had to be in excess of $3,000 (the cost information provided by Mr Lovick) but less than $13,383.79 (the cost information provided by Mr Petsis). He found that the plaintiff had failed to mitigate his loss. In the light of the material before him, he assessed damages in the sum of $8,000 (see, inter alia, 2.94-2.107 of the
Stated Case).

The Appellant's Contention may be found in paragraph 4 of the Stated Case. The matter referred to in 4.1 was not pressed at the hearing. Written Submissions have been prepared by Counsel for the appellant. No attack is made as to the findings of contract and breach. Broadly speaking, three main attacks are made against the judgment.

The authorities make it clear that the remedy of case stated provides a limited avenue of appeal. The Court has jurisdiction to determine only questions of law and only such questions of law as are submitted to it (Allen v Kerr & Anor [(1995) Aust Torts Reports 81-354] and The Australian Gas Light Company versus The Valuer-General <case>; [(1940) 40 SR 126).]
The matter of what is a question of law (as opposed to a question of fact) was considered in Azzopardi versus Tasman UEB Industries Ltd [(1985) 4 NSWLR ]
at 155-156. The facts stated are to be taken as the ultimate facts for whatever purpose the case is stated (Press versus Mathers <case>; <case>; [(1987) 11 Fam LR 615], In The Marriage of Dubar <case>; [(1987) FLC 91-846] and Chick versus Chick [(1987) 12 Fam LR 64).]
However, I am not satisfied that this is one of those cases in which the tribunal has made the assessment by selecting a mean or average between the opinions of conflicting experts.

In my view, the Stated Case makes it clear that the Learned Magistrate was left to perform a difficult task. He was left to make an assessment in circumstances where the evidence was largely unhelpful. It seems to me, that the material demonstrates that he formed his own independent judgment in the light of the material that was placed before him. He was left to do the best he could in difficult circumstances. Some mention was made of failure to disclose methodology. In the light of the material placed before the Court, I do not accept that submission. In the circumstances of this case, I consider that his reasoning process was sufficiently disclosed by the material contained in the Stated Case.

The next attack relates to an alleged failure to take into account the settlement that had been reached between the plaintiff and the first defendant. In my view, this attack also fails.

It is founded on the contention that the assessed damages related to the same loss in respect of which the settlement had been reached. I am not satisfied that that is the case.

Some uncertainty does attend the matters of the manner and the extent to which this question was agitated during the hearing. It does not appear to have been pleaded as a defence to the claim. There is transcript which records that it was raised at times. The contents of the Stated Case reveal that it certainly cropped up at the end of the hearing and was considered by the Learned
Magistrate.

This attack is confronted by many difficulties. I shall mention some of them.
The plaintiff entered into separate contractual relationships. One was with the first defendant. The other was with the second defendant. The contractual arrangements involved the performance of different obligations (see, inter alia, 2.1-2.13 of the Stated Case). The breach found against the second defendant related to a failure to conduct a second crack test. The assessed damages represent the Learned Magistrate's view as to the measure of loss that flowed from breach of the contractual arrangements made with the second defendant. It cannot be said that the defendants were under any joint liability. The second defendant had a separate liability. The Court is left to speculate as to what the settlement moneys relate. In any event, an unascertained part of the sum of $10,000 represents a costs component.

The final area of attack relates to a refusal to allow the second defendant to reopen. On 21 February 1996, the second defendant sought leave to reopen to adduce evidence of the fact of payment of the second payment of the settlement moneys.

This attack is founded on the same contention as the previous matter. The second defendant must show that the loss was the same in the case in each of the defendants. This it has not done. There would not have been any utility in granting leave. Accordingly, this attack must fail also.

As I do not consider that the second defendant has demonstrated error of law on the part of the Learned Magistrate, I am of the view that his decision should not be disturbed. I affirm the determination in respect of which the case was stated.

I dismiss the Summons. The plaintiff (second defendant) is to pay the costs of the Summons. The exhibit may be returned.
 * * * 
