

Fairfield City Council versus Liu Lonza and Beauty Holdings [1997] NSWSC 37 (17
February 1997) 
FAIRFIELD CITY COUNCIL versus LIU LONZA & BEAUTY HOLDINGS /97 
Monday 17 February 1997 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
MASON P, DUNFORD AJA 
CATCHWORDS:Appeal - Practice and Procedure - Leave to appeal against decision of judge on referred question of law - relevance of evidence on morality of brothels in development appeal in Land & Environment Court - Environmental Planning & Assessment Act 1979, s90(1)(d) - Land & Environment Court Act 1979, s36(5) 
EX TEMPORE/ RESERVED: EX TEMPORE 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED:LEAVE REFUSED, SUMMONS DISMISSED WITH COSTS 
JUDGMENT 
MASON P: This is an application for leave to file a summons out of time as to which there is not serious opposition having regard to the evidence as to why the application was filed late. The substantive issue is whether leave to appeal should be granted.

Murrell AJ gave a decision on 3 January 1997 when she addressed a question of law pursuant to section 36(5) of the Land & Environment Court Act. That question is set out on pages 1 and 2 of her judgment. Ultimately at issue is the relevance in point of evidence of objections and the reasons upon which those objections are made to a proposed brothel. Her Honour discussed the possible grounds upon which that evidence might be admitted and concluded that community standards and views on the morality of brothels are not relevant under any section 90(1) head of consideration. While the morality issue per se is irrelevant the demonstrable social effect of a particular brothel use is relevant under section 90(1)(d).
I am of the view that the ultimate question is one of some significance and in a proper case would give rise to a grant of leave. However, as was indicated in the exchange with counsel, there is difficulty with the form of the question and its breadth and the absence of a particular context in which to decide it. That difficulty is compounded by the fact that there were three applicants whose matters were before Murrell AJ. One of those applicants, Mr
Liu, has had his development application determined ultimately and there is to be no appeal against that; one has withdrawn the application and the third,
Beauty Holdings Pty Limited, is an applicant who has led no evidence and has not had the development application heard let alone determined.

I would propose that leave be refused and that the summons be dismissed with costs but making it clear that in a case where the issue is to be judged against the background of particular facts it is a matter that would attract leave. I am not at all sure that I would agree with everything that her Honour has said, although perhaps it has to be looked at against the background of the particular context of the facts she had in mind. It would be a matter for the Land & Environment Court and the parties to proceedings before it to decide what is the most expeditious way in which a live appeal on this matter could be brought to the court. If that means that a matter presently pending before an assessor should perhaps be heard before a judge who might, out of comity to Murrell AJ's decision follow it but then proceed to apply it to particular facts, then that would be a matter for the court. For those reasons
I would refuse leave with costs.
 
DUNFORD AJA: I agree.

MASON P: That is the order of the court.
 * * * 
