

Regina versus Saxon Matter No Cca 60522/96 [1997] NSWSC 535 (31 October 1997) 
Regina versus Ian Hall Saxon /96 October 1997 
Gleeson CJ, Meagher J, Abadee J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal /96 REGINA versus Ian Hall SAXON 
SENTENCING - PARITY - TOTALITY - major drug importation followed by money landering and other offences - effective head sentence of 24 years with non-parole period of 16 years held not excessive. 
ORDER Leave to appeal granted.
 Appeal dismissed.

REGINA versus Ian Hall SAXON 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: This is an application for leave to appeal against sentences imposed by Dunford J in August of 1996. Because of the length of the sentences involved, the applicant should have leave. I will hereafter refer to him as the appellant. 
The appellant was one of the prime movers in a huge importation of cannabis and subsequent serious criminal activity. Two co-offenders, a man named Morton and the appellant's brother, Lloyd Saxon, were convicted for their roles in the matter and their conviction was the subject of an appeal to this court (see R versus Lloyd Arthur Saxon and R versus Garry Roy Morton, Court of Criminal
Appeal, unreported, 6 December 1994). A reading of the Court's judgment in that matter will explain some of the background.

The appellant escaped from prison and was at large for a considerable time, but he was apprehended. When he came before Dunford J he pleaded guilty to the following charges: 
One count of importing not less than the commercial quantity of cannabis resin contrary to subs 233B(1)(b) of the [Customs Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/) which carries a maximum penalty of imprisonment for life: s235(2)(c).

Three counts of supplying not less than a large commercial quantity of cannabis resin contrary to [s25(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s25.html) of the [Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/)  which carries a maximum penalty of imprisonment for life or a fine of $500,000 or both: [s33(3).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s33.html) 
One count of money laundering by disposing of the proceeds of crime contrary to s81 of the Proceeds of Crimes Act 1987 (Commonwealth), which carries a maximum penalty of imprisonment for twenty years or a fine of $200,000 or both.

Two counts of possessing prohibited imports, namely trafficable amounts of cannabis resin contrary to subs 233B(1)(c) which carries a maximum penalty of imprisonment for twenty-five years or a fine of $100,000 or both: s235(2)(d).

Three counts of possessing money or property which is proceeds of crime contrary to s81 of the [Proceeds of Crime Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/poca1987160/) which carries a maximum penalty of imprisonment for twenty years or a fine of $200,000 or both.

The facts of the case were stated as follows: 
In 1987 the accused, Ian Hall Saxon, and one Garry Roy Morton met a person in
Pakistan known for the purpose of these and related proceedings by the pseudonym "Mr Andrews". The accused purchased some 10 kgs of cannabis resin from Andrews.

The accused subsequently made contact with Andrews in Perth in 1987. He offered to sell to Andrews a quantity of cannabis resin. In May 1987 Andrews purchased on credit 20 kgs of resin from the accused. Some weeks later Andrews purchased a further 20 kgs on credit. In October 1987 Saxon, Andrews and
Morton met in Sydney. Saxon and Morton informed Andrews that a shipment of cannabis resin was expected to arrive by sea. Andrews was asked if he was interested in assisting in the proposed ocean pick up. He said that he was.
The next day Morton and Andrews inspected a motor vessel named 'Rolling
Thunder' so as to ascertain the vessel's capacity to carry the proposed shipment. The Rolling Thunder was a 55 foot cruiser owned by Morton.

On 3 January 1989 the accused telephoned Andrews and informed him the shipment was due. Andrews flew to Sydney the next day. The accused met him at Sydney
Airport. They drove to Coffs Harbour, New South Wales, where the Rolling
Thunder was moored. Saxon showed Andrews a photograph of the vessel the
Rolling Thunder was to rendezvous with and gave him details of where the pick up was to occur. Morton and the accused's brother, Lloyd Arthur Saxon, were aboard the Rolling Thunder upon the arrival of the accused and Andrews. The accused departed the vessel shortly after arrival and returned to Sydney.

The Rolling Thunder departed Coffs Harbour on 5 January 1989. Aboard were
Morton, Lloyd Saxon and Andrews. Morton was in command. Andrews navigated.
They sailed south to Crowdy Head where some repairs to the vessel were effected.

The Rolling Thunder departed Crowdy Head on 7 January 1989. Later that afternoon the vessel rendezvoused with an unidentified ship known as a rig- tender approximately 100 nautical miles east from Crowdy Head. Over the course of some four hours, approximately 10 tonnes of cannabis resin consisting of bound canvas bags was transferred from the rig-tender to the Rolling
Thunder. The shipment of the resin had been procured by the accused in concert with other persons, known and unknown, resident in the United Arab Emirates, in the United States of America, and elsewhere.

On the morning of 8 January 1989 the Rolling Thunder sailed back to the east coast of Australia and anchored in Broken Bay, New South Wales. The vessel was met by a houseboat aboard which was the accused. The houseboat had been hired by the accused on 2 January 1989. All four men combined to transfer the cargo of resin from the Rolling Thunder to the houseboat. (Count 1 - the importation). The accused gave Andrews 25 kgs of cannabis resin by way of payment as previously agreed. (Count 2 - January supply of 25 kgs of cannabis resin). Morton, Andrews, and Lloyd Saxon sailed the Rolling Thunder to its usual berth at Akuna Bay. Andrews returned to Western Australia.

The accused subsequently paid Morton $1 million for his participation in the importation. Lloyd Saxon received 25 kgs of resin.

Between landing at Broken Bay on 8 January 1989 and 18 January 1989 the accused, with the assistance of his brother Lloyd Saxon, and one Peter William
Hamill, transferred from houseboat to shore, and then to an unknown storage place, the entire shipment of resin. The bags of resin were loaded onto a speedboat in small lots and carried to various boat ramps in the Hawksbury
River and Pittwater areas. The speedboat was winched to shore by means of a four-wheel drive hire vehicle and the bags transferred to a van and driven away. Initially a speedboat belonging to Morton was utilised. Morton's speedboat sunk and on 10 January 1989 the accused purchased a similar vessel which was then used. The accused and Morton later arranged for the first speedboat to be salvaged. The four-wheel drive vehicle was hired by the accused some days earlier.

On 14 January 1989 at the request of the accused, Andrews, together with his then de facto wife, returned to Broken Bay to assist in the transfer to shore of the remainder of the resin. By way of payment to Andrews for this work the accused agreed to waive a debt of $20,000 which Andrews still owed to the accused on account of one of his earlier credit purchases. Hamill was paid 25 kgs of resin by the accused.

On 19 January 1989, after completion of the transfer to shore, Andrews obtained from the accused a further 20 kgs of resin on credit at $8 per gram.
(Count 3 - January supply of 20 kgs of cannabis resin).

On 17 February 1989 the accused met Andrews in Perth. Andrews paid him $100,000 which he owed from the January credit purchase.

On 11 April 1989 Andrews met with the accused at Lloyd Saxon's home in Coogee.
Andrews paid the accused $102,000 and took a further 60 kgs of resin at the same price as previously on partial credit. (Count 4 - the April supply, 60 kgs of cannabis resin).

On 15 July 1989 Andrews met with the accused at the Palage Hotel, Bondi. He gave the accused $244,520 which he still owed from the previous 60 kg credit purchase.

Andrews returned to Sydney in October 1989. The accused was engaged elsewhere and unable to meet him. On 25 October 1989 Andrews and the accused met at a
Kings Cross cafe. Andrews gave the accused a further $10,000 which he still owed.

Between January 1989 and November 1989 Saxon sold 9964 kgs of cannabis resin through a chain of some seven wholesale distributors including Andrews. Hamill distributed approximately 1040 kgs. Lloyd Saxon received and distributed approximately 1360 kgs. Tamas Laszlo Schneiders, an associate of the accused, received approximately 540 kgs. According to records kept by the accused his gross receipts from the sale of the entire cannabis shipment totalled $77,523,530.

Between 1 November 1989 and 8 December 1989 the accused arranged with the assistance of Schneiders for approximately $8 million in cash to be transferred overseas. The cash was delivered by Schneiders in seven separate lots to a person known in these proceedings by the pseudonym Bennett. The accused and Schneiders met with Bennett prior to the cash being delivered. The accused informed Bennett the cash was the proceeds of rock concerts and was being sent overseas to attract performing artists to Australia. Bennett in turn arranged for the cash to be banked and electronically transferred to the nominated destination through various accounts belonging to other associates.
(Count 5 - money laundering, the overseas transfers).

Of the $8 million delivered to Bennett, about $930,000 was transferred to an account in the accused's name at the Grindlay's Bank, Channel Islands, United
Kingdom. Approximately $2 million was restrained by the authorities subsequent to the National Crime Authority being notified by the bank of Singapore,
Castlereagh Street branch, of a cash deposit by Bennett and other persons which aroused the suspicions of the bank. The balance of the cash was transferred to various other overseas accounts for the benefit of persons in the United States and in the United Arab Emirates.

According to the books and records of the accused a further $53 million of the gross receipts is recorded as having been delivered to a person identified solely as "Sep". Approximately $5 million of this amount has been traced to persons in the United Arab Emirates. The disposition of the remainder is uncertain.

On 25 January 1990 the accused and Schneiders met with Bennett. Saxon and
Schneiders requested Bennett to account for the money which had been entrusted to him for transfer overseas, but which seemingly had not got to where it was supposed to have because of the intervention of the NCA. The accused and
Schneiders informed Bennett that he would suffer serious injury at the hands of those for whom the money was intended if they did not get the money.

The accused was arrested on 26 January 1990 by officers of the National Crime
Authority. A search of the accused's apartment at 7/185 Darlinghurst Road,
Darlinghurst, revealed two 1 kilo blocks of cannabis resin remaining from the shipment. (Count 6 - possession of prohibited imports, 2 kgs of cannabis resin). Approximately $192,000 in cash and diamonds valued at $72,000 was also found. (Count 7 - money laundering, possession of money). The accused was refused bail. Schneiders was arrested on the same day at Bondi and charged with money laundering in connection with the November/December transfers.

On 29 January 1990 a search warrant was executed on a garage at 8/9 Carr
Street, Coogee. The premises were used by the accused and Lloyd Saxon for storage purposes. The garage had been rented by Lloyd Saxon some months earlier. The search revealed four more 1 kilo blocks of resin from the shipment. (Count 8 - possession of prohibited imports, 4 kgs of cannabis resin). Cash in the sum of approximately 5.53 million was also found plus 40 gold krugerrand coins and three gold bars. (Count 9 - money laundering, possession of money). (Count 10 - money laundering, possession of property).

Dunford J in sentencing the appellant said: "Having regard to the fact that the prisoner played a more significant role in the importation than Lloyd Saxon, Garry Morton or Peter Hamill, and was involved in additional offences, especially the three counts of supply, and the money laundering offences (although Lloyd Saxon and Garry Morton also had some money laundering matters but less than the prisoner); but having regard also to the fact that unlike the others the prisoner pleaded guilty, I consider that the appropriate sentences, after allowing for the fact that there are no remissions in New South Wales, should be: for the importation, fourteen years; for the three supply counts together (counts 2, 3 and 4) eight years; for sending the moneys overseas (count 5) four years; and for the various items found in his apartment at the time of his arrest on 26 January and in the garage at Coogee on 29 January 1990 (counts 6 to 10) taken together, a further five years, making a total of 31 years; but principles of totality dictate that these sentences be telescoped to some degree to achieve what is just and appropriate having regard to the totality of the criminal behaviour, and for this reason I reduce the total sentences to 24 years, with an effective non-parole period of sixteen years. A further complication is that the supply charges are State offences while the other offences are
Commonwealth matters, and so I must have regard to s19(3) of the Commonwealth
Crimes Act.

It is also necessary to have regard to pretrial custody which amounted to four years and 114 days up to 5 July, and is therefore now an effective four years and four months.

In these circumstances, the primary consideration is not how the individual sentences on the different counts are broken up, but the total sentences when aggregated. In order to achieve this object, complicated as it is by the difference between Commonwealth and State sentencing regimes, I have decided to firstly impose sentences for the State offences (counts 2, 3 and 4) and to adjust the Commonwealth sentences so as to achieve the result I have indicated, namely the total head sentences of 24 years with an effective non- parole period of sixteen years. In respect of the State offences, [s5(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/) would in the absence of special circumstances (of which I find there are none) require a sentence of eight years to be divided into a minimum term of six years and an additional term of two years. There is, however, little point in setting an additional term in this case because of the Federal sentences to follow and for this reason I will accordingly impose fixed terms of six years for these offences and thus state my reason for doing so [(s6(3))](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s6.html); and these sentences will be reduced by four years and four months to take account of the pre-sentence custody.

Ian Hall Saxon, for the offences to which you have pleaded guilty I sentence you as follows.

On each charge of supplying a large commercial quantity of cannabis resin (counts 2, 3 and 4), imprisonment for a fixed term of one year and eight months, such sentences to be concurrent with each other, to commence today and to expire on 31 March 1998.

On the charge of importing a commercial quantity of cannabis resin (count 1), imprisonment for fourteen years, such sentence to be cumulative on the sentences imposed on counts 2, 3 and 4, and to commence on 1 April 1998.

On each of the other charges (counts 5 to 10 inclusive), imprisonment for four years, such sentences to be concurrent with each other and cumulative on the sentences imposed on the first count.

Pursuant to s19AB(1)(d), in respect of all the Federal offences, I fix a single non-parole period of ten years commencing on 1 April 1998 and expiring on 31 March 2008." 
As appears, the total effective sentence imposed upon the appellant, making allowance for periods of pre-sentence custody, was what I will somewhat inaccurately describe as a head sentence of 24 years and a non-parole period of 16 years. In truth what I have called the non-parole period was broken up into what was truly a non-parole period under the Commonwealth legislation and what was a minimum term under the State legislation. But it is sufficient for present purposes to say that, as the judge informed the appellant in explaining the effect of the sentences to him, the sentences were structured so as to provide for effective head sentences totalling 24 years and an effective non-parole period of 16 years.

As the judge pointed out, the appellant, had already served approximately four years and four months in custody, so there remained to be served further head sentences of 19 years and 7 months which will expire on 31 March 2016. The judge fixed a non-parole period in respect of the Federal offence of ten years which will commence when he commences to serve the federal offences on 1 April and will expire on 31 March in the year 2008. That means that service of the sentences will entail imprisonment until 31 March 2008 and then, if a parole order is made, a period of service in the community called the parole period to complete the balance on the sentence.

In the appellant's written submissions, four grounds of appeal have been advanced. They are as follows:
That his Honour erred in concluding that the role of the appellant was more significant than that of the co-accused Garry Morton.
That the role of Ian Saxon, whilst in some respects different from that of the co-accused Morton, was nevertheless equal in culpability to that of
Morton.
If difference in culpability exists, the sentence imposed on the appellant is so significantly greater than that imposed on Morton that it does not adequately reflect such difference.
That his Honour erred in the application of the principles of totality.

It is convenient to deal with grounds 1, 2 and 3 together.

Dunford J had been the trial judge at the trial of Morton and the appellant's brother Lloyd Saxon and had sentenced Morton. There were material differences between the offences with which Morton was charged and the offences with which the appellant was charged. Morton was charged with conspiracy to import 10 tonnes of cannabis resin. He was also charged with some money laundering offences involving an amount in total of $680,000. The charges against the appellant have already been set out. It should be mentioned in relation to paragraph (C) that the amount of money involved in that offence was some $8 million.

The Crown appealed against the leniency of the sentences imposed upon Morton, but that appeal was unsuccessful. Morton was sentenced in effect to a total term of 15 years imprisonment with a non-parole period of ten years. In respect of the conspiracy to import he was sentenced to a head sentence of 12 years and in respect of the money laundering charges he was sentenced to a head sentence of three years.

In the course of dealing with the appeal by the Crown against what was said to be the inadequacy of Morton's sentence, the Court said: "Having regard to the principle of totality the particular manner in which
Dunford J structured the sentence is not of large importance." 
Dunford J made a similar remark in relation to the sentencing of the appellant. The essential finding of fact which is challenged in the first three grounds of appeal was expressed in his remarks on sentence by Dunford J in the following terms: "In all the circumstances whether or not the person `Sep' was at the top of the hierarchy, I am satisfied that the prisoner was in charge on a day to day basis of the Australian end of the importation and distribution and was also involved, although not necessarily as a principal, in the laundering of the money overseas and played a much bigger part than Morton, who was only involved in the importation, and Lloyd Saxon, who played a minor role in the importation, and merely it would seem on occasions assisted the prisoner with the distribution of the drugs and collection of the purchase moneys." 
His Honour also said at another part of his remarks on sentence that he had regard to the fact that the present appellant played a more significant role in the importation than certain named people, including Garry Morton, and that he was involved in additional offences, especially the three counts of supply and the money laundering offences.

On the other hand, his Honour also had regard to the fact that, unlike certain other co-offenders, the appellant pleaded guilty. The learned judge's finding that the appellant played a larger role than Morton in the importation, as well as engaging in a series of activities following the importation which involved him in criminal conduct of a kind in which Morton was not involved, was amply supported by the Statement of Facts, which has been quoted above, and by a proper evaluation of those facts.

In my view, no successful challenge to that finding has been made on this appeal.

It was argued on behalf of the appellant that in characterising the role of the appellant as comparatively greater than that of Morton in the importation by reference to the post importation conduct and offences in which the appellant was involved, Dunford J exposed himself to the risk of double counting when it came to sentencing the appellant for the offences subsequent to the importation.

That was a risk of which his Honour was conscious. It was specifically drawn to his attention in the course of the sentencing proceedings and was the subject of exchanges between his Honour and counsel. It is to be remembered, however, that the evaluation of the appellant's role in the importation as more significant than that of Morton did not depend entirely upon the appellant's post importation conduct. It also involved a consideration of the introductory portions of the Statement of Facts quoted above and the drawing of inferences from aspects of the behaviour of the respective offenders.

Senior counsel for the appellant pointed out that in terms of traceable cash payments, it appears that Morton received $1.5 million and the appellant received $1.9 million which counsel said was not an enormously greater amount.
That is true, but it is to be borne in mind that in addition to the traceable cash payments there were valuable items of property and other amounts of money that were not assigned to any particular individual because the evidence did not permit such an assignment. There was and is a degree of uncertainty about the ownership of or entitlement to some of that property and some of those funds which does not permit a simple comparison between the money obtained by
Morton and the money obtained by the appellant. In other words, there is more to the problem than simply comparing $1.5 million to $1.9 million.

Senior counsel for the appellant has observed correctly that part of the criminality involved in the conspiracy to import for which Morton was sentenced must have included the contemplation that the drugs that were being imported would in due course be distributed. Indeed that was one of the matters that gave rise to discussion in the course of the sentencing proceedings as to the possibility of double counting against which Dunford J needed to be on guard.

It is also to be remembered that it is not appropriate simply to compare the sentence that was imposed upon Morton for conspiracy to import with, for example, the sentence that was imposed upon the appellant for the offence of importation. It has already been mentioned that in the case of both sentencing exercises the principle of totality was at work and there was an express acknowledgment that once a decision was made as to what was an appropriate ultimate effective sentence, not much turned upon the precise manner in which the individual sentences were structured.

Bearing in mind his Honour's finding as to the comparative roles of Morton and the appellant in the importation, and bearing also in mind the extremely serious criminality involved in the other offences of which the appellant was convicted, in my view a comparison between the total sentence imposed upon
Morton and the total sentence imposed upon the appellant does not reveal any disparity.

Of course, this was a case in which considerations of totality were important.
In my view, however, Dunford J gave proper consideration to those principles.
One particular argument that was advanced orally on behalf of the appellant, but had not been foreshadowed in the written submissions and which I take to be an elaboration of the fourth ground of appeal to which I have referred, concerns the way in which his Honour dealt with s16G of the Commonwealth
Crimes Act. I have already quoted above the passage in which his Honour dealt with that subject.

It was argued that if the judge had left s16G to one side until after he had considered and applied the principles of totality, at the very least it would have been clearer to him that by implication he had taken the view that before the application of s16G the appropriate sentences to be imposed upon the appellant were very large indeed. There is no reason to doubt that Dunford J did not consider and reconsider from a variety of angles the various matters that he was obliged to take into account, including totality and including s16G, and that he did not check and cross check his reasoning at various stages.

It is also to be noted that the application of the principles of totality did not involve an exercise of mathematical calculation. That is apparent when one considers that having expressed a conclusion that an appropriate head sentence after allowing in the case of the Commonwealth offences for s16G would be a total of 31 years, Dunford J went on to say that the principles of totality dictate that the sentences be "telescoped to some degree to achieve what is just and appropriate having regard to the totality of criminal behaviour" and on that ground reduced the total sentences to 24 years.

That step in his Honour's process of reasoning was a straight out exercise of discretionary judgment, not an exercise in mathematical calculation. In my view, no error has been shown in the approach which his Honour took to that exercise of judgment.

It has not been argued that the ultimate sentences imposed by his Honour in their combined practical effect were manifestly excessive, and I do not consider that it can fairly be said that they were so. I do not think that the appellant has been the victim of any element of double counting. As Dunford J observed, the primary consideration was not how the individual sentences on the different counts were broken up but the total sentences when aggregated.

No error has been shown in the process of reasoning adopted by the sentencing judge and the ultimate sentences imposed were not excessive, having regard to the major criminality involved in the offences of which the appellant was convicted.

I propose that the appeal should be dismissed.

MEAGHER J: I agree. 
ABADEE J: I agree. 
GLEESON J: The order of the court will be as proposed. * * * 
