

Vester Allen Fernando -v- Regina [1997] NSWSC 155 (23 April 1997) 
Vester Allen FERNANDO -v- REGINA /95 
Wednesday, 23 April, 1997 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES CRIMINAL DIVISION 
TEMBY, AJ 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: Vester Fernando and his cousin Brendon Fernando are to be arraigned in Sydney on 5 May next. The indictment against them contains three counts. Each offence is said to have been committed at Walgett on 9 December 1994. The counts are the murder of Sandra Hoare, the robbery of Ms Hoare's underclothes while armed with a machete, and sexual intercourse without the consent of Ms Hoare. Each accused is alleged to have committed each offence.

Vester Fernando seeks a separate trial, contending that if a joint trial proceeds then he will suffer grave injustice that cannot be remedied by a direction from the trial Judge, no matter how carefully, forcefully and frequently given.

In what follows I of course express no concluded view as to what will happen at trial. However the material before me enables me to make a reasonably confident prognostication, in some respects, especially as Mr J. Conomos of counsel for the applicant submits that I must for present purposes take the
Crown case at its highest.

A little after midnight on 8 December, that is to say in the very early hours of 9 December 1994, Ms Hoare was a nurse on duty at the Peg Cross ward of the
Walgett District Hospital. A car driven to the hospital by another nurse, and parked not far from the nurses' station where Ms Hoare was situated, was broken into and articles were stolen from it. An elderly patient in the Peg
Cross ward heard screams, probably immediately after the car was broken into, went to see what was happening, and observed two men struggling with the nurse. He was struck hard about the head, probably three times, with what he thought was a baton. Another nurse found him injured, and that Ms Hoare was missing. After a search her body was found near the Walgett air-strip. She was nearly decapitated. Some of her clothing was missing, and the Crown case is that she had been raped. No semen which would or might identify the rapist was found within the body.

Three sets of footprints were found leading from near the place of abduction to the body, and two sets of footprints were found leading away from it. Near these tracks on the way to the body there were found some personal items of Ms
Hoare. Near the tracks leading away from the body some articles which had been in the car were found, and further on two machetes were found in a dam. The fatal wounds could have been inflicted by one or other of them. The footprints could no longer be tracked after they reached a road, I gather paved, which led towards another road in which were situated two houses in one of which the applicant was staying and in the other of which the co-accused was staying. Of course many other people were in that part of town on the night in question.

As against the applicant, there is some evidence linking him with the abduction and murder, although the case is circumstantial. On 7 December he was in possession of two machetes and a knife. During the evening of 8
December, in Walgett, he was seen by a number of witnesses in possession of a machete, and he used it to threaten a young man by holding the weapon to his throat. Later he discussed stealing a car at the hospital, that discussion being with his co-accused and another. He told the latter not to worry because he had the machete and if anyone grabbed him, he would kill them. That third person made himself scarce. In the applicant's bag where he was staying there were found articles from the car that had been broken into and other such articles were found in a bag that the accused had taken with him from Walgett to Dubbo after the alleged offences. The machetes found in the dam are said to be very like those the applicant had earlier, or perhaps the same as them. One of the items found in the bag was a portion of a Bon Jovi tape cover, another portion of which was found near the tracks leading away from the body at about the point where the machetes were found. When spoken to by the Police the applicant said he had spent the relevant time at his sister's house. The Crown says that is untrue, as he was out and about the time. The applicant exercised his right not to be further interviewed.

The Crown says that the co-accused confessed. According to a summary which was placed before me by Mr Thompson Q.C. (paragraph 20): 
Police interviewed the accused Brendan [sic] Fernando firstly. He admitted that he and the accused Vester Fernando had discussed stealing a car but said that his co-accused had grabbed the girl, hit the patient, sexually assaulted the girl whilst he (Brendan) had held onto her, and killed her. He said he had no choice in the matter as the accused Vester Fernando had the machete.

As against that accused there is the evidence that he was in the company of the applicant, and the three and then two sets of footprints. There is nothing which physically links the co-accused with either the car that was broken into or the deceased, or at least nothing that was pointed out to me.

There was debate as to whether the case against the applicant will be weaker than that against Brendon Fernando, counsel for the applicant contending it would be and Crown counsel contending that it was stronger. In my view it cannot be said that the Crown case against the applicant Vester Fernando is weaker than that against his co-accused. What can be said is that the two cases are different. As against the applicant the Crown has physical material linking him with the car and by extension with the body, and also the evidence concerning the machetes. As against the co-accused the Crown has a confession, which seeks to place the greater burden of responsibility on the applicant.
Juries do not always accept Police evidence as to confessions. If the confessional material is not accepted, then the Crown case against the co- accused depends upon it being proved beyond reasonable doubt that the present applicant was one of the assailants, and that the co-accused was the second of two men proved by the tracks to be implicated. I would not categorise the
Crown case against the co-accused as strong if the admissions are excluded from evidence or not accepted by the jury.

That confessional material is of course admissible only against the co- accused. In it Brendon Fernando said that Vester grabbed the sheila, that he protested, that Vester told him to hold on to the girl and then hit the old man, that Vester had sex with the girl, that Vester took her underclothes and that Vester hit the woman with the machete when he had his back turned walking away. Brendon said, "He was the man in control he had the blade". I should also mention a short statement made by the co-accused to a cell-mate, which according to the evidence before me has Brendon saying "we had gone out, done the job, went back home, laid down, had a couple of beers, went for a walk and then got picked up". That statement seems to me to add little if anything to the Crown case against the co-accused, and nothing or nothing much in the eyes of the jury as against the applicant. It is of course the law that it is inadmissible against him.

This is not a case such as Regina -v- Baartman (Court of Criminal Appeal, unreported, 6 October 1994) in which Police covertly taped a conversation between a co-accused and one or more of his brothers, which contained language described by the learned Chief Justice as "both colourful and extremely incriminating". Statements made included some referring to Baartman, who succeeded in his application for a separate trial. One could well imagine the recording when played having a dramatic impact on the jury, both properly against the co-accused and impermissibly against Baartman. However the confessional material here does not have any extraordinary characteristics. It is the common enough case of an accused acknowledging involvement but urging that the main malefactor was another. Such cases are commonly dealt with by directions to the jury, given by the trial Judge, during and at the end of the hearing.

The relevant principles are adequately summarised in the decision of Hunt J., as he then was, in Regina -v- Middis (unreported, 27 March 1991) namely that; where the evidence against an applicant for a separate trial is significantly weaker than and different to that admissible against another or the other accused to be jointly tried with him, and where the evidence against those other accused contains material highly prejudicial to the applicant although not admissible against him, and where there is a real risk that the weaker Crown case against the applicant will be made immeasurably stronger by reason of the prejudicial material, a separate trial will usually be ordered in relation to the charges against the applicant. The applicant must show that positive injustice would be caused to him in a joint trial.

As indicated already, it is my view that the evidence against the applicant is different from that admissible against his co-accused, but not weaker than that evidence, whether significantly or at all. The evidence against the co- accused contains material prejudicial to the applicant, but not extraordinarily so, and in my view not of a highly prejudicial nature. I do not accept that if a joint trial proceeds the jury will be swayed from the proper path as against the applicant by reason of the confessional material which is inadmissible against him. That is the effect of the third stated principle. Judicial direction should suffice to guard against an outcome which would be contrary to law.

There is no general rule against joint trials. As Priestley J.A., speaking for the Court of Criminal Appeal, said in Regina -v- Oliver [(1984) 57 A.L.R.
] at 547, discretionary factors to balance against prejudice to an accused include "the public interest in the efficient despatch of trials, the conserving of costs and the avoidance of any inconvenience to witnesses by having to attend a number of trials" and also "the desirability of having the various people allegedly concerned in the one crime being all dealt with by the one litigation unless positive injustice would be caused by it." 
Of course the risk of injustice, if sufficiently real, must prevail over mere cost and convenience considerations. However I do not see this case as fitting within the Middis criteria or otherwise requiring special treatment so that a far trial can be held.

For these reasons the application is dismissed.
 * * * 
