

Newton versus P J Berriman and Co Pty Limited Matter No 13505/97 [1998] NSWSC (4 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 10 June 1998 
NEWTON versus P J BERRIMAN & CO PTY LIMITED /97 March 1998 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: The applicant filed a Summons on 18 December 1997. He seeks leave to appeal under section 208M of the Legal Profession Act 1992 , 1987 (the Act). 
The applicant was the complainant in proceedings brought in the Chief
Industrial Magistrate's Court. The proceedings were dismissed on 13 February
He appealed to the Industrial Relations Commission of New South Wales.
The appeal was dismissed on 7 February 1997.

Two bills of costs were given by the respondent. The first bill related to the proceedings before the Chief Industrial Magistrate. The second bill related to the appeal.

In proceedings No. 91122 of 1997, the assessment of costs was referred to a
Costs Assessor (Mr Fitzsimons). The applicant's solicitors made submissions to the Costs Assessor in relation to the bill given by the respondent. The Costs
Assessor made his determination and a Certificate was issued dated 20 November .

The total of the amount assessed was in the order of $35,000. The costs assessed for the proceedings before the Chief Industrial Magistrate were assessed in a sum of the order of $29,000.

The application is supported by an affidavit sworn by Mr Hart (the solicitor for the applicant). The respondent relies on an affidavit sworn by Mr Woodward (the solicitor for the respondent).

The affidavit sworn by Mr Hart is parsimonious in detail. Paragraphs 4-7 of the affidavit set forth the grounds upon which leave was sought. The paragraphs read as follows:- "4. The Chief Industrial Magistrate's decision dismissing his claim did not order costs but, in his Judgment stated the following words: `If the parties are unable to agree to costs to be paid by the complainant then the matter may be relisted'.
No action was taken to relist the matter to determine costs.
In addition pursuant to the provisions of the Industrial Relations Act (the 1991 Act) which was in force at the time the proceedings were heard before the Chief Industrial Magistrate, by the effect of regulation 13(1) of the Industrial Court Rules (Transitional) Regulation 1992, provide that where an amount recovered is less than $25,000.00 only 25% of the amount allowable under the second schedule is to be recovered by the successful party together with reasonable disbursements. The Assessor has erred in law in failing to take into account that no Costs Order was formerly made by the Industrial
Magistrate and that in any event, the appropriate course was to reduce costs awarded to the Respondent.
The amount in dispute in relation to the claim was, by agreement $11,283.20 and in relation to the Industrial Magistrate's Court proceedings the Assessor has allowed $21,782.21 in recoverable party/party costs of which $12,456.50 were professional costs. If the appropriate reduction in fees applied a maximum recoverable amount would have been $3,114.12." 
These paragraphs identify the only two grounds argued at the hearing. The grounds were put in the alternative and in respect of the amount assessed for the proceedings before the Chief Industrial Magistrate only.

The applicant has chosen to approach the Court by way of seeking leave pursuant to section 208M. It is not said that the Summons was not filed within the time allowed for bringing an appeal as of right under section 208L.
Counsel for the applicant said that both of the challenges related to errors of law. It may be that the applicant's advisers erroneously decided to approach the Court pursuant to section 208M.

Be that as it may, there has been no amendment application and the case has proceeded as a claim for relief under section 208M. Accordingly, the applicant must satisfy the Court that it is an appropriate case for the granting of leave.

I first turn to the ground which is sought to be articulated in paragraphs 4 and 5 of the affidavit of Mr Hart. Leave is now sought because it is said that the Chief Industrial Magistrate did not make an order for payment of costs by the complainant.

At the conclusion of his judgment, the Chief Industrial Magistrate said:- "Accordingly, the complaint is dismissed.

If the parties are unable to agree to costs to be paid by the complainant then the matter may be relisted." 
These paragraphs had been preceded by certain strong findings adverse to the complainant.

There has been debate as to the meaning to be attributed to what was said in the second of the two paragraphs. The paragraph has the potential to be read as an expression by the Chief Industrial Magistrate of both his decision on the question of costs and as an order for the payment of those costs by the applicant (complainant). Further, it has the potential to be read as expressing that the matter left outstanding was the quantification of the costs to be paid by the complainant. This being the matter which could be relisted if the parties were unable to reach agreement as to quantum.

The Costs Assessor was not asked to make any decision on these matters.
However, if he had been asked to make any findings, it seems to me that it would have been open to the Costs Assessor to take the approach that I have mentioned.

Whilst the matters may raise questions on which minds may differ, there are other considerations which are fatal to the application. It has to be borne in mind that the first time that it was said that the Chief Industrial Magistrate had not made an order as to costs was when this application for leave was brought. Up to that time, the conduct of the parties was consistent with there being a consensus to the complainant paying the costs and/or there having been an order made to that effect.

It would seem that the parties were not able to reach any agreement as to the quantification of costs. The matter was not relisted. Rather than relisting the matter before the Chief Industrial Magistrate, the parties pursued the course of having the quantification of the costs both before the Chief
Industrial Magistrate and the appellate Court assessed by a costs assessor.

The referral to the Costs Assessor was to assess party/party costs. This is an assessment which takes place where an order has been made by a Court or a tribunal. The referral took place not in these proceedings but in proceedings
No. 91122 of 1997.

It had been open to the applicant to challenge the jurisdiction of the Costs
Assessor to deal with the first of the two bills. This objection could have been taken in proceedings No. 91122 of 1997. This was not done. The applicant both submitted to the jurisdiction and took steps in the proceedings which led to the making of the Costs Assessor's determination. The alleged failure of the Chief Industrial Magistrate to make an order as to costs was not raised as an issue before the Costs Assessor. The submissions made by the applicant proceeded on the basis that an order for costs had been made by the Chief
Industrial Magistrate and the appellate Court. The Costs Assessor was left to make the assessment on the issues agitated by the parties.

In my view, it is not now open to the applicant to raise this matter in this application for leave. Even if a different view were to be taken, in the circumstances of this case, I would not have been satisfied that this matter would justify the granting of leave.

I now turn to the ground that was sought to be articulated in paragraphs 6 and of the affidavit. This matter was agitated before the Costs Assessor. It was responded to by the solicitor for the respondent in submissions.

In my view, taking a benign approach, the submission made on behalf of the applicant may be described as being misconceived. It was but faintly argued.
This course was taken for good reason. The submission was devoid of substance and manifestly untenable.

The submission is dependent upon the applicant satisfying the Court that regulation 13(1) of the Industrial Court Rules (Transitional) Regulation had application to the proceedings before the Chief Industrial Magistrate. It is more than abundantly clear that it did not have application to any such proceedings. The submission flies in the face of, inter alia, the definition of "court" and the object of the provision.

It follows that I have formed the view that the applicant has failed to demonstrate any error (whether of law or otherwise) on the part of the Costs
Assessor.

Leave will be given under section 208M of the Act in cases where it is in the interests of justice to do so. Each case will depend on its own particular circumstances. The onus of demonstrating an entitlement to leave rests with the applicant.

In this case, that onus has not been discharged. In my view, this application was hopeless and doomed to failure. If falls within the category of abuse of process.

I affirm the decision of the Costs Assessor. I dismiss the Summons. The applicant is to pay the costs of the proceedings.
 * * * 
