

Ettingshausen versus Australian Consolidated Press Limited Nos. Ca 40108/95;
Cld 12807/91 Costs - Practice and Procedure - Statutes [1995] NSWSC 176 (28
December 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
GLEESON CJ(1), KIRBY P(2) AND PRIESTLEY JA(1)
HRNG
SYDNEY, 5 October #DATE 17:11:1995 #ADD 28:12:1995 
Counsel for the Appellant:    G O'L Reynolds and R G McHugh 
Solicitors for the Appellant:
Mallesons Stephen Jaques 
Counsel for the Respondent:   B R McClintoch 
Solicitors for the Respondent:  Gilbert and
Tobin
ORDER
Appeal allowed
JUDGE1
GLEESON CJ AND PRIESTLEY JA The issue in this appeal concerns the meaning and effect of the
Rules of Court relating to offers of compromise and indemnity costs.
The essential facts of the case are neither complicated nor unusual. The plaintiff, before trial, made an offer of compromise. At the trial the plaintiff received an award of damages substantially higher than the amount specified in the offer of compromise. There was an appeal. The Court of Appeal sent the matter back for a new trial, limited to the issue of damages. At the second trial, the verdict for the plaintiff was lower than at the first trial, but, once again, higher than the amount referred to in the offer of compromise. Is the plaintiff entitled to indemnity costs? .
It may be observed that a very similar question would have arisen if, instead of sending the matter back for a new trial, the Court of Appeal had itself assessed damages.
The detailed facts were as follows.
In April 1991, the respondent published matter defamatory of the appellant. In May 1991, the appellant commenced an action for damages for defamation in the Supreme Court. In December the appellant, pursuant to
Pt22 r2 of the Rules of Court, made an offer to compromise his claim for $85,000 plus costs. The time limited for acceptance of the offer, pursuant to
Pt22 r3(3), was 28 days. The offer was not accepted. (The respondent had itself earlier made an offer of $30,000, but that is not presently material.)
The action came for trial in February 1993. The jury awarded the appellant damages in the amount of $350,000. The trial judge made an order for indemnity costs in favour of the appellant.
There was an appeal to this court. The Court of Appeal ordered a new trial limited to damages (although, it may be noted, it declined to set aside the costs order of the trial judge). Before the new trial the respondent made an offer of compromise for $60,000. That offer was not accepted.
At the new trial, the jury awarded the appellant damages in the sum of $100,000. The appellant asked the trial judge, Badgery-Parker J, to order indemnity costs in respect of the second trial. The appellant relied on the provisions of Pt52 r17 and, additionally, in so far as necessary, upon the inherent jurisdiction of the court.
In making the application under Pt52 r17, the appellant relied upon the offer of compromise in the amount of $85,000, which had been made before the first trial.
Badgery-Parker J refused to order indemnity costs.
In so far as the application was based on the provisions of
Pt52 r17, it was rejected upon two grounds.
First, his Honour accepted a submission, made by the respondent, to the effect that, on the true construction of the Rules of Court, the appellant's offer of compromise "ceased to have effect" after the conclusion of the first trial.
Second, his Honour held that, even if his view as to the construction of the Rules were incorrect, as a matter of construction, he should decline to make the order sought.
Badgery-Parker J also declined to exercise a discretion, in favour of the appellant, under the court's inherent jurisdiction. Because of the view we take in relation to his Honour's decision concerning Pt52 r17, it is unnecessary for us to consider this aspect of the matter further.
The relevant provisions of Pt52 r17 are as follows: "17 ...

Where an offer is made by a plaintiff and not accepted by the defendant, and the plaintiff obtains an order or judgment on the claim to which the offer relates no less favourable to him than the terms of the offer, then, unless the Court otherwise orders, the plaintiff shall, subject to rule 24, be entitled to an order against the defendant for his costs in respect of the claim from the day on which the offer was made, taxed on an indemnity basis in addition to his costs incurred before and on that day, taxed on a party and party basis".
The appellant's application expressly excluded costs incurred after the service of the offer of compromise in so far as they had been dealt with by the order for costs made by the trial judge at the end of the first trial and subsequent orders made by the Court of Appeal. This exclusion no doubt anticipated the way in which an exercise of judicial discretion, otherwise favourable to the appellant, would be tailored to fit the circumstances of the case.
Badgery-Parker J expressed his first reason for refusing the application as follows: "I conclude that as a matter of construction of the Rules, they do not attach costs consequences to an offer of compromise once the claim to which it relates has been the subject of a complete trial".
It is clear from his Honour's reasons for judgment that, by the expression "complete trial", he was referring to the proceedings before the first trial judge and a jury, which concluded with the verdict of the jury and the making of consequential orders by the trial judge. Implicit in his
Honour's conclusion was the proposition that it was immaterial that the Court of Appeal subsequently set aside the judgment entered at the first trial.
Furthermore, consistently with his Honour's view as to the true construction of the Rules, it would have made no difference if, instead of ordering a new trial, the Court of Appeal had itself reassessed damages at $100,000.
The Rules which his Honour was construing are contained in
Part 22 of the
Rules of Court.
The relevant Rules are as follows: "1A. (1) An offer of compromise is made to a party under this
Division by serving a notice of the offer on the party.

A notice of offer shall:- be prepared in accordance with Part 65 Rules 1-4; bear a statement to the effect that the offer is made in accordance with this Division, and where the offeror has made or been ordered to make an interim payment referred to in Division 2 of Part 5 of the
Act to the offeree, state whether or not the offer is in addition to the payment so made or ordered.
In any proceedings the plaintiff or the defendant may make to the other an offer to compromise any claim in the proceedings on the terms specified in the notice of offer.
An offer may be made at any time before the time prescribed by subrule (8) in respect of the claim to which it relates.

A party may make more than one offer.

An offer may be expressed to be limited as to the time it is open to be accepted but the time expressed shall not be less than 28 days after it is made.
 
An offeree shall, within three days after service, serve a written acknowledgment of receipt on the offeror.

An offeree may accept the offer by serving notice of acceptance in writing on the offeror before:-(a) the expiration of the time specified in accordance with subrule (3) or, if no time is specified, the expiration of 28 days after the offer is made; or (b) the time prescribed by subrule (8) in respect of the claim to which the offer relates, whichever is sooner.

An offer shall not be withdrawn during the time it is open to be accepted, unless the court otherwise orders.

An offer is open to be accepted within the period referred to in subrule (5) notwithstanding that during that period the party to whom the offer (the 'first offer') is made makes an offer (the 'second offer') to the party who made the first offer whether or not the second offer is made in accordance with this
Division.

The time prescribed for the purposes of subrules (1) and (5) and Part 52A Rule 22(3) is:- where the trial is before a jury - after the judge begins to sum up to the jury; where the proceedings have been referred under s.76B(1) of the Act for determination pursuant to the [Arbitration (Civil
Actions) Act 1983](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/aaa1983261/) - after the conclusion of the arbitration hearing; or in any other case - after the judge or master gives his decision or begins to give his reasons for decision on a judgment (except an interlocutory judgment).
An offer providing for the payment of a sum of money, or for the doing of any other act, shall, unless the notice of offer otherwise provides, be taken to provide for the payment of that sum or the doing of that act within 28 days after acceptance of the offer.
An offer made in accordance with this Division shall be taken to have been made without prejudice, unless the notice of offer otherwise provides.
No statement of the fact that an offer has been made shall be contained in any pleading or affidavit.

Where an offer has not been accepted, then, subject to subrule (3), no communication with respect to the offer shall be made to the court at the trial or, as the case may require, to the arbitrator.

An offer made in accordance with this Part may be disclosed to the court or, as the case may require, to the arbitrator:- for the purposes of [Part 52A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/aaa1983261/index.html#p52a) Rule 22(4) or (6)- after all questions of liability and the relief to be granted have been determined; as provided by [Part 52A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/aaa1983261/index.html#p52a) Rule 22(9); where a notice of offer provides that the offer is not made without prejudice; or in so far as disclosure is necessary to enable the offer to be taken into account for the purposes of s.94(3) of the Act or [s.73(4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s73.html) of the [Motor Accidents Act 1988](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/)".
The policy underlying these Rules and the provisions of Pt52 r17 was considered by this court in Maitland Hospital versus Fisher (No 2) [(1992) 27 NSWLR .] It is unnecessary to repeat what was there said.
The following features of the rules are significant.
First, the subject of an offer of compromise is a claim in proceedings (Pt22, r2). In the present case, the claim was for damages for defamation. In accordance with the Rules, the appellant's offer to compromise was expressed as an offer to compromise that claim for a certain sum of money plus costs.
The concept of the relevant compromise being the compromise of a claim is basic to the rules in question: see
Pt22 r2, r3. It is not a compromise of a hearing, or of one round in a bout of litigation. The appellant had only one claim, and it was that which he offered to compromise. The same claim was litigated at the second trial. That claim was only finally heard and determined at the conclusion of the second trial (and, still then, subject to the appeal process).
Second, in the present case, the offer, following one of the paths contemplated by the Rules, and one frequently used in practice, was open for acceptance for only 28 days after it was made. In the present case, again as frequently happens, the period of 28 days expired a substantial time before the commencement of the first trial. This is of some importance, because
Badgery-Parker J was influenced by what he described as: "... the absurd and unjust consequence that a party would be adversely affected by an offer which it was no longer open to that party to accept".
This consequence, far from being absurd and unjust, is one the Rules quite deliberately contemplate.
The fact is that, pursuant to the Rules, it is possible for offers of compromise to be open for acceptance only for a limited period which may expire long before the trial commenced. This is perfectly consistent with the scheme of the Rules, one evident purpose of which is to require parties to litigation to give prompt consideration either to settling, or to taking the various risks of not settling, which now include the costs risks created by the Rules. A great many parties adversely affected by an offer of compromise are adversely affected by an offer no longer open to them to accept.
Third, either party may make more than one offer. As it happens, in the present case the respondent, after the Court of Appeal made its orders, made a fresh offer of compromise, although at a figure substantially below the verdict given for the appellant in the second trial. The ability of the parties to make more than one offer is important, because the forensic situation in a case could change from time to time, and for a variety of reasons.
Witnesses might disappear, points of law might be argued and won or lost, or, as in the present case, an appellate court might set aside a judgment entered at first instance.
As we noted above, there is nothing unusual about what happened in the present case. Nor, so far as the operation of the Rules is concerned, would it seem to make any difference that what was involved was a second trial, rather than a reassessment of damages by the Court of Appeal. (Obviously,
Badgery-Parker J did not think it would have made any difference.) It is not easy to accept that the drafters of the Rules overlooked these possibilities.
They are routine contingencies of litigation.
Badgery Parker J said: "It appears to me that (there) are powerful indications that once a trial is had, which, being before a jury continues at least to the point where the fudge begins to sum up, the consequences in terms of costs which flow from the making of that offer and the non-acceptance of it are exhausted once that trial comes to an end, whether by verdict or by discharge of the jury without verdict".
The indications to which his Honour was referring are to be found in subrules (8) and (3) of Pt22 r3.
It is important also to note the provisions of [Pt 22](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/index.html#p22) r3(5).
The provisions in question are part of a scheme which imposes a strict limit upon the time within which an offer is to be open for acceptance.
Subrule (5) identifies certain alternative possibilities, and concludes by providing that an offer may be accepted within whichever is sooner amongst those possibilities.
In that context, it was clearly necessary for the Rules to fix a latest time by which an offer might be accepted. Obviously, it would be absurd to permit an offer to be accepted after a decision had been given in the case in question, even though the offer might only have been made shortly before the decision was given. Accordingly, subrule (8) addresses a series of different circumstances, and makes commonsense provision concerning the latest time at which an offer may be accepted.
There is nothing in that which either requires or justifies the conclusion that the consequences of an offer are "exhausted" once the trial, prior to which the offer was made, comes to an end. As was noted, the offer is made, not in respect of a trial, but in respect of a claim. Depending upon the circumstances of a case, a claim may not be finally heard and determined until after there have been a number of appeals, and, perhaps, a number of trials.
Furthermore, as the language of his reasons makes clear, if the point which
Badgery-Parker J took from subrule (8) is valid, then it must necessarily apply equally to a case where an appellate court reassesses damages as to a case where an appeal is allowed and a new trial is ordered. In truth, this court routinely reassesses damages on appeal, and is frequently asked to make, and makes, orders for indemnity costs based upon offers of compromise that were made before the original trial.
We are unable to agree with the construction of the Rules which appealed to Badgery-Parker J. In our view, there is no justification for concluding that, once the claim to which it relates has been the subject of a complete trial, an offer of compromise made before the trial has no further significance for any appeal, or subsequent retrial.
Accordingly, we consider that, in making his application under Pt52 r17 the appellant was entitled to rely upon his offer of compromise for $85,000.
We turn now to the discretionary reasons advanced by Badgery-Parker J for rejecting the application for indemnity costs.
It is important to note that Badgery-Parker J came to this issue upon the assumption that his reasoning as to the construction of the Rules was incorrect. The question of discretion only arose upon the hypothesis that, for the purposes of the appellant's application under Pt52 r17, following the second trial, the offer of compromise made before the first trial was a relevant offer within the meaning of Pt52 r17(4). The corollary of that hypothesis, of course, is that, on the true construction of the Rules, it was not necessary for the appellant to renew his offer of compromise, following the first trial, or the appeal, if he intended to rely upon it after the second trial.
The reasons given by Badgery-Parker J for exercising his discretion in a matter adverse to the appellant were as follows: "In this case it appears to me that there are several particular considerations which should lead to a conclusion that the court's discretion be exercised in favour of the defendant and so as to displace the prima facie rule established by [Part 52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/index.html#p52) Rule 17.
Those considerations include that the non-acceptance of the offer was followed by the making of an order that the defendant pay indemnity costs in respect of the first trial; that the offer having stipulated a time for acceptance which was 28 days from the service of notice of the offer, the defendant thereafter could not accept that offer even if it had been so minded after the decision of the Court of Appeal to send the matter back for a new trial; that the plaintiff seems at no time after the conclusion of the appeal to have revived the offer, to have renewed it by filing a fresh offer in the same terms, or to have made known in any way at all to the defendant that he remained willing to accept the sum specified therein".
In the above passage, his Honour sets out three particular considerations which he regarded as relevant.

As to the first consideration, it is not easy to understand why, if the
Rules have the construction which was, at this stage of his
Honour's reasoning, assumed to be correct, the fact that an order for indemnity costs was made in the appellant's favour at the first trial should be a reason for not ordering indemnity costs following the second trial. We cannot follow the process of reasoning involved.
If the Rules attach continuing consequences, flowing from the fact that an offer has been made, and not accepted, and which endure until the final hearing and determination of the claim to which the offer relates, then the fact that a plaintiff had obtained an order for indemnity costs at the first trial would provide no reason for refusing to make an order for indemnity costs following a second trial.
As to the second consideration, the scheme of the Rules is that an offer is only open for acceptance within a limited time. A defendant who has failed to accept an offer within the stipulated time can never thereafter accept it unless, of course, it is renewed. There is nothing unusual about such a situation; it is the ordinary case.
As to the third consideration, it is necessary to repeat that one only comes to this point upon the assumption that, on the true construction of the
Rules, it was unnecessary for the plaintiff to have, after the conclusion of the appeal, revived or renewed the offer. If, on the true construction of the
Rules, it was unnecessary for the appellant to do that, we cannot see why the appellant's failure to do that which was unnecessary is a discretionary reason for denying him indemnity costs.
By way of amplification of the third consideration, Badgery-Parker
J referred to an order made by the trial judge following the first trial, for the payment to the appellant of a certain sum of money.
We understand the significance which this might have had for an argument about interest on the verdict at the second trial, but it appears to us to be irrelevant to the present issue.
The amount of damages awarded to the appellant at the second trial was substantially in excess of the respondent's offer of compromise made after the appeal, which was, in turn, double the offer originally made by the respondent soon after the commencement of the litigation. It is true, as was urged by senior counsel for the respondent, that in defamation proceedings, issues other than money are often at stake, and this is something to be taken into account. Even so, bearing in mind the policy of the Rules enunciated in the case mentioned above, and having regard to all the circumstances of the case, we consider that the appellant should have had the order under Pt52 r17(4) sought by him. He made a reasonable offer which was not accepted by the respondent, and he ultimately obtained a verdict which was significantly higher than his offer, and substantially higher than the respondent's counter-offer.
We would make the following orders: 
The appeal should be allowed; 
The refusal of Badgery-Parker J to make an order under Pt52 r17(4), and his Honour's order relating to the costs of the application for indenmnity costs, should be set aside; 
The appellant should have an order against the respondent for his costs, in respect of the claim from 11 December 1992, (so far as they have not been dealt with by the order for costs made by Hunt CJ at CL at the end of the first trial, and subsequent orders made by the Court of Appeal) assessed on an indemnity basis; 
The appellant's costs of this appeal, and of the application for indemnity costs, should be paid by the respondent. The respondent, if otherwise so entitled, should have a Certificate under the Suitors Fund Act; 
The matter should be remitted to the Common Law Division for the resolution of any issues which remain outstanding between the parties.
JUDGE2
KIRBY P This appeal, by leave earlier granted, concerns the Rules of the
Supreme Court relating to indemnity costs and the discretion of a Judge to "otherwise order" under the
Rules where a prima facie entitlement to indemnity costs is established. Alternatively, there is raised a claim for an order for indemnity costs under the general discretion enjoyed by a Judge of the Supreme
Court.
The trial Judge (Badgery-Parker J), effectively refused an order for indemnity costs. He did so by his construction of the relevant Rules of Court.
He indicated that, if his construction of the Rules were wrong, he would still have refused indemnity costs in the exercise of the discretion reserved by the relevant Rule.
Finally, he refused such an order under the general discretion of the Court. It is from his Honour's refusal of an order for indemnity costs that the appellant appeals to this Court.
 
Offer of comprise and a second trial
For the purposes of this appeal, the facts are uncomplicated and mostly uncontested. Mr Andrew Ettingshausen (the appellant) is a prominent Rugby
League footballer. Australian
Consolidated Press Ltd (the respondent), in the
April 1991 issue of its magazine HQ, published an article which contained, amongst other things, a photograph of him in a shower, revealing his penis.
The appellant never consented either to the taking of the photograph, or to its publication. In the context of the article, he claimed that he had been defamed by the publication. He commenced proceedings for damages for defamation on 24 May 1991. On 26 August 1991, the respondent made an offer of compromise in accordance with Pt 22
SCR in the sum of $30,000. On 11 December , not having accepted the respondent's offer, the appellant made his own offer of compromise, pursuant to the same Part of the Rules, in the sum of $85,000. Whereas the respondent's offer was not limited in time, the appellant's offer was "open to be accepted for a period of 28 days from the date of the service of this notice". That time expired on 10 January
The offer was not accepted.
The appellant's proceedings therefore went to trial. After a six day trial, on 10 February , a jury returned a verdict in favour of the appellant in the sum of $350,000. The respondent promptly appealed to this
Court.
A stay of execution of the judgment was sought. The trial Judge who had presided in the first trial (David Hunt CJ at CL) granted a stay until further order in the disposal of the appeal, upon condition that the respondent, within 14 days, pay to the appellant the sum of $200,000. The respondent was also required, within the same period, to give security in the form of a bank guarantee for the balance of the judgment, together with an amount of $125,000 on account of the appellant's costs.
Pursuant to the jury's verdict, on 10 February 1993, Hunt CJ at CL ordered that judgment be entered in favour of the appellant in the sum of $350,000, together with costs. He further ordered that such costs as had been incurred from 11 December 1992 should be assessed on an indemnity basis.
On 13 October 1993, this Court allowed the respondent's appeal. By its orders, it set aside the judgment of Hunt CJ at CL "except as to costs". It granted a new trial of the appellant's action, limited to damages. It ordered that the appellant pay one-quarter of the respondent's costs of that appeal provided that he should have, in respect of such costs, a certificate under the [Suitors' Fund Act 1951](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/).
The parties proceeded to a second trial in accordance with this Court's orders. Before that trial the respondent, on 22 December , made a further offer of compromise in the sum of $60,000. That offer was to be open for acceptance for a period of 28 days and "was not in addition to any balance that the plaintiff will retain of the $200,000 paid by the defendant to the plaintiff, pursuant to (the orders of Hunt CJ at CL)". The offer was not accepted by the Appellant.
The second trial commenced on 30 January 1995 before Badgery-Parker J and a new jury. It concluded on 1 February 1995 when the jury returned with a judgment in favour of the appellant in the sum of $100,000. His Honour entered judgment in the appellant's favour in that sum.
The appellant then applied for a second order of indemnity costs from
Badgery-Parker J. He relied principally upon the suggested continuing operation of the offer of compromise of 11 December 1992. Alternatively, he sought the exercise of the Court's general discretion, in the circumstances of his case, to order indemnity costs. Badgery-Parker J declined the application for a special order. He determined that the usual rule as to costs should apply. By Pt52 r 23 SCR the party and party basis for costs required that: "(2) ... There shall be allowed all such costs as were necessary or proper for the attainment of justice or for enforcing or defending the rights of the party whose costs are being taxed."
For the appellant it was suggested (and the Court could in any case take notice of the fact) that the difference between an indemnity order for costs and the ordinary (party and party) order would be substantial, running into many thousands of dollars. As well, the point being raised is one of general importance for the administration of the Rules of the Court as to indemnity costs. it was doubtless for these reasons that the Court provided leave to appeal from Badgery-Parker
J's costs orders.
 
The Primary judge's reasons
Badgery-Parker J reviewed the foregoing facts, noted the terms of s76 of the [Supreme Court Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) and the relevant provisions of [Pt 22](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p22) of the Rules.
He observed that it was clear that the drafter of the Rules "never contemplated the situation which has arisen in this case". He therefore turned to give meaning to the Rules which would be most consonant with their language, with their apparent policy and with the justice of the case. For clarification of the policy, he referred to Maitland Hospital versus Fisher (No 2) [(1992) 27 NSWLR 721 (CA)] 724, where this Court described the general objects of the new provisions for indemnity costs in the Rules as including: "(1)
To encourage the saving of private costs and the avoidance of the inherent risks, delays and uncertainties of litigation, by promoting early offers of compromise by defendants which amount to a realistic assessment of the plaintiff's real claim .... ; 
To save the public costs which are necessarily incurred in litigation which events demonstrate to have been unnecessary, having regard to an earlier (and, as found, reasonable) offer of compromise made by the plaintiff.... ; and 
To indemnity the plaintiff who has made the offer of compromise, later found to have been reasonable, against the costs thereby incurred
This is deemed appropriate because, from the time of the rejection or deemed rejection of the compromise offer, notionally the real cause and occasion of the litigation is the altitude adopted by the defendant which has rejected the compromise.
In such circumstances, that party should ordinarily bear the costs of litigation."
The essential reason why Badgery-Parker
J rejected the application for an order for indemnity costs based on the Rules, was that his Honour concluded that: "...Once a trial is had, which, being before a jury continues at least to the point where the judge begins to sum up, the consequences in terms of costs which flow from the making of that offer and non-acceptance of it are exhausted once that trial comes to an end, whether by verdict or by discharge of the jury without verdict. Were it not so, the consequence would be ... 'the absurd and unjust' consequence that a party would be adversely affected by an offer which it was no longer open to that party to accept. Such a construction of the Rules does not disadvantage the plaintiff who has made the original offer because [Rule 3(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s3.html) permits a party to make more than one offer. "
In case this view of the proper meaning of the Rules were held to be erroneous,
Badgery-Parker J proceeded to consider whether if, contrary to his opinion, the respondent were at risk in the second trial by reason of the appellant's offer of compromise on 11 December 1992 (before the first trial) he would nonetheless have exercised his discretion in favour of the respondent and, in effect, to "otherwise order" that, notwithstanding the continued operation of the appellant's original offer of compromise, that indemnity costs be refused. He concluded that he would have done so.
For this conclusion the Judge referred to four considerations: 
That the non-acceptance of the offer was followed by the making of an order that the respondent pay indemnity costs in respect of the first trial; 
That the offer, having stipulated a time for acceptance which was 28 days from the service of the notice of the offer, the respondent could not thereafter have accepted the offer in compromise of the claim in the second trial, even had it been so minded, after this Court sent the matter back for a new trial; 
That the appellant seemed, at no time after the conclusion of the appeal, to have revived his offer or to have renewed it by filing a fresh offer in the same terms, or to have made it known to the respondent that he remained willing to accept the sum specified in the original offer; and 
That the appellant had had the benefit of the sum of $200,000 paid to him pursuant to the stay order of Hunt CJ at CL.
At the close of his reasons, Badgery-Parker J referred to the alternative argument for the appellant that, even if he were not entitled to indemnity costs under the Rules, the appellant was entitled to have them under the inherent jurisdiction of the Court, or by the statutory power afforded by s76 of the [Supreme Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) which, relevantly, provides: "(76) (1) Subject to this Act and the Rules, and subject to any other Act -
Costs shall be in the discretion of the court;
The court shall have full power to determine by whom and to what extent costs are to be paid; and
The court may order costs to be assessed ... on an indemnity basis. " 
Badgery-Parker J declined to so order: "... The considerations which would lead, in this case, to an exercise of discretion in favour of the plaintiff, are substantially those which to which I have already consented and which have led me to the conclusion that the discretion should be exercised in the defendant's favour.
 
The appellant's arguments
Before this Court, the appellant contended: 
That Badgery-Parker J had erred in his construction of the Rules. By [Pt ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p52) r 17(4) SCR an offer of compromise made had to be measured against the judgment "on the claim to which the offer relates". That claim was, at all times, the appellant's claim for damages for defamation. Accordingly, the original offer of compromise remained in force and was not spent until the "claim to which the offer relates" was concluded in a final judgment; 
That notwithstanding the limitations upon the disturbance of discretionary decisions in relation to costs, Badgery-Parker J's discretion had miscarried because he had taken into account irrelevant considerations which arose directly from his misconstruction of the applicable Rule. Thus, if the Rule had the meaning for which the appellant contended, the mere fact that indemnity costs had been paid in respect to the first trial, or that the time for accepting the original offer had expired, or that the appellant had never revived his offer, were irrelevant.
Once the offer was made, unless accepted within the specified time, it continued to operate until the "claim to which the offer relates" had been concluded and passed into judgment; 
Upon this basis, Badgery-Parker J's discretion having miscarried, this
Court would exercise the discretion afresh and conclude that no proper reason existed to "otherwise order" and to deny the appellant the indemnity costs which he sought and to which he was entitled by the eventual recovery on his claim of a judgment "no less favourable to him than the terms of the offer" and, indeed, more favourable to him by the sum of $15,000 by which the eventual judgment was greater than the amount for which the appellant indicated he was ready to compromise his claim in December 1992. In the appellant's submission, all of the policy reasons which were mentioned in
Maitland Hospital versus Fisher supported the application of the Prima facie rule.
In a series of decisions in this Court, the Court has been at pains to uphold the policy which is reflected in the Rules and expressed in Fisher. See, eg,
Fowdh versus Fowdh and Anor, Court of Appeal , unreported, 4 November 1993;
NSWJB 114: Forbes Services
Memorial Club Limited versus Hodge, Court of
Appeal , unreported, 8 March 1995; (1995) NSWJB 38: cf Quack and Anor v
Mustafa, Court of Appeal , unreported, 15 June 1995; (1995) NSWJB 60;
Alternatively, that even if the Rule did not apply, the discretion invoked under the general power of the Court to order indemnity costs had miscarried because Badgery-Parker J had relied only upon considerations thought to be apt to the application to "otherwise order" under the Rules. The considerations relevant to a more general application for indemnity costs were more broadly focused. They would take the Court to the unreasonable conduct of the respondent throughout the length of the trial; its refusal, to the very end, to acknowledge the seriousness of the wrong that it had done to the appellant; the serious misjudgment evidenced in the final offer of compromise which it made ($60,000); and the extent to which that offer undervalued the wrong as demonstrated by the second jury's verdict. Considering the application for indemnity costs for itself, and even allowing for the large measure of discretion which must be accorded to the trial judge, this Court would set aside his Honour's orders and provide an indemnity costs order for itself.
The respondent defended Badgery-Parker J's construction of the Rules. It argued that the merits of the case entirely favoured a refusal of indemnity costs. It defended consideration by his Honour of the fact that the appellant had had the use of the $20,000 paid as a condition of a stay. This was a benefit which the appellant had enjoyed which would not be recouped to the respondent, whatever order for interest were eventually made. Defamation cases were notoriously difficult to evaluate. That much was objectively shown in this case by the fact that the first jury brought in a verdict of $350,000 and the second a verdict of $100,000. By inference, it was suggested that a jury with a more robust view about nudity and a more sensitive view to the importance of free expression might have brought in a verdict lower than the sum of $60,000 which the respondent had, by its second offer, placed before the appellant for acceptance as a compromise. That the second jury did not do this did not reflect upon the reasonableness of the respondent's second assessment when made. Any complaints about the respondent's conduct at the first trial were irrelevant to the costs order proper to be made in the second trial, which was for an assessment of damages only.
 
Indemnity cost rules and their proper meaning
It was common ground that the Rules of the Supreme
Court did not expressly, and in terms, deal with the case of a second trial pursuant to an order of the Court of Appeal (or of the
High Court), setting aside a judgment at the first trial. The Rules are quite sparse in their language, a fact which occasioned the need to adapt them to apply to the Court of Appeal in the way explained in Fisher (above) at 726. This Court is required to do further judicial surgery to make the rules work in the special circumstances which have arisen in this case. As Badgery-Parker J observed, however, this is by no means fatal to the appellant's claim, any more than it was to that of Mrs
Fisher.
The primary duty of the Court is to give meaning to the language of the
Rules, for they are a form of subordinate legislation made under power granted by Act of Parliament to the Rule Committee of the Supreme Court, exercising the powers afforded to it by [s124](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s124.html) of the [Supreme Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/).
The relevant Rules are, for the most part, to be found in [Pt 22](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p22) SCR, "Offers of Compromise". This was introduced pursuant to gazettal on 23 June
The relevant provisions of the Rules in [Pt 22](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p22) SCR read: "(2) In any proceedings the plaintiff or the defendant may make to the other an offer to compromise any claim in the proceedings on the terms specified in the Notice of Offer.
 ...
An offer may be made at any time before the time prescribed by sub-rule (8) in respect of the claim to which it relates.
A party may make more than one offer.
An offer may be expressed to be limited as to the time it is open to be accepted, but the time expressed shall not be less than 28 days after it is made.
 ...

The time prescribed for the purposes of sub-rules (1) ... and [Pt 52A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p52a) [Rule 22(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s22.html) is -
Where the trial is before a jury - after the Judge begins to sum-up to the jury;
Where the proceedings have been referred under <case>(B) of the Act for determination pursuant to the [Arbitration (Civil
Actions) Act 1983](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/aaa1983261/) - after the conclusion of the arbitration hearings; or
In any other case - after the Judge or Master gives his decision or begins to give his reasons for decision on a judgment (except an interlocutory judgment)."
Also relevant are the terms of [Pt 52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/aaa1983261/index.html#p52) r 17 SCR. The pertinent sub-rules read: " 17(4) Where an offer is made by a plaintiff and not accepted by the defendant, the plaintiff obtains an order or judgment on the claim to which the offer relates no less favourable to him than the terms of the offer, then, unless the court otherwise orders, the plaintiff shall ... be entitled to an order against the defendant for his costs in respect of the claim from the day on which the offer was made, taxed on an indemnity basis, in addition to his costs incurred before and on that day, taxed on a party and party basis.
 ...
 (9) Sub-rules (4) and (5) shall not apply unless the Court is satisfied by the party making the offer that the party was at all material times willing and able to carry out what the party offered."
The two most powerful arguments for the appellant are to be found in the operation of [Pt 17](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/aaa1983261/index.html#p17) r 4 SCR. The Rule is not expressed to relate to a particular trial or particular proceedings on a claim. In terms, the referent for the operation of the Rule is the "judgment on the claim to which the offer relates". The "claim" in this context is not defined.
But, clearly enough, it refers to the claim as expressed in the statement of claim. In the present case, this was the appellant's "claim" for damages for the respondent's defamatory publication concerning him. The argument also appears to have support from the application of the Rule to cases, on appeal, in the Court of
Appeal. Where this Court, for example, reassesses damages, it has been common practice for the Court to consider, for its own part, the application of any offer made before trial to the costs of the proceedings, including in the
Court of Appeal. To that extent, the practice of the Court of Appeal has not confined the operation of the "offer of compromise" to the outcome of the trial. It has accepted that the offer made before trial will govern, as well, the disposal of the application for indemnity costs in the Court of Appeal.
Until this time, that practice has not been questioned or doubted. But can it stand with the operation of the Rules suggested for the respondent? It is certainly consistent with the operation of the Rules urged for the appellant.
By his argument, once the offer of compromise is made, it continues to operate until the final outcome of the litigation by the "judgment on the claim to which the offer relates". Then only (whether at the first trial, in the Court of
Appeal, in the High Court of Australia, at a later trial, or even subsequently) will the "judgment on the claim to which the offer relates" be finally identified. Then only can the final comparison be made between that judgment and the offer made by the plaintiff but not accepted by the defendant.
Obviously there is force in this submission. It carries the other members of the Court.
But I am not convinced that it is the preferable construction of the Rules in their application to this unforeseen and unusual circumstance of a second trial. I must explain why.
 
The Primary judge was correct in his construction
This Court must steadfastly resist any visitation in the costs order, of displeasure with the respondent because of lingering distaste for its publication of the appellant's photograph when he was naked. The proper recompense for this is found in the jury's verdict at the second trial. That verdict, and the judgment which followed, represents the assessment of the appellant's damage. It does not need to be "topped up" with a penalty order for costs. The Court must also steadfastly resist any suggestion that, because the appellant is a large and well resourced corporation, it is subject to a different standard of justice than the appellant enjoys. All litigants, rich and poor, corporate and individual, are entitled to expect equal treatment from the judges. The mere fact that it would be no special burden in the respondent to pay the appellant's trial costs on an indemnity basis is not a reason for so ordering. The Court must act in a principled fashion.
Leave was granted in this case because the issues raised matters of principle, potentially of general application. That should be kept in mind in disposing of the appeal.
It is true, as the appellant submitted, that the Court must give effect to the meaning of [Pt 52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/aaa1983261/index.html#p52) r 17(4) SCR according to its terms. But the modern approach to the construction of words is to avoid the fine, precise interpretation which focuses upon words in isolation or in their immediate context only. It is to look for the meaning as derived from the entire context in which the words appear. Only this approach will achieve the imputed purpose of the words and do least offence to the attainment of that purpose. See
Kingston and Anor versus Keprose Pty Limited [(1987) 11 NSWLR 404 (CA)], 423. Not only is this approach what the instruction of Parliament itself requires in both particular and general interpretation statutes. It is the direction in which the common law has been steadily moving; and with increasing determination in recent years.
Lord Diplock in "The Courts as Legislators", published in The Lawyer and Justice, Sweet and Maxwell, London, 1978, 274, said: "If ... the Courts can identify the target of Pariamentary legistation, their proper function is to see that it is hit; not merely to record that it has been missed."
I realise, of course, that different judicial observers can see a different target. Different judicial eyes can discern a different purpose. But if the endeavour is to identify the target and define the purpose, it is less likely that the task of the construction of legislation will miscarry than if the judicial (or other) eye is fixed resolutely only upon a phrase in isolation.
Adopting this approach, three considerations tell against the construction of the relevant
Rules urged for the appellant. They argue in favour of the construction adopted by the primary Judge. 
First, and most important, is the fact that [Pt 52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/aaa1983261/index.html#p52) r 17(4) SCR, being meant to operate (as [Pt 52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/aaa1983261/index.html#p52) r 17(1) SCR indicates) upon an offer of compromise "in accordance with [Pt 22](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/aaa1983261/index.html#p22) r 3(5)" incorporates the scheme which [Pt 22](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/aaa1983261/index.html#p22) r 3 SCR establishes. That scheme contemplates a particular kind of offer of compromise, subject to particular time constraints. The time constraints which define the character of the offer of compromise in question are to be found in [Pt 22](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/aaa1983261/index.html#p22) r 3(8) SCR. The particular offer which is contemplated is one which has an ultimate terminating effectiveness as defined by that sub-rule. But that sub-rule operates, and is only intended to operate, upon a single trial or proceeding as there defined. In the case of a trial before a jury (as this case was) the time prescribed runs out, at the latest, "after the Judge begins to sum up to the jury". Likewise, in the case of an arbitration, it runs out, at the latest, at the it conclusion of the arbitration hearing".
In another case it terminates where the judicial officer "gives his decision or begins to give his reasons for decision". Thus, the scheme of the Rules contemplates that, at the latest, an offer will expire at the point of the conclusion of the particular trial to which the offer is directed. This is consistent with the focus of [Pt 52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/aaa1983261/index.html#p52) r 2 SCR upon the "proceedings", as there stated. 
The notion that, notwithstanding sub-rule (8), the offer made under [Pt 22](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/aaa1983261/index.html#p22)
SCR will endure beyond a first trial to a second trial simply cannot stand with the express terminus listed in [Pt 22](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/aaa1983261/index.html#p22) r 3(8) SCR for the final conclusion of the time within which the offeree may accept the offer. By providing, as was done in sub-rule , the drafter made it clear that the offer was intended to operate upon a particular trial or arbitration proceedings and in no case beyond the points defined. It could expire earlier. But it could never expire later. The final date of the expiry of the offer thus fixes its character as being an offer which related to the particular trial or proceeding. Badgery-Parker J so held. He was correct;
If, from this attention to the language of the Rules, the Court lifts its eyes to their purpose, it is clear that the purpose supports the construction to which the primary judge came. The object of an offer of compromise is to encourage the settlement of "any claim in the proceeding". The making of the offer is therefore directed to that objective. The sanctions as to costs, including relevantly indemnity costs, are designed to promote early settlement and to impose consequences upon what is later revealed as an unreasonable refusal to accept a compromise offer. But once a second trial is ordered, the litigious goal-posts have changed. It would take an other-worldly ignorance of the realities of litigation to pretend that an offer of settlement, made before judgement in a first trial, is unaffected by the outcome of that trial.
That outcome inevitably becomes a major consideration in any settlement of the claim at or before a second trial. Even where set aside (as the judgment following the jury's verdict in the first trial here was), the outcome cannot be ignored in the practical business of negotiation and settlement of claims.
To deny this is to defy the realities of litigation, as it is conducted. The
Rules of this Court are designed to work in the real world of such litigation.
They do not have a disembodied life which is to be given meaning apart from that reality. Therefore, stretching the language of Pt 22
SCR to apply to a case such as the present requires this Court (as it did the primary Judge) to interpret the phrase in Pt 52 r 17(4)
SCR "obtains ... judgment on the claim to which the offer relates", as meaning no more than "obtains (for the first time) judgment on the claim to which the offer relates". The addition of these words does no violence to the meaning of the sub-rule. It merely carries into effect the achievement of the purpose of the Rule being that of promoting compromised settlement, but upon a given set of premises which have not been altered. A supervening appellate judgment necessarily changes the equation.
When these practical considerations as to the intended operation of the Rule are borne in mind, the impact of Pt 22 r 3(8) SCR becomes all the more potent.
To hold a party forever to an offer which has terminated and is no longer available for acceptance, but which continues to hang over the party's head through the meandering vicissitudes of litigation, does not promote the compromised settlement of cases. It may indeed inhibit the making of further offers. Yet further offers are specifically contemplated by Pt 22 r 3(2) SCR.
I do not believe that the Rule makers intended such a capricious operation of the offer of compromise Rules. This Court should hold back from giving the
Rules that construction for there is no requirement to do so and the primary
Judge rightly rejected it;
If there is ambiguity in the meaning of the Rules, the Court should favour that construction which best promotes the achievement of the objective of promoting realistic assessments of cases, based upon the changing circumistances which arise from time to time in the course of protracted litigation. Because a party may make more than one offer, the appellant could certainly, following the first jury's verdict, have made a further offer to reflect the changed circumstances. If his offer, before the first verdict, were to accept judgment in the sum of $85,000, can it seriously be thought that he would have offered to accept the same sum after that verdict? If he would not why should the peril of the litigation continue for ever to rest upon the initial assessment made before a major event occurred in the litigation which altered radically the equation reflecting the perceived worth of the case? The respondent increased its offer.
As events proved, it did not do so by a sufficient sum. But it doubled the original offer which it had made before the first verdict.
Clearly, it did so out of recognition of the alteration of the prospects which that verdict introduced. The proper operation of the
Rules, in such a way as to reflect the real marketplace of litigious bargaining (as distinct from a disembodied, capricious operation of the Rules not to be ascribed to the Rule makers) would require, for a second trial, that parties should be obliged to make new assessments reflecting those changed circumstances and directed to the ultimate objective of this Part of the Rules. This is the sensible compromise of the "claim in the proceedings" as it then looked - not as it had originally been assessed.
Thus, the proper construction of the Rules, the achievement of their purpose and the avoidance of capricious results frustrating that purpose all point in the direction which Badgery-Parker J took.
I see no inconsistency between this construction of the Rules and the practice of this Court, before now, in providing costs on an indemnity basis following the outcome of an appeal. This is because the Court is conducting, not a completely new trial, but a rehearing of the first trial on the papers.
If it were to substitute a different judgment for that obtained at the first trial, it is, in effect, specifying the judgment which ought to have been entered in that trial.
But that is not the case for the second trial which has its own integrity and purpose. This is illustrated by the present case. The second trial was entirely different from the first. By order of this Court, liability was no longer in issue.
The trial was much shorter. It was conducted in a substantially different way. Indeed, for the appellant, it was complained that much of the prejudicial value of the conduct of the first trial was lost, inevitably, by the constraints of the second. What was involved was not a substitution for the proper judgment of the first trial, but the achievement of an entirely new judgment in the second.
I agree with the submissions for the appellant that a number of the considerations listed by Badgery-Parker J as being relevant to the refusal to "otherwise order" if the Rules applied were not relevant. Thus, if the construction of the Rules urged for the appellant were correct, the payment of indemnity costs for the first trial was irrelevant. The respondent remained at risk for the second and any subsequent trial or hearing. Similarly, the fact that the defendant could not accept the offer, even if it were so minded, would be irrelevant. It might be harsh. But that would be the construction of the Rule. Likewise, the failure of the appellant to renew the offer would be irrelevant. He did not have to do so. His single offer, with its time limit of days, for ever dealt the cards which would ultimately decide whether indemnity costs would, prima facie, apply. Let it not be forgotten that
Hocking versus Bell <case>; [(1947) 75 CLR 125 (PC)], went through three trials. Defamation cases seem more prone than most to go through a number of trials. The reasons advanced by
Badgery-Parker J as being relevant to the exercise of his discretion were (as I have shown) rather considerations relevant to the avoidance of an unrealistic construction of the Rules. Insofar as they were offered as reasons for refusing, the Rules being applicable, to confirm indemnity costs and for "otherwise ordering" under Part 52 r 17(4) SCR, I think that his Honour's discretion would have miscarried.
But as, like his Honour, I believe that the Rule was inapplicable to a second trial, unless made so by a further offer (which the appellant did not make in this case) no question of "otherwise ordering" arises. Nothing follows from the demonstrated miscarriage of that discretion.
 
Indemnity costs should not be ordered
I therefore finally turn to the alternative case put for the appellant, namely that this Court should, out of its general power, order indemnity costs.
With respect to Badgery-Parker
J, I am not convinced that his Honour fully considered all of the matters which might have been relevant to the provision of an order for indemnity costs. Insofar as he incorporated, in this part of his reasons, the grounds previously specified for exercising his discretion, I do not feel that they properly addressed the pertinent considerations. It was urged that these included: 
The "unrealistic" offer of compromise originally made by the respondent;
The second "unreasonable" offer made, even after the Court of Appeal had strongly criticised the conduct at the first trial and affirmed the indemnity costs order in respect of it; 
The second offer made by the respondent which demonstrated that it still did not appreciate the seriousness of the defamation which it had published; 
The fact that these "unrealistic" offers had effectively obliged the appellant to undertake, or submit to, two trial hearings, two appeals and an application for leave, all of which involved both public and private costs; 
These involved proceedings in a case where there had been no real defence and no excuse. Yet even to the end, the respondent had continued to protest the merits of its offer of $60,000 and the difficulty of assessing, realistically, the wrong it had done to the appellant; and 
The appellant, a citizen of good repute, without the means of the respondent had been forced into multiple hearings to vindicate his honour and reputation and had been fought at every point on the way (including in earlier interlocutory hearings which I have not mentioned, some of which are recorded.
See [(1991) 23 NSWLR 443 (SC)).] Unless indemnity costs were ordered, the end of the appellant's attempts to vindicate his good name, would be a substantial reduction in his second verdict. He should not be offered such a hollow victory.
Again, I acknowledge the force of these arguments.
However, for a number of reasons, I would not accept them: 
The ordinary rule as to costs in this jurisdiction is party and party costs. In some jurisdictions (such as the United States) each party to civil litigation ordinarily bears its own costs. As our rule (above) indicates, most costs necessary for the doing of justice may be recovered under the ordinary rule. To the extent that there is a diminution, this may be taken as the requirement established by law to contain costs and to visit on all parties some of the inevitable economic burden of litigious dispute resolution; 
No special rule has been fashioned for costs in defamation cases. Each of the parties before this Court urged that special considerations were relevant.
The appellant mentioned his unequal economic power in a contest with the respondent. The respondent mentioned the difficulty of assessing damages in a case such as the present, and it could have referred to the public interest in containing defamation verdicts which can inhibit the valuable right of free expression; 
It is also vital to remember, in the approach which I take to the Rules, that the Court is only disposing of the costs of the second trial. The plaintiff has held his order for indemnity costs at the first trial. The second trial was a different thing entirely. The respondent did not persist with unmeritorious defences for these were removed by the order of this
Court.
it is not suggested that the respondent conducted the trial in a dilatory or needlessly prolonged manner. To the contrary, the appellant's complaint was that he lost the forensic advantage, hard won at the first trial. Because the second trial was conducted in an apparently proper manner as an assessment, and because the appellant did not see fit to put the respondent afresh to the peril as to indemnity costs by a new offer of his own (as could have been done), I see no reason for departing from the ordinary rule.
The appellant should have his costs. But it should be on the ordinary basis for which the law provides in the overwhelming majority of cases disposed of in the Supreme Court. If that basis is unjust to the appellant, it is so to very many others. I have not been convinced that it is so specially unjust to him that, absent a fresh offer, this Court should exceptionally provide for indemnity costs under its statutory or inherent power. Whilst this can be done, it is truly exceptional. See Baltic Shipping Company v Dillon (Mikhail Lermontov) [(1991) 22 NSWLR 1 (CA)], 32f. This is not such an exceptional case.
 
Law reform
If the rule is ultimately construed differently than I have favoured,
I would urge that it be reconsidered by the Rule Committee. It is inherent in the foregoing remarks, that I regard the consequence as capricious and insufficiently attentive to the realities of litigation and negotiation that typically takes place between parties once a first trial has been had and a second trial is ordered. When that happens, the parties should be required to reassess and to make fresh offers of compromise if they wish to attract the indemnity costs rules. This will give the parties in the second trial the chance to accept (or reject) the new offer(s). They will not forever be hostages to an offer made much earlier in different litigious circumstances.
The object of the Rules and of the procedure they provide, ie avoidance of unnecessary litigation, will be achieved.
Not least this may be of benefit to the Court and to the public purse. Instead, all that is achieved by the contrary approach is a litigious lottery where the parties are locked into odds fixed in a different context. Chance, not logic and rationality then primarily governs the outcome. As it will here.
 
Orders
The orders made by Badgery-Parker J were correct. The appeal should be dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/176.html  
