

Mavrideros versus Mack Matter No Ca 40412/97 [1998] NSWSC 583 (22 October 1998) 
Last Updated: 8 December 1998 
MAVRIDEROS versus MACK 
CA 40412/97; ED 1887/96 October 1998 
Priestley JA, Sheller JA, Beazley JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Equity Division - Young J 
FILE NO/S: CA 40412/97; ED 1887/96 
DELIVERED: 22 October 1998 
HEARING DATE: 23-24 September 1998 
PARTIES: MAVRIDEROS versus MACK 
JUDGMENT OF: PRIESTLEY, SHELLER, BEAZLEY JJA 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: R W White 
Respondent: M D Broun QC 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: Nicholas G Pappas & Company 
Respondent: Alexander Mack & Co 
CATCHWORDS: REVOCATION OF GRANT OF PROBATE - excessive delay - application of principle in Bates versus Messner [(1967) 67 SR 187] 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Allowed 
NO OF PAGES: 58 
MAVRIDEROS versus MACK 
This is an appeal against the decision of the trial Judge refusing to revoke a grant of probate. The appellant was the sole beneficiary under the will of the testatrix and the respondent was the executor named in the will. The testatrix's estate consisted of two bank accounts and a property in
Paddington. The only substantial claim against the estate, which was ultimately settled, was made by a family which had rendered assistance to the testatrix.

Shortly after the grant of probate, the appellant's solicitors had begun protracted correspondence with the respondent's solicitor in an attempt finalise administration of the estate and have the property transferred to the appellant.

By amended summons the appellant claimed in the Equity Division an order that the grant of probate of the will to the respondent be revoked. The appellant's primary argument was that the respondent was guilty of gross delays in the administration of the estate.

The trial Judge dismissed the proceedings with costs and held that while the administration of the estate could have been more efficient, it had not paralysed the estate, therefore, the grant of probate should not have been revoked.

The grounds of appeal were that the trial Judge failed correctly to apply the principle upon which the Court acts in revoking a grant of probate and had erred in ordering the appellant to pay the respondent's costs. The appellant sought a revocation of probate and that the respondent personally pay the appellant's costs below.

The respondent argued that the Court had no power to revoke a grant of probate unless the executor had done nothing in the administration of the estate and that any revocation would operate "ab initio" with the consequence that any act performed by the executor would be made void.

Held:
The power of the Court to revoke a grant of probate is not confined to circumstances where the executor had not performed any executorial duties. Nor does a revocation of a grant of probate render any executorial acts made void: s40D of the Wills, [Probate and Administration Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/paaa1898259/) and
Bates versus Messner [(1967) 67 SR 187] applied.
The trial Judge erred in holding that the Court will not intervene to revoke probate unless the executor's conduct amounts to something like paralysing the administration of the estate by misconduct. The trial Judge's interpretation of the test in Bates versus Messner was too narrow.
The question was whether the due and proper administration of the estate had either been put in jeopardy or had been prevented either by reasons of acts or omissions on the part of the executor or by virtue of the proof of other matters which established that the executor was not a fit and proper person to carry out the duties he had sworn to perform; Bates versus Messner applied.
Because the trial Judge erred in not expressly taking into account the degree of delay and inefficiency on the part of the respondent and in applying the incorrect test the Court is able to re-exercise the trial Judge's discretion.
The appellant's complaints of delay and inefficiency have been made out and the respondent should have been ordered to pay for the costs of the proceedings from his own resources.

Authorities: 
Bates versus Messner  <case>; [[1804] 10 Ves 1]; [32 ER 743] 
Hordern versus Hordern [[1910] AC 465] 
In the Goods of Galbraith [[1951] P 422] 
In the Goods of Loveday [[1900] P 154] 
ORDERS
Appeal allowed.
Set aside the order of Young J dismissing the proceedings and ordering the appellant to pay the costs thereof.
Orders to be made in accordance with short minutes.
The respondent to pay the costs of the proceedings before Young J and of this appeal without recourse to the estate but to have a certificate under the
Suitors' Fund Act if so qualified.

MAVRIDEROS versus MACK 
JUDGMENT 
PRIESTLEY JA: I agree with Sheller JA. 
SHELLER JA: 
INTRODUCTION 
This is an appeal from a decision of Young J refusing to revoke a grant of probate. The appellant, Constantine Mavrideros, the sole beneficiary under the will of the late Olga Dolgih, who died on 15 August 1995, instituted the proceedings by summons in the Equity Division. The defendant and respondent,
Alexander Mack, was the executor named in the will. Probate was granted to him on 6 October 1995.

In the summons as filed on 18 April 1996, the appellant claimed orders that the respondent verify, file and pass his accounts and do all things necessary to transfer the testatrix's property at 177 Hargrave Street Paddington to him.
On 17 February 1997, the appellant filed an amended summons claiming an order that the grant of probate of the will to the respondent be revoked. After a hearing which took place on 7 May 1997, Young J dismissed the summons with costs. His Honour published his reasons on 16 June 1997. A significant matter in issue between the parties was the principle upon which the Court acts in revoking a grant of probate; see Bates versus Messner [(1967) 67 SR .] 
From the beginning of the dispute the appellant, who lived in Greece, retained the services of Tzovaras & Company, Solicitors, of which firm Mr Nicholas
Pappas was a partner and Mr Michael Scheib was a senior consultant. During the course of the dispute in late 1996, Mr Pappas and Mr Scheib became partners in
Nicholas G Pappas & Company, which thereafter acted for the appellant. The evidence in the proceedings was for the most part documentary and contained in two affidavits by Mr Pappas and five affidavits by Mr Scheib. The respondent's solicitors were Alexander Mack & Co, a firm of which until about 1993 the respondent had been a member but which at the relevant time comprised his daughter, Mrs Tatiana Lenton. The respondent did not given evidence but relied on an affidavit of Mrs Lenton. At least two affidavits by Mrs Lenton and one by the respondent became exhibits. All the affidavits were read without objection. None of the deponents was cross-examined.

EVENTS TO THE DATE OF HEARING 
The written submissions filed on behalf of the appellant in the appeal contained a narrative statement of facts which, in the absence of any challenge to its contents by the respondent, I have used to state what occurred during the period up to the hearing before Young J.

In the events which happened, the testatrix by her will appointed the respondent her executor and bequeathed the whole of her estate to the appellant. The estate consisted of two bank accounts with the Commonwealth
Bank totalling $8,328.21 and the property at Hargrave Street Paddington.
Before probate was granted on 6 October 1995, members of the Kollaras family indicated that they would be making a claim against the estate. According to
Mrs Lenton, the substance of the claim, first raised with her on or about 17
August 1995, was that members of the Kollaras family had rendered assistance to the testatrix and she had made them a promise that the house property would be devised to them in recognition of their care for her. Otherwise, the testatrix had no significant liabilities. None was disclosed in the application for probate. The respondent paid from the bank accounts for the changing of the locks on the house, the removal of rubbish, an inspection and valuation fee, the cost of the probate and of the transmission application, costs which were assessed by the Registrar at $5,042.75. The funeral was also paid for from these bank accounts.

Before probate was granted and before the sole beneficiary had been found, the respondent made arrangements with an estate agent to auction the property. On October 1995, an agreement was signed with Michael Honer Realty Pty
Limited, the Professionals, appointing that company to sell the property on behalf of the respondent with an exclusive license arrangement from 10 October to 11 February 1996 and a date for public auction on 18 November 1995.
The licensee's estimate of the then current reasonable selling price was $300,000.

Most, if not all, of the correspondence between the solicitors for the appellant and for the respondent was transmitted by facsimile. It began on 12
October 1995, when, after a telephone conversation, Tzovaras & Company wrote to Alexander Mack & Co confirming that they acted for the appellant and asking for a copy of the will, the inventory of the property in the estate and the title to the Paddington property. They concluded their letter by saying: "Mrs Lenton informed us that the executor had made arrangements to offer the property for sale at public auction to be conducted on 12 November. It may be that our client's instructions will be that he wishes to take a transfer of the property. It is likely that our client will wish to obtain access to the property to enable him to make a decision on this. Please let us know when this can be arranged." 
On 13 October 1995, a Friday, Tzovaras & Company wrote again to Alexander
Mack & Co referring to a telephone conversation between Mr Scheib and Mrs
Lenton that morning and stating: "It is as well that we record the following unsatisfactory state of affairs:
Your client's instructions are to provide copies of the 3 documents requested in our letter of 12 October not today but on Monday next, 16
October.
Mrs Lenton could provide no satisfactory explanation for your client declining to provide the documents today except to say that your client was not a well man, that he wished to see your letter, that there was no urgency and finally that you had a copy of the deceased's will and a copy of the title to the Paddington property but did not have a copy of the inventory of the property of the estate and you wished to send copies of all documents to us at the one time.
We infer from what Mrs Lenton said to us that you did not intend informing us today of your client's instructions.
Our client as the sole beneficiary under the deceased's will is entitled to a copy of the will and a copy of the inventory upon request. There is simply no basis for your client instructing you to delay providing these documents to us. As to the inventory, we find it difficult to accept that you did not retain a copy of this when lodging the probate application." 
The solicitors then asked Mrs Lenton to seek instructions from her client to provide them with the documents that day and advised that they were instructed to inform her that their client did not agree to the sale of the Paddington property at that time. They sought an assurance from the respondent that no sale would be effected that weekend.

Alexander Mack & Co responded acknowledging receipt of the fax and stated they had referred the same to their client for instructions.

On 16 October 1995, Tzovaras & Company wrote again to Alexander Mack &
Co referring to their letter of 13 October and proceeding: "The deceased's will dated 26 November 1979, probate of which was granted to your client on 6 October, does not contain any power entitling your client to sell the Paddington property. That being so, your client's power to sell the property is limited to a sale for the purposes of administration: s.46 of the
Wills, [Probate and Administration Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/paaa1898259/) and [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s153.html) of the [Conveyancing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/). The deceased's estate contains bank accounts totalling $8,237 and no liabilities of the deceased have been disclosed in the probate application. It seems, therefore, that the deceased's bank accounts will provide for payment of all administration expenses rendering it unnecessary to sell the property.

As we have already said, our client may wish to have your client proceed with the proposed sale but at this stage, and until he or someone on his behalf inspects the property, he expressly forbids your client from effecting a sale.

Please advise us of the arrangements which your client proposes to permit our client to inspect the property." 
On the same date Alexander Mack & Co wrote to Tzovaras & Company, presumably before receipt of their letter, as follows: "We refer to your two letters dated 12th & 13th October last and note that they both written (sic) within 24 hours. We have had a conference with the executor-trustee he instructs us to ask you as a matter of urgency for the full postal and residential address of the person for whom you act.

We advise that we have received instructions for the trustee to act for his beneficiary and we will continue to act for the beneficiary until such time as the trustee identifies the beneficiary after which the beneficiary will no doubt instruct you.

We have done considerable research into the beneficiary and the trustee will have no problem in identifying him as soon as they meet.

Information sought by you is being annexed, that is:
Copy of the will;
Copy of letter received from Commonwealth Bank, please note that the passbook is being withheld from us by the Kollaras family;
Copy of estate agent's valuation;
Copy of the Certificate of Title.

The keys to the property are held by Mr Honer of the Professionals at
Mortdale. He is instructed to open the property for the inspection of the beneficiary. Note that the property is not insured and our insurance company refuses to insure the property while it is vacant. The executor, in following the directions of the will, is selling the property by Public Auction.

Referring to your letter of 13th instant, the executor has instructed us to decline any telephone conversations whatsoever with any person or firm. He also instructions (sic) us to refer any letter from whatsoever source to himself and to reply to any such letter immediately he has had the opportunity to study its contents and formulate his reply. We are instructed to co-operate with the beneficiary and his solicitor to the fullest extent once the trustee has identified the beneficiary.

We now await your faxing to us as a matter of urgency the address of the beneficiary." 
On 17 October 1995, Tzovaras & Company replied questioning the meaning of the second and third paragraphs and pointing out that the assertion that the respondent was selling the property in accordance with directions in the deceased's will was incorrect. The point was made that the final paragraph on the first page of the letter, wherein the writer referred to instructions to decline telephone conversations, appeared to be saying that the respondent had instructed his solicitors to decline to speak with the beneficiary's solicitors.

On 18 October 1995, Alexander Mack & Co wrote to the appellant's solicitors to place on record that: "... in spite of our letter to you that we are not allowed to discuss the estate matter with you late yesterday afternoon your Mr Michael Scheib telephoned our Mrs Lenton in which conversation he used the words, `Well don't talk just listen'.

Mrs Lenton is distressed at the offensive attitude used towards her by your Mr
Scheib. We are seeking Counsel of the Law Society and the Anti-Discrimination
Board and you will no doubt be advised of the result.

In the meantime you are strictly forbidden to ring this office." 
On 18 October 1995, Tzovaras & Company wrote: "We refer to the writer's telephone conversation with Mrs Lenton at about .10pm yesterday during which we informed you of information which we had received to the effect that items of furniture were at that time being moved out of the Paddington property and onto a truck. We asked that you inform your client that he should immediately cease removing items of personalty from the property and to return all items which had been removed by the time of our telephone call.

Please provide us with an explanation for your client's conduct and inform us whether the items of personalty have been returned to the property and if not, what has become of them." 
Various documents were enclosed to establish the identity of the appellant.
Alexander Mack & Co were asked to obtain instructions from their client to acknowledge during the course of the day that their client was the beneficiary named in the will and to be informed during the course of the day whether the appellant's sister who was travelling from South Australia to Sydney on the
Friday would, with the authority of the appellant, be able to inspect the
Paddington property.

On 20 October 1995, Tzovaras & Company wrote again to Alexander Mack &
Co referring to their letters of 16, 17, 18 October all of which remained unanswered and seeking by 11.00am to have a written response to matters raised in the correspondence. On 20 October 1995, Alexander Mack & Co replied saying that the respondent was arranging to be brought to the office on Monday morning when all correspondence would be attended to and continuing: "The executor is aware that you will probably be issuing an ex parte injunction and he considers that a proper course of action." 
A time was suggested for inspection of the property. On the same day by separate letter an undertaking was given not to sell the property prior to the public auction scheduled for 12 November without referring the matter to the beneficiary.

In a third letter of 20 October 1995, Alexander Mack & Co referred to the
Paddington property and said that during a lengthy discussion between the selling agent and "your client", the agent pointed out that: "The property is a fire hazard that they were then standing in an inch of rat excreta and that it would be better that the property be sold. ...

We advise you, that after the death of the testatrix, a member of the Kollaras family contacted this office alleging that the property had been either given or promised to them and that this transaction, whatever it may have been, was done in the presence of two witnesses." 
The solicitors said that the respondent's only concern was that the property was not insured and even though the locks had been changed by the agent, someone was still getting inside the property and the property was a fire hazard. The letter continued: "The executor is approachable even though he is elderly and in poor health. He has no personal desire to sell the property. There seems to be no reason for all the anger on your part as all matters can be resolved easily, properly and professionally. We are writing to the beneficiary as at the present time we are acting for him on instructions of the trustee." 
On 24 October 1995, the Department of Social Security sought payment of $1,028.30 which it said had been credited to the testatrix's account after her death. The Department was wrong and later withdrew the claim.

On 31 October 1995, Tzovaras & Company advised Alexander Mack that the beneficiary did not want the property sold and asked that it be transferred to him and the balance of the estate distributed as soon as possible. The letter continued: "In relation to the "claim" made by the Kollaras family, if your client wishes to obtain protection with respect to this, he should publish immediately all necessary notices of his intention to distribute the estate. If you do not inform us within 7 days that such notices have been published, our client will assume that your client does not wish to obtain the protection to which he is entitled and he will request that a distribution of the estate be affected [sic] as soon as possible after the expiration of that 7 day period." 
A reply was called for by 4pm on 7 November. In the meanwhile, on 23 October , Alexander Mack & Co had written directly to the appellant in Greece and informed him that they had been advised by the Kollaras family that they would be contesting the will but had not received any official notification.
The letter continued: "The property was in an appalling state and the executor has had the property cleared of all items therein. ... The property has been listed for auction on the 11th November but such has been postponed to the 18th November to enable us to communicate with you." 
On 1 November, the appellant wrote to Alexander Mack & Co requesting the property not to be auctioned. On 2 November 1995, the respondent in the course of a telephone conversation with the appellant told him that he had expenses of $12,000 for the investigations he had carried out in order to find the appellant and that the appellant had to pay him for this. This amount exceeded the total costs and expenses claimed to have been incurred at that time, even if all were justified. On 6 November 1995, the property was withdrawn from sale. The account dated 3 November 1995, in an amount of $5,243.75, for obtaining probate, making the transmission application and administration, was paid from the estate bank account on 12 December.

On 14 November 1995, Tzovaras & Company wrote to Alexander Mack & Co asking for their client's instructions on points referred to in the letter of October and an accounting relating to the respondent's administration of the estate. On 14 November 1995, Alexander Mack & Co wrote to the appellant referring to the Kollaras' verbal notice of their claim and the fact that no formal demand had been made. The letter continued: "The executor does not think that such a demand through the Court will be made." 
On 16 November, Alexander Mack & Co wrote to Tzovaras & Company acknowledging receipt of their letters of 8 and 14 November and saying: "We have received instructions from our client to request you not to communicate with this office until Counsel's advice is received by the executor. Brief is being forwarded to Counsel on Monday." 
This led to a response of 17 November 1995 raising the question of why the respondent had been unable to deal with the very specific matters raised in the correspondence, noting that "your client has had no difficulty in providing you with instructions to write directly to our client without first informing us." Questions were raised about instructions to Alexander Mack & Co to decline any telephone conversations whatsoever with any person or firm and forbidding Tzovaras & Company from ringing their office.

On 22 November 1995, Alexander Mack & Co wrote advising that a brief was delivered to Counsel the previous day and that he would be able to attend to it the following week. On 11 December 1995, Alexander Mack & Co wrote that they had telephoned their Counsel who unfortunately would be away all week and would not be able to give his opinion as requested.

No further correspondence apparently passed until 22 January 1996 when
Alexander Mack & Co wrote: "We refer to your telephone call to this office and have to advise you that we will attend to the matters in this estate shortly.

At this stage we cannot add more to our letter or advise you any differently.
We confirm that we have had no process served upon us and [sic] in respect of the claim against the estate and it would be reasonable to assume that this claim will not be pursued. In the even(t) documents are served upon us we will advise you immediately." 
On 9 February 1996, Counsel provided a memorandum of advice to the respondent.
In that advice, Counsel, amongst other things, referred to sections 92 and 93 of the Wills, [Probate and Administration Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/paaa1898259/) (the WP & A Act) and advised the publication of a section 92 notice and the giving of express notice to whichever members of the Kollaras family had previously made contact with Mr Mack. Despite this, on 19 February 1996, Alexander Mack & Co wrote to Tzovaras & Company, enclosing a summary of their work in the estate which had been partly costed, and said: "In due course we will publish a Notice of Distribution and place the estate in a position where it can be distributed once the twelve months from the
Grant of Probate has expired.

Probate accounts are to be prepared and filed and Application for commission to be made and a copy will be sent to you shortly." 
This attitude may have been explained by the statement in Counsel's advice that the executor had a year from the time of grant in which to carry out the administration. The appellants contended that the enclosures appeared to show that Alexander Mack & Co were charging professional costs for the carrying out of executorial work.

On 8 March 1996, Tzovaras & Company wrote to Alexander Mack & Co: "It appears tolerably clear that by 20 October 1995 your client had satisfied himself that Mr Constantine Mavrideros of Kos in Greece was the beneficiary named in the deceased's will dated 26 November 1979. As your client knows, Mr
Mavrideros is entitled to the whole of the estate. Apart from the collection of a savings account held by the deceased, we have been unable to identify any positive step which has been taken by your client since 20 October to progress the administration of the estate.

Apparently it is your client's intention to distribute the estate after the expiration of one year from the date of grant of probate, ie after 6 October
We are confounded as to why in your correspondence you refer again and again to this one year period as being the length of time allowed to your client in which to complete his administration of the estate. In this you are simply mistaken. Your client must carry out his duties diligently and without undue delay. This is especially so in a small estate.

Our client's position is quite simple; he wishes to receive a transfer of the
Paddington property so that he can do with it as he wishes, eg let it in its present condition, refurbish and then let it, or refurbish and sell it.
However, your client's position is that no transfer will be made until after 6
October this year.

We note that your client intends to publish a notice of his intention to distribute the estate "in due course". It is in the interests of our respective clients that such a notice be published as soon as possible in circumstances where you have referred in your correspondence to a possible claim by the Kollaras family. As long ago as 31 October 1995 we asked that your client publish a notice." 
The letter finished by saying that the solicitors were instructed to inform the respondent's solicitors that unless their client made: "an application to pass his accounts by 3pm on Friday 15 March, our client will commence proceedings seeking an order that your client do so forthwith and all other necessary relief to ensure that your client proceeds with and finalises the administration of the estate".

On 18 April 1996, the Summons was filed in the Equity Division. The proceedings were assigned to that Division pursuant to [section (3)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s53.html) of the [Supreme Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/). On 26
April 1996, the respondent filed a summons in the Probate Division for an order passing accounts and commission. Verified accounts filed included legal costs to 31 December 1995.

On 6 May 1996, the Equity proceedings were adjourned to 6 July 1996 to permit the Probate proceedings to be determined. Further correspondence between the solicitors followed. On 3 May 1996, Alexander Mack & Co wrote to Tzovaras & Company rejecting the suggestion that there had been any inactivity on behalf of their client in the administration of the estate and claiming that the appellant's action was not only premature and without foundation but commenced in the wrong Division of the Court. Accordingly, they claimed that the proceedings should be dismissed. The letter continued: "As to the transfer of the subject property, on your client giving appropriate security for the costs of administration of the estate, the executor will transfer the property." 
On 8 May 1996, Tzovaras & Company wrote back saying: "Our client may be able to provide security for payment of the administration costs relating to the estate (as allowed by the Court) to permit the transfer of the Paddington property to occur now. Please advise as soon as possible what your client has in mind." 
On 14 May 1996, Alexander Mack & Co replied acknowledging the letter of 8
May and advising "that we have referred the matter referred to in your final paragraph to our client and to Counsel for instructions." No further response in respect of this proposal was received from Alexander Mack & Co.

On 1 July 1996, Alexander Mack & Co wrote to Tzovaras & Company referring to their "without prejudice" letter of 26 June, which was not reproduced in the evidence, and said they had now received instructions and advised as follows: "1. The executor notes that you are acting on instructions of Constantine
Mavrideros the beneficiary, the executor rejects your offer of settlement as made. Constantine appears to have no knowledge whatsoever of the laws and procedures of this jurisdiction and the executor classifies his offer as absolute nonsense. The executor gives you notice to have the beneficiary present in Court on both 8th July, 1996 in the Equity proceedings and in the
Probate Court whenever it comes on for hearing. The executor wishes us to advise you that he will contact the beneficiary himself and will attempt to restore some measure of order into the running of this estate. At the present time the executor considers it to be in a chaotic state;
The executor instructs us to put it on record as at the 1st November, 1995 all the affairs of the estate were settled between the executor and the beneficiary. The property was to be transferred at the proper time to
Constantine and the total debts costs fees and charges of the estate was approximated at $12,000.00. Constantine stated to the executor that he could raise the money and there appeared only simple problems and obstacles which the executor anticipated he could easily overcome, there were no problems which could not have been resolved simply and without expense;
The beneficiary then without any explanation forbade any direct approach to him and you advised our firm accordingly. Since that date, 8 months have elapsed and there has been a great deal of completely unnecessary correspondence and accusations coming from the beneficiary which were conveyed through your firm to the executor and the whole matter has now progressed to where there are two Supreme Court actions pending and the total cost to the beneficiary including the tremendous amount of work by you as instructed by the beneficiary to bring up the expenses to the estate of probably somewhere about $50,000.00. In view of the fact that the beneficiary has not gained any advantage or profit or even $1.00 this explosion of expenses is a tragedy to the beneficiary and he has to explain to his trustee the reason for such conduct on his behalf. Please note the executor will not under any circumstances agree or consent to any Court action launched by the beneficiary to be withdrawn." 
On the same day, the respondent wrote to the appellant in Greece as follows: "I refer to your telephone call to me on 1st November, 1995 and to the fact that the one or two matters in the estate which required discussion were discussed with you. After this there was no problem to prevent the estate being completed and at the proper time the house property being transferred to you as you wished.

I refer to your instructions to your solicitors Tzovaras & Co that they were to advise my solicitors that there was to be no further reference of any matter in connection with this estate to you personally and all communication was to go to Mr Scheib of Tzovaras & Co.

From correspondence between your solicitors and my solicitors it is evident that you have completely reversed your attitude towards myself which action has caused the situation to become extremely belligerent and therefore embarrassing to myself. Instead of the matter being completed in accordance with decisions made on 1st November, 1995 as at the 1st July, 1996 the matter has become one of great size, complexity and completely unreasonable expenses incurred, including two Court cases in the Supreme Court disputing matters and facts which do not exist. All your objections, problems and accusations have no justification whatsoever and I require you to come to Sydney where an appointment will be given to you to state and express all your accusations and objections to each of the two judges who will probably be involved in the hearing of the two matters.

You were requested in my solicitor's letter of November to keep in touch with me even though it was agreed that you should be at all times advised by other solicitors and lawyers. You have not made a single telephone call to me and continue to blunder and to embarrass me and spend a great deal of your money in frivolous nonsense which you have been spouting through your Solicitors.
This must stop, it is becoming a joke and when you arrive in Sydney arrangements will be made for you to see me and I will express personally my complete disappointment in you. I will then assume full control of this estate and I will not permit you or anyone else on your behalf to make any representations, requests or demands on me apart from the Court or officials of the Court to whose decisions I will submit.

With this letter I enclose a copy of the last letter received from your solicitors dated 26th June, 1996 and a copy of my solicitors reply to your solicitors dated 1st July. This will give you an opportunity to study your position before I speak to you." 
According to the appellant's narrative, which, as I have said, the respondent did not challenge, between November 1995 and 1 July 1996, the only substantial work apparently done in relation to the estate by the executor or his solicitor was to obtain the advice of Counsel which, in relation to the publication of the notices, was not followed, to file accounts in the Probate
Division after the summons in the Equity Division had been filed, to appear by his legal representatives on 6 May 1996 to oppose unsuccessfully an application by the appellant that the proceedings be adjourned to 6 July 1996 to permit the probate proceedings to be determined, to attend through his solicitor in relation to requisitions, to consider an affidavit of Mr Pappas sworn on 14 June 1996 in the Probate proceedings and to correspond with
Tzovaras & Company.

On 8 July 1996, the Equity proceedings were adjourned by consent to 9
September 1996 to enable the Probate proceedings to be determined. Tzovaras & Company had proposed that on 2 July 1996. Even so, Counsel was briefed to appear on the respondent's behalf on that day.

Having been provided by the appellant with a copy of the respondent's letter to him of 1 July 1996, Tzovaras & Company wrote to Alexander Mack on 22
July: "The contents of that letter and the fact that it was written are simply extraordinary.

Your firm's involvement in the writing of that letter should be explained to us.

The contents of your client's letter indicate very clearly that he should cease to be the trustee of the deceased's will and estate. We believe that your client should, in all of the circumstances, offer to resign from his office as trustee. If your client refuses to resign, we are instructed to seek an order that he be removed as trustee. To that end our client intends to amend his summons to include such an order and consequential orders. A copy of the form of the proposed amended summons is enclosed." 
On 26 July 1996, Alexander Mack & Co replied: "... we are strictly instructed to advise you that our client will not agree to resign as trustee nor to the substitution of what appears to be an amended summons now before the Court." 
The letter continued: "We are instructed to bring it to your attention that had the beneficiary, in accordance with the usual procedure adopted by beneficiaries in Sydney had contacted our client when Olga died in August 1995 the only costs which he would have had to pay were the costs on the application for probate.

As the beneficiary for some reason or other failed to contact our client in
August of last year the expenses of the estate reasonably increased especially because of the contract with the agent to sell the estate property.

For some accountable (sic) reason the beneficiary failed to communicate with our client until November of last year and then he communicated by the unusual procedure of ringing his sister in Adelaide who in her turn adopted the unusual procedure of instructing a solicitor to communicate with us who in turn adopted the unusual procedure of writing to us expressing an unreasonable opinion that the work carried out by us and the attitude of our client were both unsatisfactory thereby implying that there was something which can only presumed to be dishonest (sic). In spite of this unusual first approach the solicitor would not provide our client with the address of the beneficiary or the address of his sister.

The consequence of all these unusual events is that the total costs of the administration of this estate has now risen to an estimated $50,000.00. This may be an exaggeration but on the other hand this amount may well increase.

We are instructed to point out to you that having filed the probate accounts the Supreme Court has now adjusted the accounts by its requisition just received, by reducing the accounts by $201.00. We are further instructed to make it clearer, that is the total expenditure up to date roughly estimated at $50,000.00 has resulted so far in reduction of the expense of the estate by $201.00.

We are further instructed to draw to the attention of your client and yourselves that had the sale of the property been allowed to proceed and completed (sic) last year the proceeds of such sale would have been invested for the time being in the Commonwealth Bank and had this been done the beneficiary would have in the interval entitled (sic) to an income of between $400.00 to $500.00 each week. Instead of receiving this income the beneficiary has incurred huge costs as set out above.

We are further instructed to point out to you that the property had been available to the beneficiary from 1st November, 1995. It is still available to him and we refer to our letter to you dated 1st July, 1996. The costs of the estate have been set by the Supreme Court and such costs are payable by the beneficiary immediately or will be deducted from the sale proceeds of the property.

We are further instructed to refer to your amended summons and in particular to paragraph three in which an order is sought that `a fit and proper person be appointed as a new trustee'. Our client is apprehensive as to who is this `fit and proper person'. Is it perhaps the sister of the beneficiary and is it intended that all documents and the property itself be turned over to this person.

The cost of the change of trustee would be completely unnecessary because the property is available to the beneficiary. If a trustee company is appointed in lieu of our client, that company will charge the estate 5% of the value of the estate which will be in excess of $15,000.00. The question is, can our client stand by and permit this extravagance to take place. Our instructions are that our client will not permit this to happen.

In view of the above your client is required to elect as to whether he accepts the property as offered to him or whether he elects to launch the further
Supreme Court application to remove our client as trustee and risk further destruction to the estate." 
It should be observed that the beneficiary, accused of the unusual procedure of instructing a solicitor, lived in Greece, that the address of the beneficiary was provided on 30 October 1995 and that the letter from Tzovaras & Company of 8 May 1996, seeking to know what security for payment was required, remained unanswered.

On 29 July 1996, in an affidavit filed in the probate proceedings in relation to the account, the respondent said that he felt it was necessary to dispose of the property as soon as possible because he was unable to have a tenant in because of its state of dilapidation and repairs. There were no funds in the estate to put the property into a tenantable state for the purposes of security. He felt that the property should be disposed of as soon as possible to avoid vandalism. This did not accord with his statement on 16 October 1995 that "in following the directions of the will" he was selling the property by public auction. Any concern that the property was not insured seems to be inconsistent with an attachment to a letter from Alexander Mack & Co to
Tzovaras & Company of 19 February 1996 which set out a summary of the solicitor's work in the estate and referred to the "discovery" on 22 November that the property was already insured with GIO. In his affidavit the respondent indicated an intention to claim commission.

On 12 August 1996, a further Notice of Motion was filed for an order that upon the appellant providing security for various claims of the respondent, the respondent transfer the Paddington property to him. That Motion was adjourned to 16 August. However this proposal faced the problem that even as late as that date, no Notice of Intention to Distribute under s92 of the W P & A
Act had been published and no notice under s93 had been served on the Kollaras family.

By affidavit sworn on 12 August 1996, Mrs Lenton deposed that she proposed within the next few days to arrange the insertion of the advertisement as to the intention to wind up the estate and then to write to members of the
Kollaras family in accordance with Counsel's advice advising them of the advertisement and requesting they make their claim if they wish to do so. Mrs
Lenton submitted that if, after resolution of the Kollaras claim, the property in the estate was to be transferred directly into the name of the appellant, an amount of security should be provided for a total of $35,000. A Section 92
Notice was published on that date.

On 21 August 1996, Tzovaras & Company sent to Alexander Mack & Co a further copy of a document entitled `Draft Orders if Executor Requires
Protection From Claims' which set out the procedure which the appellant contended the respondent ought to follow if he required protection from claims. Following the publication of the notice, solicitors for the Kollaras family wrote on 16 September to the executor's solicitors giving notice that they had received instructions to commence proceedings seeking orders under the [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/) and on 21
October 1996 that their clients would be asserting a constructive trust over the property.

On 23 August 1996, Alexander Mack & Co invited a proposal from the appellant that he go into possession of the property pending resolution of outstanding matters and pointing out that any moneys spent on repairs and improvements would be at his risk if the Kollaras family should bring a claim which ultimately succeeded. On 16 October 1996, after the publication of a
Section 92 Notice and the foreshadowing of the claim by the Kollaras family,
Tzovaras & Company advised that "in those circumstances" the appellant did not wish to obtain possession of the property and suggested that the respondent should seek to obtain a short term tenancy if that were possible having regard to the property's condition. No reply was received on that matter until 27 April 1997.

On 22 October 1996, Tzovaras & Company again reminded Alexander Mack &
Co about service of notices under section 93. Because of the threatened claim by the Kollaras family, the appellant was advised that his motion for the transfer of the Paddington property to him, with or without security, could not succeed. On 13 November 1996 Windeyer J, by consent, vacated the date for hearing of the Notice of Motion seeking an order for transfer of that property.

On 14 November 1996, Nicholas G Pappas & Co, who were now acting for the appellant, complained that they had discovered on the previous day that no
Notice had been served on the Kollaras family pursuant to section 93(1) requiring them to take proceedings to enforce any claim they might have against the estate within three months after service of such Notice. Despite that complaint, nothing was done in relation to service of the Notice. On 21
November 1996, Nicholas G Pappas & Co asked to be advised whether such a
Notice had been served. On 25 November 1996, Alexander Mack & Co advised that the matter was with Counsel and that until his advice was received, their instructions were "to do nothing".

On 28 November 1996, Nicholas G Pappas & Co wrote to Alexander Mack &
Co referring to the facsimile transmission of 25 November and proceeding: "To inform us that you have instructions to do NOTHING until you receive counsel's advice is decidedly unhelpful. It is your client's duty, although he appears to us to have great difficulty in understanding this, to administer the estate, and a very simply estate at that. However, we have been "battling" with you for 13 months and there is simply no end in sight.

In looking over the correspondence it seems to us that virtually on every occasion specific information has been requested of you as to your client's instructions and intentions, your client takes refuge behind the statement `I am taking counsel's advice' (see your communications of 16 November 1995, 22
November 1995, 11 December 1995, 19 February 1996, 14 May 1996, 4 July 1996, August 1996, 8 November 1996 and 25 November 1996). Of course, your client is entitled to take counsel's advice if he legitimately needs it but we would have thought that by and large such advice should be at his own cost because firstly; the matters on which advice is being sought are elementary and secondly, even assuming counsel's advice was needed, it was unwarranted to retain silk.

Please deal with all outstanding requests for information without further delay." 
On 11 December 1996, Alexander Mack & Co wrote back stating that their instructions were firm that until advice was received from Counsel in respect of the matters raised by the appellant's solicitors "we are to do nothing".
They further advised that their office would be closing from 20 December 1996 to 13 January 1997. On 18 December 1996, Nicholas G Pappas & Co wrote commenting on the likelihood of further delay and remarking that the respondent did not need any advice as to whether or not a Notice had been served under section 93(1). On 19 December 1996, Nicholas G Pappas & Co wrote stating that they had spoken with Mr Doyle from Salmon Connolly Doyle who acted for the Kollaras family. Mr Doyle had said that he had had no communication from Alexander Mack & Co since he wrote on a "without prejudice" basis on 21 October 1996, that his clients had not commenced proceedings but would do so within the time limit prescribed under the [Family Provision Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/), that is to say, by 15 February 1997 and that his clients had not been served with a
Notice under section 93 (1). The letter from Nicholas G Pappas & Co continued: "This news reinforces the view which we have held virtually from the moment we first had contact with you. Your client does not have the capacity to administer the estate in a timely fashion or perhaps at all. Has not the time arrived where your client should permit some other person or persons to carry out the duties which he has so assiduously avoided?" 
On 13 February 1997, the Kollaras family began proceedings for orders under the [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/) and for a declaration that the property at Paddington was held on trust for them. The summons was not served until 11 March 1997, immediately after service of a s93 notice on 7 March 1997. The respondent briefed Senior Counsel to appear on August 1996 on the return before the Registrar of the appellant's notice of motion seeking leave to amend the summons, on the joint application to
Windeyer J on 13 November 1996 to vacate the hearing date and on the mention of the proceedings before the Registrar on 10 March 1997.

On 27 March 1997, Alexander Mack & Co, writing at the suggestion of
Counsel, proposed that the appellant be joined as a second defendant in the
Kollaras proceedings and thereafter have the conduct of the defence. The appellant consented to this.

EVENTS AFTER DISMISSAL OF THE EQUITY PROCEEDINGS 
On the appeal the parties accepted that evidence of events after the hearing before Young J was relevant and only relevant if this Court was of opinion that Young J in refusing to revoke the grant of probate acted in error of principle so that his exercise of discretion miscarried and was reviewable by this Court.

After Young J dismissed the proceedings on 7 May 1997, orders were made joining the appellant as a defendant in the Kollaras proceedings on 23 June
Mr Pappas commenced negotiations with the solicitors for the Kollaras family which resulted in an agreement being reached on 10 September 1997, for settlement of their claim in the sum of $10,000. The Deed was executed on 9
October 1997.

The appellant gave instructions to request the sale of the property at
Hargrave Street, Paddington. The property was sold on 13 November 1997 for $421,000. $250,000 was paid to the appellant from the net proceeds of sale. On October 1997, Alexander Mack & Co said that the question of commission and costs could be resolved quickly and that the appeal from the decision of
Young J might not be relevant if the estate were ready for distribution and distribution took place. On 22 October 1997, Nicholas G Pappas & Co asked that the respondent quantify and inform them of the amount of the claims for costs of the administration of the estate, executor's commission and the costs of the proceedings before Young J and of the Kollaras proceedings. On 18
November and 26 November 1997 Nicholas G Pappas & Co repeated this request for information for which they were still waiting.

On 15 January 1998, Alexander Mack & Co said that to get the matter moving as quickly as possible, the appellant should withdraw his objections to their costs as set out in the accounts filed with the Probate office and to their costs as rendered as previously communicated, as well as costs in respect to the Equity proceedings brought against the respondent by the Kollaras family.
They said they assumed that the appellant would not oppose the respondent's application for commission and that they would prepare a third set of probate accounts for passing in connection with their client's application for commission. On the next day, Nicholas G Pappas & Co asked for a breakdown of all of the claims the respondent and Alexander Mack & Co proposed to make on the estate funds.

On 3 February 1998, Alexander Mack & Co advised that the respondent would be asking the Probate office to allow a commission at 5 percent, that that would involve a huge affidavit which would be costly and it would be in the interests of both parties for the appellant to agree to that commission to save the costs. In the case of that agreement, the respondent would immediately withdraw his commission (apparently from the estate funds) and send a balance of the moneys to the appellant. On 19 February 1998, Nicholas G
Pappas & Co noted that, for the respondent to claim commission, he would need to verify, file and pass his accounts, asked to be advised when that could be expected and asked for copies of accounts or bills supporting payments notified in Alexander Mack & Co's letter of 6 February 1998. The total was $53,387.30. The accounts stated that further Counsel's fees were to be advised and that for the period October to 31 December 1997 the right was reserved to render a future account for the work beyond the $1,500 claimed. On February 1998 Alexander Mack & Co wrote to Nicholas G Pappas & Co enclosing copies of accounts.

On 27 April 1998, Nicholas G Pappas & Co referred to the enclosure sent under cover of letter of 27 February 1998 and said that the respondent should file and serve the third and final estate accounts and make arrangements to have the matter listed before a deputy registrar to vouch them. Almost two months later, on 25 June 1998, Nicholas G Pappas & Co asked to be advised whether the respondent proposed to file and serve his final estate accounts and said that if they did not hear from Alexander Mack & Co within seven days they proposed to have the matter re-listed before a deputy registrar in order to have the matter finalised. The appellant acknowledges that the reference in these letters to "final" accounts was premature.

On 30 June 1998 Alexander Mack & Co wrote saying that, as regards filing any Supreme Court accounts, the matter had been dealt with in the application by the beneficiary to the Equity Court when the beneficiary sought several orders including an order that the executor file such accounts, that this order the Court included in its refusal when the application was dismissed with costs and that because of this the executor had been advised that the beneficiary was precluded from asking the executor to file any further accounts. They also said that they were specifically instructed that no further information was to be given to anyone at all in respect of the estate.
On 1 July 1998, they described the further correspondence from Nicholas G
Pappas & Co as being "additional harassment and abuse". The solicitors' accounts included charges for what they characterised as harassment and abuse.

On 3 July 1998 Nicholas G Pappas & Co wrote to Alexander Mack & Co: "The executor seems to misunderstand completely the beneficiary's entitlement for an order that the executor verify, file and pass his accounts. This has nothing to do with the Equity proceedings which were determined by Young J and which are the subject of the appeal. It is well established that a beneficiary can seek the verification, filing and passing of accounts by an executor or administrator, and these applications are routinely approved by the Court.

Our instructions are to file a summons in the probate proceedings seeking an order that the executor verify, file and pass his accounts. Please note that the executor cannot apply for his commission until his verified accounts have been dealt with." 
By a further letter of 15 July 1998 Nicholas G Pappas & Co sought information.

On 28 July 1998, accounts rendered by Alexander Mack & Co to the appellant from February to June 1998 were sent to Nicholas G Pappas & Co. These showed what the appellant claimed was further mulcting of the estate in costs.
For example, on 7 April 1998, there was a charge of $3,444 to the estate for "fees paid to costs, consultant for advice and drafts prepared by him as basis for defence against the anticipated litigation of beneficiary against the executor". That amount was withdrawn from the estate account on the same day.
The accounts for January, February, April and May showed repeated conferences with the respondent.

SUMMARY OF APPELLANT'S CONTENTIONS 
The appellant contended before Young J that the respondent was guilty of gross delays in administration of the estate, that he was not fit to administer the estate, that he left the executorial work to be done by his solicitor, that he involved the estate in unnecessary costs and threatened to charge exorbitant costs and that he failed to act with reasonable competence. The appellant's grounds for orders that the grant of probate of the will to the defendant be revoked and that he be removed as trustee, were substantially as follows:
The executor decided not to publish notices of distribution and to place the estate in a position where it could be distributed until 12 months from the grant of Probate had expired (Alexander Mack & Co's letter of 19
February 1996) notwithstanding correspondence from Tzovaras & Co of 31
October 1995 and counsel's advice of 7 February 1996.
The executor failed to attend to his duties in a timely manner in that: if the executor wished to obtain protection from the claim made by the
Kollaras family, which he did, he failed to publish the requisite notices.
This was so notwithstanding: 
Tzovaras & Co's letter of 31 October 1995; counsel's advice of 9 February 1996. Notice under s.92 was not published until 20 August 1996, being a date after the return date of plaintiff's motion for an order that upon providing security for the various claims of the defendant, the defendant transfer the property to him; the `Draft Orders If the Executor Requires Protection' enclosed under cover of letter of Tzovaras & Co on 21 August 1996 the executor did not give notice pursuant to s.93 of the Wills [Probate and Administration
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/paaa1898259/), despite regular communication with the Kollaras family and their solicitors from 26
August 1996 and did not otherwise compel them to bring their claim before
February 1997; the executor failed to finalise his administration by passing his accounts and failed to file his accounts until 26 April 1996, after the commencement of these proceedings.
In response to the request of Nicholas G. Pappas & Co of 21 November to advise whether the executor had served a notice on the Kollaras family pursuant to [s.93(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/paaa1898259/s93.html) and to respond to matters raised on 16 October 1996, the executor instructed his solicitors to do nothing until counsel's advice was received, which advice was not expected until counsel had cleared his other commitments (letters from
Alexander Mack & Co dated 25 November and 11 December 1996). No such notice was given.
The executor failed to respond to the request made by Tzovaras & Co in their letter of 8 May 1996 as to what he had in mind by way of security for payment of the administration costs relating to the estate (as allowed by the
Court) to permit the transfer of the Paddington property to then occur. There was no response until Mrs Lenton's affidavit of 12 August 1996 filed in response to the plaintiff's notice of motion dated 9 August 1996 in which he sought an order for transfer of the property on giving such security as the
Court might direct.
The executor repeatedly delayed the administration to obtain counsel's and senior counsel's advice (Nicholas G Pappas & Co's letter of 28 November and correspondence there referred to).
The executor failed to respond to Tzovaras & Co's suggestion of 16
October 1996 that the property be let on a short term tenancy until 21 April (despite repeated complaints about that failure). Alexander Mack & Co asserted that the agent's report (apparently advising of the cost of putting the premises in a habitable state) had been sent to Nicholas G Pappas &
Co. It had not.

Fitness 
As well as the above matters, the plaintiff relied on the following:
The terms of the executor's letter to the plaintiff of 1 July 1996 indicated that the defendant was not a fit and proper person to execute the trust (or administer the estate).
The executor chose his daughter to do the work which he should have done, and to do so in her capacity as his solicitor.
Notwithstanding para 8, he sought to charge the estate with professional costs for that work and also intended to claim commission in respect of that work.

Particulars 
The various items of executorial work for which professional charges are sought to be made by Messrs Alexander Mack & Co from 17 August to 21
December 1995 were in the letter from Alexander Mack & Co dated 19
February 1996. The intention of the executor to charge those items as professional costs of his solicitor, to charge alleged disbursements of his solicitor, and also to claim commission, appears from para. 8 of the affidavit of the defendant sworn 29 July 1996 in the Probate proceedings.
The executor sought to charge the estate with additional costs arising from his instruction to his solicitor to decline any telephone conversation, and from time to time any other communication, with Tzovaras & Co.
(Letters or facsimiles from Alexander Mack & Co to Tzovaras & Co dated October 1995; 18 October 1995; 16 November 1995).
The executor invited Tzovaras & Co to involve the estate in additional legal costs by taking proceedings to injunct the threatened sale of the property at 177 Hargrave Street, Paddington. (Letter from Alexander Mack & Co dated 20 October 1995).
On about 1 November 1995 the executor required the plaintiff to pay him $12,000 to cover the expenses of administration, as a condition of transferring the property to him. (Letter from the appellant to Mr Pappas dated 3 November 1995). After taking into account the sum of $5,345.84 which the executor received on 30 October 1995 (Defendant's verified accounts sworn on 26 April 1996) this sum substantially exceeded the total costs claimed to have been incurred at that time, even if all of the claimed costs and expenses were justified.
The executor was elderly, in poor health, and unable to write.

Costs
The executor claimed that by 1 July 1996 the costs and expenses of the estate were in the region probably of about $50,000. Between 1 November 1995 and 1 July 1996 the only substantial work apparently done in relation to the estate by the executor was: to obtain the advice of counsel in relation to the publication of notices under s. 92 of the Wills, [Probate and Administration
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/paaa1898259/) and notices to the Kollaras family in respect of their claim (which advice the executor did not follow); filing his accounts in the Probate Division after the summons was filed; appearing by his legal representative in these proceedings on 6 May 1996 to oppose the application of the plaintiff that the proceedings be adjourned to 6 July 1996 to permit the Probate proceedings to be determined; possibly, attending through his solicitor in relation to requisitions raised by the Deputy Registrar in the Probate proceedings and considering an affidavit of Mr Pappas sworn on 14 June 1996 in those proceedings; corresponding through his solicitor with Tzovaras & Co.
Paragraph 9 above was repeated.
The executor instructed counsel to appear on the mention of the proceedings on 8 July 1996 at which time they were adjourned by consent as the
Probate proceedings were not determined, notwithstanding the offer of Tzovaras & Co in their letter of 2 July 1996. The executor instructed senior counsel to appear, inter alia: on 12 August 1996 on the return before the Registrar of the plaintiff's notice of motion seeking leave to amend the summons; on the hearing of the joint application to Windeyer J. on 13 November 1996 to vacate the hearing date and the plaintiff's notice of motion which had been placed in the short notice list on 16 August 1996; and on the mention of the proceedings before the Registrar on 10 March 1997.

Competence 
In addition to the above matters the plaintiff relied on the following:
Notwithstanding the `considerable research into the beneficiary' which it is said the executor or his solicitor performed, they failed to locate the beneficiary before 12 October 1995. Nonetheless the executor instructed his solicitor to act for the beneficiary, and made arrangements for the sale of the property notwithstanding that this was contrary to the beneficiary's wishes.
The executor engaged Michael Honer Realty, Real Estate Agents, to sell the property at 177 Hargrave Street, Paddington notwithstanding that the executor proposed to sell the property otherwise than for the purpose of administration of the estate and accordingly had no power of sale.
He said that he was following the directions of the will in selling the property by public auction. (Alexander Mack & Co's letter dated 16 October ). The will contained no such direction. He later contended that his purpose in arranging for the property to be advertised for sale was to avoid vandalism, there being no funds in the estate to put the property into a tenantable state. (Respondent's affidavit of 29 July 1996 in the Probate
Division). No such contention was advanced in the correspondence with Tzovaras & Co. Moreover, the executor failed to contact the beneficiary to advise him of his bequest and the assets in the estate and to ascertain his wishes regarding the sale of the property.
The executor filed a statement of receipts and disbursements including `accounts to be paid' which included: a claim by the Department of Social Security for $1,028.30 for overpaid pension. The Department claimed that the moneys had been paid to the
Commonwealth Bank Account of the deceased after her death. The claim was made by letter to the executor dated 24 October 1995. The executor did not have the deceased's passbook which had been withheld by the Kollaras family. On 29 May Alexander Mack & Co requested details from the Commonwealth Bank of the difference in the balance of the account from the date of death to closure. This letter was apparently written in response to the requisition of the Registrar. The Bank replied on 4 June 1996. It showed no receipt from the
Department except one payment after the date of death, which was not the subject of the Department's claim. Notwithstanding this discrepancy, no step was taken to reconcile the statements until after the notice of motion dated 9
August 1996 was filed and the discrepancy pointed out by the plaintiff's legal advisers to the defendant's legal advisers. On about 26 August 1996 the
Department advised that it had adjusted the amount of `overpaid aged pension' to nil. Payments had been returned to the Department from the account; an amount of $4,987.20 for `aborted auction fees and charges' of Michael
Honer Realty. The agent hasdno contractual right to the amount claimed, indeed the claim, even for expenses, appears to be excluded. (Clauses 3.2, 3.3 and .4). If the agent did have a restitutionary claim, it arose from his engagement by the executor before the grant of Probate, when the executor had not ascertained the beneficiary's wishes, and notwithstanding the absence of power to sell.

General
There was hostility between the executor and the beneficiary grounded in the way in which the estate and trust had been administered, and substantial overcharges had been sought to be made.
The welfare of the beneficiary and the trust estate required the revocation of the grant of Probate and removal of the executor from his office as constructive trustee.
By reason of the above matters, the continuance of the executor in his office prevented the proper execution of the trust (or administration of the estate if the estate is not yet administered).
The executor had no further function usefully to perform. He had invited the plaintiff to assume the effective conduct of the Kollaras proceedings.

GROUNDS OF APPEAL 
The appellant appealed from the decision of Young J on the following grounds: * His Honour failed to apply correctly the principles stated in Bates versus Messner; * His Honour erred in holding that the Court should not exercise its discretion to remove an executor unless the grant of probate was proving useless or nearly useless or the administration had got to the stage where the respondent's conduct amounted to something like paralysing the administration of the estate through misconduct; * His Honour erred in failing to revoke the grant of probate for the reasons the appellant contended; * In awarding costs against the appellant, his Honour failed to take into account that the summons had sought other relief and that the proposal to have the appellant conduct the Kollaras proceedings was made after the proceedings were begun and affidavits prepared 
The appellant sought an order that the grant of probate be revoked, an order that letters of administration with the will annexed de bonis non of the deceased be granted to the appellant and that the respondent pay the appellant's costs of the proceedings in the court below. The appellant also sought an order that the costs of the proceedings below and of the appeal should be paid by the respondent personally without recourse to the estate of the deceased.

YOUNG J'S REASONS FOR JUDGMENT 
Young J published his reasons for judgment on 16 June 1997. His Honour first considered what he saw as an initial procedural problem arising from the proceedings having been begun in the Equity Division rather than the Probate
Division. His Honour concluded that the whole of the relief the appellant sought was relief in the Probate Division and said that he thought that was the end of the argument and that the proceedings should be transferred to the
Probate Division and then dismissed in that Division. However, on consideration, his Honour concluded that such transfer would serve no purpose.

Section 49 in [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/paaa1898259/index.html#p3)
Division 1 of the [Supreme Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) provides that subject to [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p7), concerned with appeals to the Court of Appeal, proceedings in the Court which are not assigned to the Court of Appeal are assigned to the Divisions of the
Court. [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p3)
Division 2 provides for the distribution amongst Divisions, as [s52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s52.html) says, "for convenient dispatch". For that reason, the Court is divided into the Divisions listed in [s38(b).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s38.html) [Section (3)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s53.html) provides for there to be assigned to the Equity Division all proceedings for the administration of the estates of deceased persons, the reason why the summons in these proceedings was originally filed in the Equity Division.
[Section (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s54.html) provides that proceedings may be retained in a Division whether or not the proceedings are assigned to that Division by the Act or by the Rules.

Young J concluded, as I read his reasons, that no sufficient case for transfer to another Division had been made out and I am aware of none. As a Judge of the Court, Young J had authority to deal with the proceedings completely, whether or not according to the ordinary assignment of business they should have been instituted in the Probate Division or whether or not they were amended in a way which raised a matter which ordinarily would have been dealt with in the Probate Division. Neither party suggested that Young J had other than such authority or that the proceedings should have been transferred to the Probate Division and I need say no more about it.

Young J next turned to consider whether or not the jurisdiction to revoke the
Grant of Probate should be exercised. His Honour carefully reviewed a number of cases, decided both in New South Wales and elsewhere. This in my opinion was unnecessary. The principles to be applied are stated in the decision of this Court in Bates versus Messner. In that case, the appeal was from a decision of Myers J dismissing an application for the revocation of a grant of probate made to the respondent. Sugerman JA at 189 quoted from the judgment of Jeune P in In the Goods of Loveday [[1900] P 154] at 156 and said the principle there stated had been consistently followed and no doubt cast on its correctness in point of principle. Jeune P in the passage quoted said: "After all, the real object which the court must always keep in view is the due and proper administration of the estate and the interests of the parties beneficially entitled thereto; and I can see no good reason why the court should not take fresh action in regard to an estate where it is made clear that its previous grant has turned out abortive or inefficient. If the court has in certain circumstances made a grant in the belief and hope that the person appointed will properly and fully administer the estate, and if it turns out that the person so appointed will not or cannot administer, I do not see why the court should not revoke an inoperative grant and make a fresh grant." 
At 191-192, Asprey JA said: "... that the essential basis of the exercise of the court's inherent jurisdiction to revoke a grant of probate is that emphasised by Jeune P, namely, that the real object which the court must always keep in view is the due and proper administration of the estate in the interests of the parties beneficially entitled thereto on the part of the person to whom and by whose oath as to the faithful performance of his duties the court has been induced to entrust the office of executor. The terms used in some of the previously decided cases with relation to the circumstances which have given rise to the exercise of the jurisdiction of revocation, such as `abortive', `inefficient', `useless' or `ineffectual', are simply descriptive of a situation in which the court has been persuaded to the view that its grant, which was predicated on the oath of the executor named in the will that `he will pay all the just debts and legacies of the said deceased so far as the estate of the said deceased will extend and the law shall bind him, and that he will otherwise well and faithfully administer the said estate according to law; and that he will render a just and true account of his administration' has been circumvented by a breach of that oath which is in effect an undertaking to the court making the grant. I shall make no attempt to define all circumstances which may attract the exercise of the court's jurisdiction, but where circumstances clearly appear to have arisen after a grant of probate which impel the court to the firm conclusion that the due and proper administration of an estate has either been put in jeopardy or has been prevented either by reason of acts or omissions on the part of the executor or by virtue of matters personal to him, for example, mental infirmity, ill health, or by virtue of the proof of other matters which establish that the executor is not a fit and proper person to carry out the duties which he has sworn to the court that he will perform, the court may exercise its inherent jurisdiction to revoke the grant." 
The non-requirement since 1994 that an executor take the oath of office in no way detracts from the force of this dictum; see now para 10 in the affidavit of executor, Form 97.

These are the principles to be applied in the present case. Mr Broun QC, who appeared for the respondent, submitted that in New South Wales there was no power to revoke a grant of probate unless the executor had done nothing in the administration of the estate and that any revocation of probate would operate "ab initio" with the consequence that any act performed by the respondent as executor would be made void. He submitted that in Bates versus Messner the grant was revoked because nothing had been done by the executor to administer the estate. In that case, the grant was made on 21 November 1960. Almost nothing had been done in the way of performance of the executorial duties except for the payment of death duties: see 187 and 188. On 16 December 1963 the executor, who was also a solicitor acting for the estate, was made bankrupt.
He had misappropriated 2,200 from the estate. On 20 August 1965 he was sentenced for various offences involving defalcations and on 11 October 1965 his name was removed from the roll of solicitors. At first instance, Myers J said (see 188): "The fact that an executor is a person of bad character or that it appears that the estate may be in jeopardy if it remains in his hands is no ground for revoking a grant...... The fact that an executor may have neglected his duties is likewise no ground. It must be shown that the grant has become useless, for example, by supervening insanity or physical incapacity or by the executor having left the jurisdiction and refused to administer the estate. There is no evidence in this case that the executor has refused to administer." 
The Court of Appeal rejected such limitations on the power of the Court to revoke a grant of probate. Nowhere in the judgments did their Honours suggest that an application for revocation could not succeed if the executor had performed executorial duties, or that, to the extent that the executor had, his or her acts were void.

If there be any doubt about the matter it is resolved by s40D of the W P &
A Act which provides, so far as presently material, as follows: "(1) If a grant of probate or administration is revoked, the provisions of this section shall have effect.
 ........

The revocation shall not invalidate any payment or transfer lawfully made by or to the executor or administrator in the course of administration before the revocation, but nothing in this subsection shall prejudice the right of any person to follow assets into the hands of the person or any of them among whom the same may have been distributed, or who may have received the same." 
This section is of general application and not limited to the particular circumstance of revocation described in s40C; compare s40D (4). An example of a case where probate was revoked after executorial acts had been performed is
In the Goods of Galbraith [[1951] P 422.] In my opinion, the respondent's submission should be rejected. Mr Broun did not suggest that the principles stated in Bates versus Messner were not those to be applied in considering the present application.

Young J referred to the appellant's claim that the respondent had been guilty of great and unreasonable delay but did not in his reasons for judgment refer to the evidence in support of this claim. He said only: "There then [that is to say after October 1995] followed acrimonious correspondence between the respective solicitors. It would appear that the reason for the correspondence taking this form was because the plaintiff was objecting to the defendant selling the deceased's house because he wanted it for himself. The defendant wished to sell the property because he said it was vacant, it could only be let if a considerable amount of money was found to do it up and that money was not available. If it was left vacant then the defendant feared it would be further vandalised and reduced in value." 
With respect, this summary does not accurately state the expressed attitude of the respondent through his solicitors. On 16 October 1995 in a letter, parts of which are very difficult to understand, they wrote that the executor was selling the property by public auction "in following the directions of the will". The solicitors asked it to be noted that the property was not insured and that "our insurance company refuses to insure the property while it is vacant". In fact the property was insured as the November "discovery" revealed. In their letter of 16 October 1995 the appellant's solicitors pointed out that the will contained no directions for the property to be sold and that the respondent's power to sell was limited to a sale for the purposes of administration.

There was no need to sell the property for the purposes of administration unless the Kollaras claim referred to in Alexander Mack & Co's letter of October 1995 was made out. In their letter of 31 October 1995, the appellant's solicitors pointed out the obvious, namely, the publishing of notices under s92 and the serving of a notice under s93 of the Wills, [Probate and Administration Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/paaa1898259/) should be undertaken forthwith. In fact, the [s92](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/paaa1898259/s92.html) notice was not published until 20 August 1996 and the [s93](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/paaa1898259/s93.html) notice not served on members of the Kollaras family until 7 March 1997. There was no justification whatever for this delay. Indeed, Mr Broun conceded the delay could not be justified.

Young J referred to the appellant's claim that the respondent had failed to give the requisite Notices against the Kollaras family in due time but beyond that does not mention it. By 9 February 1996 the respondent's solicitors had advice from Counsel that they should publish a Notice under [section .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/paaa1898259/s92.html)
Why a firm of solicitors holding themselves out as competent to act for an executor on the probate of a will and the administration of an estate as simple to administer as this one, would require the advice of Counsel, the obtaining of which led to nearly three months delay from 16 November 1995 to 9
February 1996, is difficult to understand.

On 19 February 1996 Alexander Mack & Co wrote that "in due course" they would publish a notice of distribution and place the estate in a position where it could be distributed "once the twelve months from the grant of probate had expired". This is a statement by his solicitors that the respondent proposed to take twelve months to administer an estate with one beneficiary and assets consisting of an unencumbered property and two bank accounts. Apart from liabilities in the order of $6,000, there was the claim by the Kollaras family which called for prompt and obvious action. There is considerable force in the statement of the appellant's solicitors on 8 March that apart from the collection of a savings account held by the deceased, they were unable to identify any positive step which had been taken by the respondent since 20 October 1995 to progress the administration of the estate.

Dealing with the argument by the appellant's counsel, Mr White, based on cases stretching back to Garthshore versus Chalie <case>; [[1804] 10 Ves 1]; [32 ER 743], that the suggestion that an executor has one year to administer the estate before he or she can be attacked for non-action was "a complete furphy", Young J said: "He need not have gone so far. The proposition is true and completely well supported by more modern authority as appears on pp 412-413 of Geddes Rowland & Studdert "Will Probate and Administration Law in New South Wales" 1996.
Prima facie, if a year has passed the onus is upon the executor to justify the delay: re Tankard [[1942] Ch 69] at 73." 
After the appellant began these proceedings on 18 April 1996, a positive step was taken. The respondent filed a Summons in the Probate Division for an order passing accounts and commission and filed verified accounts. Apart from a general denial of inactivity, the respondent's solicitors response to the proceedings was to claim that they had been commenced in the wrong Division of the Court; see letter of 3 May 1996.

The first suggestion of a tenancy of the property in the evidence is found in a letter from Nicholas G Pappas & Co to Alexander Mack & Co of 18
April 1997. That brought the response on 21 April 1997 that there was no possibility, nor was it practicable, to lease the estate property due to its derelict condition with all services disconnected. "The cost of putting it into a habitual (sic) state is estimated by the agent to be $50,000." Not until Mrs Lenton's affidavit of 2 May 1997 was it said to have been the wish of the executor to dispose of the property because it could not be tenanted, because of its state of dilapidation and poor repair and because the estate had no funds to put the property into a tenantable state.

Young J said he did not want to deal with the question finally as it might be that it would come up for decision at a later time in the dispute between the parties when all the facts were available, but found, "in the circumstances as presently appear, it would seem not unreasonable for the defendant to have taken the action he did. I also tend to think that in the circumstances, his preparations were in connection with a sale for the purposes of administration." His Honour referred to the appellant's claims that the respondent had failed to give the requisite Notices against the Kollaras family in due time, to file his accounts until after the commencement of these proceedings and to answer letters and had repeatedly delayed the administration to obtain Senior Counsel's advice and had permitted his daughter, who was acting as his solicitor, to do all the work that he should have done as an executor personally. His Honour's judgment continued: "Mr Broun QC admitted that the administration had not been all that it could have been and there had been delays. However, he said that there was not the degree of dereliction in duty that would warrant revocation of the grant.
Furthermore he put that at the present stage it is clear that the only things remaining to be done are the resolution of the claim made by the Kollaras family, the matter of the estate agent's claim and the final distribution of the estate. As to the first, Mr Broun QC says that his client is quite happy to have the plaintiff virtually conduct the proceedings. He says that if the defendant could be left in peace and released from any claims, he would not at all mind stepping out of the picture completely, but that was not the deal that was being offered, nor was it ever likely to be offered in view of the relations between the parties. In the absence of such agreement, the next best thing was to permit the plaintiff to direct what would happen to the Kollaras proceedings.

I agree with the submissions that were made by Mr Broun QC. The administration could have been more efficient, but it has not got to the stage where the executor's conduct amounts to anything like paralysing the administration of the estate because of his misconduct. It cannot be the case that merely by continually harassing the executor and by writing solicitors' letters to him, the beneficiary can force revocation of the grant. That is so even if the executor rises to the bait of provocation in the beneficiary's solicitors' letter and responds in a way which he later would regret. If it were otherwise, then any beneficiary could, by the appropriate tirade of abuse directed against an executor, create the environment in which the executor's grant would be revoked and the protection sought by the testator by appointing a trusted person as his or her executor would be lost.

Mr White says that in taking this view I am not doing my duty in following what the Court of Appeal said in Bates versus Messner. He submits that the test in Bates versus Messner was that where an executor is acting other than in the interests of the beneficiaries, then the court exercises its inherent jurisdiction to revoke the grant (p 192). With respect, I do not consider that the decision should be read in that way at all. Certainly it is the interests of the beneficiaries which motivate the court, but the court will only think that those interests are prejudicially affected when the executor's administration shows that he is not duly and properly administering the estate and that the estate has been put in jeopardy. That usually will come about through a person's mental infirmity, ill health or conduct such as to show that he or she is virtually useless as an executor. That degree of uselessness has not been demonstrated in this case to my satisfaction.

Accordingly, at the end of the oral argument I dismissed the present proceedings with costs." 
ERROR OF PRINCIPLE 
The passage that I have quoted shows in my opinion that, although his Honour made reference to the test in Bates versus Messner, he applied a different and stricter test. With all respect, the statement that the administration could have been more efficient does not describe the litany of inefficiency and delay of which the appellant complains and which the respondent does not deny.
It is wrong to suggest that the Court will not intervene to revoke the probate unless the executor's conduct amounts to something like paralysing the administration of the estate by misconduct. Obviously, a beneficiary cannot force the revocation of a grant by harassing an executor. His Honour's reference to "the appropriate tirade of abuse directed against an executor" could have no application to the letters written by the appellant's solicitors. Mr Broun accepted this and submitted that his Honour did not intend to suggest otherwise. If so, this was an irrelevant observation.
Invited to particularise anything in the correspondence or interchanges between the parties which justified Young J's observations, Mr Broun pointed to the following expressions and matters in the letters from Tzovaras &
Company: * "Unsatisfactory state of affairs" in their letter of 13 October 1995 * "Forbids" in the letter of 16 October 1995 * "If you are not saying this, what are you saying?" in the letter of 17 October 1995 * Mrs Lenton's asserted distress in Alexander Mack & Co's letter of 18 October 1995 * "Please provide us with an explanation of your client's conduct" in the letter of 18 October 1995 * "By 11 am today we require a written response of substance" in the letter of 20 October 1995 * The executor's objection to direct phone calls referred to in Alexander Mack & Co's letter of 20 October 1995 * "We have not found your two page letter to be a satisfactory response" in the letter of 31 October 1995 * "Please inform us of your client's instructions thereon by 4 pm on Thursday, 9 November" in the letter of 8 November 1995 * "Our client has concluded that having regard to the time which has elapsed since 21 November and your failure to inform us of the matter or matters on which Counsel's advice has been sought, your client does not intend to administer the estate" in the letter of 8 December 1995 
Beyond these particulars, Mr Broun submitted that the correspondence continued in similar vein from then on. At all times the appellant's solicitor adopted a confrontational antagonistic and, it was submitted, completely professionally inappropriate attitude in the correspondence and such phone calls as occurred.
The passages referred to have to read in their context. The context, as I have said, was one of inaction and delay by the respondent. The appellant's solicitors, to their credit, were not to be put off by this. The letters they wrote, quite properly, made this plain.

Young J stated no reasons for a conclusion that the appellant or his solicitors were continually harassing the respondent, to the extent that his
Honour meant by this to reflect upon the propriety of their conduct, and a careful review of the correspondence between the parties makes any such conclusion insupportable. If it were suggested that the letters written by
Alexander Mack & Co on 1 July 1996 to Tzovaras & Company or the letter of the same date from the respondent to the appellant, which I have quoted, could adequately be excused as rising to the bait of provocation in the appellant's solicitors letter, I do not agree. The correspondence shows, with clarity, that the problem lay in the incapacity or unwillingness of the respondent or his solicitors to progress a simple probate administration expeditiously.

At the conclusion of his reasons, his Honour found that the necessary degree of uselessness by the respondent had not been demonstrated and that accordingly, the summons should be dismissed and the appellant ordered to pay the costs. His Honour accepted that there was inefficiency but seemed to have regarded this as being excused because the appellant, through his solicitor, repeatedly complained about it. Apparently that was the harassment. His Honour said of the appellant's submission that the test in Bates versus Messner was that where an executor was acting other than in the interests of the beneficiary, then the Court exercises its inherent jurisdiction to revoke the grant, was wrong. In my opinion, and with the greatest respect, Young J erred in the way that he approached this application.

In the first place, his Honour examined in detail tests applied in cases in other jurisdictions which, apart from Hordern versus Hordern [[1910] AC ], were not binding on him. This led his Honour to say that in New South Wales and
England, greater emphasis had been placed on the right of every testator to choose his or her own executor. This led his Honour to examine cases concerned with conflicts of interest. The present was not a case of conflict of interest. It was a case of inexcusable delay in administering the estate exemplified by the failure expeditiously to publish or serve notices under ss92 and 93 of the W P & A Act. His Honour said of Bates versus Messner: "Although the words used by Asprey JA are wide enough to deal with the situation referred to in Monty Financial Services Ltd versus Delmo <case>; [(1996) 1 VR 65], it seems to me that unless one is getting close to the position of the grant being useless, the inherent power to revoke a grant to an executor should not be used." 
For present purposes, this interpretation of Bates versus Messner was too narrow.
The question was, to adapt the language of Asprey JA at 192, whether the due and proper administration of an estate had either been put in jeopardy or had been prevented either by reasons of acts or omissions on the part of the executor or by virtue of matters personal to him, for example, mental infirmity, ill health, or by virtue of the proof of other matters which established that the executor was not a fit and proper person to carry out the duties he had sworn to perform. His Honour applied a far too rigid test by saying that one had to get close to the position of the grant being useless.
In this, in my opinion, his Honour erred. Further his Honour did not expressly take into account the degree of delay and inefficiency. No reason was advanced by reference to any particular act of the appellant or his solicitors, whether in correspondence or otherwise, which could possibly justify the conclusion that inefficiency and delay was the result of harassment. Indeed, I do not think that solicitors, who diligently pursue their client's interests in the way the appellant's solicitors did, should be so stigmatised. In the circumstances, the errors of law revealed entitle this Court to interfere with his Honour's order even though it involved a discretionary exercise of jurisdiction.

RE-EXERCISE OF DISCRETION 
I have no doubt that the appellant's complaints of delay and inefficiency having been made out, a proper exercise of discretion would have led to the revocation of the grant of probate. Furthermore, I think in the circumstances the respondent should have been ordered to pay the costs of the proceedings from his own resources and without recourse to the estate. That leaves the question of what orders should now be made. The respondent's conduct of the administration of probate since Young J gave his decision nearly eighteen months ago inspires no confidence that he is able or willing properly to fulfil his task as executor.

Young J noted that the executor's accounts were still in dispute before the
Registrar and said there did not appear to be any reason why, the application for revocation having been dealt with, that application should not be heard.
However, having unsuccessfully on 15 January 1998, requested Nicholas G Pappas & Co to withdraw their client's objections to their costs as set out in the filed accounts and as rendered as well as costs in respect of the Equity proceedings brought against their client by the Kollaras family, the respondent through his solicitors, by letter of 30 June 1998, took up the untenable position, as seems to have been subsequently conceded, that the appellant was precluded from asking him to file any further accounts. The application for commission and to pass accounts has still not been heard more than a year after Young J published his reasons.

Whatever complexity existed in the administration of the estate, namely the claim by the Kollaras family, disappeared when the appellant's solicitors settled that claim in September 1997 for $10,000. The appellant has outlined a series of orders or undertakings on the basis of which he would be content at this time not to press for the revocation of probate. These orders or undertakings as put before the Court were as follows.
That within 30 days the respondent file, verify and pass his accounts and make any claim for commission in respect of the estate, and thereafter prosecute expeditiously his application to have his accounts and any commission assessed.
That until the assessment of the respondent's accounts and any claim for commission the respondent not deduct from the estate account any moneys in payment of legal costs and expenses.
That within seven days the respondent pay from the estate account the sum of $15,361.25 to the Deputy Commissioner of Taxation in accordance with the advice of Hill Mayoh, Accountants, of 16 September 1998 which is annexure `A' to the affidavit of T A Lenton sworn 18 September 1998.
That the respondent forthwith repay the estate the sum of $26,061.40 deducted from the estate account on 6 February 1998 as costs in respect of `the Equity proceedings'.
Within 14 days the respondent make a further interim distribution to the appellant in the sum of $70,000.

At the conclusion of the argument the Court informed counsel that when judgment was handed down the parties would be invited to put submissions about the form of appropriate orders.

ORDERS 
In my opinion, the following orders should be made:
Appeal allowed.
Set aside the order of Young J dismissing the proceedings and ordering the appellant to pay the costs thereof.
Orders to be made in accordance with short minutes.
The respondent to pay the costs of the proceedings before Young J and of this appeal without recourse to the estate but to have a certificate under the
Suitors' Fund Act if so qualified.

BEAZLEY JA: I agree with Sheller JA. * * * 
