

Regina versus Saxon Matter No Cca 60113/97 [1998] NSWSC 115 (21 April 1998) 
Last Updated: 20 May 1998 
REGINA versus LLOYD ARTHUR SAXON /97 April 1998 
Wood J, Smart J, Sperling J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal from Dunford J 
FILE NO/S: 60113 of 1997 
HEARING DATE/S: 3 March 1998 
DELIVERED: 21 April 1998 
PARTIES: REGINA versus Lloyd Arthur SAXON 
JUDGMENT OF: Wood, Smart, Sperling JJ 
COUNSEL: * APPELLANT - P R Boulten * RESPONDENT - L Robberds QC 
SOLICITORS: * APPELLANT - Watsons * RESPONDENT - SE O'Connor, Solicitor for Public Prosecutions 
RESULT: Application dismised 
CATCHWORDS: 
Criminal law and procedure - appeal against conviction - conspiracy to import cannabis (s233B(1)(b) [Customs Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/) ) - money laundering (s811 Proceeds of Crimes Act 1997 - prior appeal dismissed -
Court order perfected - fresh evidence - whether Court has jurisdiction to re- open appeal - Application dismissed.

No. of pages: 28 
REGINA versus Lloyd Arthur SAXON 
The applicant sought leave to appeal against conviction on three counts of money laundering contrary to s81 of the [Proceeds of Crime Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/poca1987160/) ; one count of conspiracy to import cannabis resin contrary to s233 B(1)(b) of the [Customs Act 1901](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/) . A previous appeal against conviction had been dismissed. Advice having been given that an application to the Commonwealth Attorney General pursuant to <case> (1)(b) of the [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) for reference back to the Court would in all probability be refused, the applicant sought to bring a new appeal on the basis of fresh evidence, which he asserted was not available at the trial or at the earlier appeal. The evidence consisted of a statutory declaration made by the applicant's brother to the effect that he and not the applicant had placed the gold, money and the cannabis resin the subject of two of the money laundering counts, and of the possession count, in the applicant's garage, without the knowledge or complicity of the applicant. This evidence had not been available at trial nor at the subsequent appeal against conviction, as the applicant's brother, who had been at large, had been arrested and returned to Australia only after the appeal had been dismissed and the order of the Court perfected. 
The applicant submitted that the Court had jurisdiction to hear the appeal under a general power to reopen an appeal where failure to do so might involve a miscarriage of justice, arising in this case because of the foreshadowed refusal to refer the matter under the [Part
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/index.html#p13a) of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) .

HELD 
Since the first appeal determined the case on its merits and the order then made had been perfected, the Court lacked jurisdiction to reopen the appeal or to entertain a fresh appeal. No general jurisdiction existed to reopen an appeal or to entertain a fresh appeal on the ground that a failure to do so might permit a miscarriage of justice to occur. The application was therefore dismissed.

Applied 
Grierson versus The King <case>; <case>; <case>; [(1997) 71 ALJR 875] 
ORDERS: Application dismissed.

JUDGMENT 
WOOD J: The applicant seeks leave to appeal against convictions recorded at his trial on 8 September 1993, for the following offences arising under Commonwealth law: conspiracy to import cannabis resin, being not less than the commercial quantity applicable to that substance (10 tonnes), contrary to S 233 B(1)(b)l [Customs Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/); engaging in money laundering (possession of the proceeds of crime, namely $5.5m) contrary to S 81 of the [Proceeds of Crime Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/poca1987160/); engaging in money laundering (receiving $352,000, the proceeds of crime) contrary to S 81 of the [Proceeds of Crime Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/poca1987160/); engaging in money laundering (possession of the proceeds of crime, namely gold bars and gold Kruger Rand coins) contrary to S 81 of the proceeds of
Crime Act 1987; possession of a prohibited import (cannabis resin) being not less than the trafficable quantity applicable to that substance contrary to S 233 B(1)(c) [Customs Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/).

The applicant received head sentences of imprisonment totalling thirteen years with a non-parole period of eight and a half years. An appeal to this Court was brought by the applicant against all convictions, and leave was sought to appeal against the sentences. The appeal against conviction was dismissed on 6
December 1994. Leave to appeal against sentence was granted but that appeal was also dismissed.

The applicant now asks the Court to entertain a further appeal against conviction upon the basis of fresh evidence, which he asserts was not available to him at the trial, or at the earlier appeal. That material is of immediate relevance to the offences in sub paras (b) (d) and (e) above, but also has a relevance for the remaining offences, so far as the facts proved at the trial concerning the first three offences were relied upon as circumstantial evidence in relation to the two other offences.

The application is opposed upon the basis that, the earlier appeal having been dismissed, and the order perfected this Court has no jurisdiction to embark upon a rehearing.

The nature of the evidence sought to be used, and the reason for the application, may be briefly mentioned. It was the Crown case that the applicant entered into a conspiracy with his brother Ian Hall Saxon, and others, to import the cannabis resin the subject of the first offence mentioned. The third offence, item (c) above, related to the collection of moneys said to have represented the proceeds of the sale of some of the imported cannabis. The remaining offences related to the discovery in a garage at Coogee, said to be under the applicant's control, of 4kgs of cannabis resin, the bank notes, the gold bars and the Kruger Rands, the subject of the relevant counts. The applicant was sentenced on the basis that he had been providing a safe place for Ian Saxon to store the cannabis resin and the other items.

Some three months before the commencement of the applicant's trial, Ian Saxon "departed from his place of custody" at Long Bay prison. Whether that constituted an escape is a matter awaiting determination in other proceedings.
He was still at large when the trial commenced, and he remained at large when the appeal came on for hearing. He was arrested and returned to Australia after the appeal was dismissed and the order of the Court perfected.

He pleaded guilty on 21 February 1996, to numerous charges involving the importation of the cannabis resin and the possession of the proceeds of the sale of drugs. On 1 August 1996, he was sentenced to an effective head sentence totalling twentyfour years with an effective non parole period of sixteen years, adjusted to take into account a period of pre-sentence custody.

On 12 June 1996, while at Maitland Correctional Centre waiting sentence, Ian
Saxon made a Statutory Declaration in which he asserted, inter alia, that the money, the gold and cannabis resin had been placed in the garage by himself, without the knowledge, or complicity, of the present applicant. This accorded with the defence case at the trial of the latter, and it was a matter expressly considered by the Court of Criminal Appeal in relation to the unsafe and unsatisfactory ground. The Court observed in this regard: "As to the charges relating to what was found in the garage, the jury were entitled to infer that the garage and its contents were in the effective control of Lloyd Saxon, at least jointly with his brother, and they were entitled to reject his assertion that he was unaware of its contents. Having regard to the nature of those contents, it is inherently unlikely that Ian
Saxon would have put them there without the knowledge of Lloyd Saxon. ... In the light of the whole of the evidence, it was well open to the jury to infer that Andrews (sic) knew what was in the garage, and that a huge amount of money, together with gold and cannabis, would not have been stored there without his knowledge and approval." 
Additionally, the Court considered the sufficiency of the directions given by the trial Judge in relation to the meaning of possession, and in particular whether the jury had their attention drawn in an adequate way to the need for the Crown to establish immediate and physical control over the contents of the garage. This arose in the context of the defence case that the items in the garage had been placed there by Ian Saxon, without the knowledge of the present applicant, and that there was at least a possibility that the former retained sole control over them.

It can be seen that the matter now sought to be raised had squarely arisen at the trial, and in the 1994 appeal, although without the benefit of any evidence from Ian Saxon. The appeal was dismissed by the Court of Criminal
Appeal upon the merits, and after consideration of the very issue now sought to be reventilated.

The present application was listed for hearing on 20 June 1997, but was stood over to allow a petition to be addressed to the Commonwealth for a reference back to this Court, pursuant to S 474C (1)(b) of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/). An application to this effect was made to the Commonwealth Attorney General based upon the Statutory Declaration of Ian Saxon. On 14 December 1997, the applicant's Solicitors were advised that the Minister for Justice had declined to consider the petition while the applicant had an outstanding application before the Court of Criminal Appeal to reopen the appeal. The advice continued: "However the Minister indicated that, if she were to make a decision in relation to Lloyd Saxon's petition on the material before her at this time, she would decide not to refer the case to the Court of Criminal Appeal." 
It is against this background that the preliminary question of jurisdiction needs to be determined.

In inviting the Court to assume jurisdiction, the appellant recognised that it was necessary to persuade it to depart from the decision of the High Court in
Grierson versus The King <case>; [(1938) 60 CLR 431.] The argument that it should do so rests upon the proposition that the Court has a general power or discretion to reopen an appeal where a failure to do so might lead to a miscarriage of justice. Such a situation was said to arise in the present case for the reasons: 
First, that there was a significant possibility that the applicant would have been acquitted by the jury, had Ian Saxon's evidence been available to them:
Mickelberg versus The Queen <case>; [(1989) 167 CLR 259.] In those circumstances it was submitted that a grave sense of disquiet and unease would arise if the convictions were allowed to stand: R v
Rendell [(1987) 32 A Crim R 243] and Varley versus Attorney General [(1987) 8 NSWLR 30]; and secondly, that in the light of the foreshadowed refusal of the Minister for
Justice to refer the matter under [Part
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/index.html#p13a) of the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/), a refusal by this Court to entertain the appeal would leave the applicant without any means of redressing that miscarriage of justice.

This latter assumption, which would be of relevance to the exercise of any discretion to entertain a second appeal, requires some qualification. It was common ground that by reason of S 68 of the Judiciary Act, convictions arising under Commonwealth law may be referred to the Court of Criminal Appeal pursuant to the provisions of S 474 C(1)(a) and (b) of the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/): The Queen v Collie Court of Criminal Appeal (Victoria), unreported, 18 December 1992.
Moreover, there is precedent for review under the [Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/adra1977396/), in respect of any decision of the relevant Minister, to refuse a petition or application for such a reference: Perrier versus Kerr Federal Court of Australia,
Ryan J, unreported 19 August 1997.

The correctness of these propositions was not further explored. The argument was confined to the threshold question whether this Court has a general jurisdiction to entertain a second appeal against conviction, notwithstanding the fact that an earlier appeal has been heard to finality, wherever the interests of justice dictate that it do so. The further question whether there was a risk of a miscarriage of justice in this case, or any other circumstance of relevance to an exercise of discretion, assuming such a discretion to exist, were expressly not addressed.

Grierson was a case on all fours with the present case, in that the applicant, having failed in an earlier appeal against conviction, and having also had an application for an inquiry under the former S 475(1) of the [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) refused, sought to bring a second appeal upon the basis of fresh evidence. In the course of his judgment in the Court of Criminal Appeal, with which Davidson and Halse Rogers JJ concurred, Jordan CJ said: "The point which has been raised is exactly covered by the decision ... in R v Edwards (No.2) (2) and I am of opinion that this court should follow that decision. When an appeal has once been fully heard and disposed of, that is, in my opinion, an end of the matter so far as appeal is concerned, and the prisoner cannot continue to appeal from time to time thereafter, whenever a new point occurs to him or to his legal advisers or whenever a new fact is alleged to have come to light. This does not mean that injustice must necessarily occur when new substantial evidence pointing to a prisoner's innocence is discovered after his appeal has been finally disposed of. In such a case recourse may be had to S 26 of the Criminal Appeal Act of 1912, or to
S 475 of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/). There is no reason to suppose that the procedure provided by those sections is not adequate for the consideration of any matter which it may now be sought to raise on behalf of the prisoner." 
Rich J, in the High Court said at 434: "In making the remedies provided by S 475 of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) and S 26 of the Criminal Appeal Act of 1912 available to a prisoner after conviction the legislature has, I think, recognised that the jurisdiction of the Court of
Criminal Appeal is confined within the limits of the Act and that when the court has heard an appeal on its merits and given its decision the appeal cannot be reopened." 
Dixon J observed, at 435/6: "The Criminal Appeal Act of 1912 is based upon the English Act of
It does not give a general appellate power in criminal cases exercisable on grounds and by a procedure discoverable from independent sources. It defines the grounds, prescribes the procedure and states the duty of the court. The statute deals with criminal appeals rather as a right or benefit conferred on prisoners convicted of indictable offences and sets out the kind of convictions and sentences from which they may appeal and lays down the conditions on which they may appeal as of right and by leave and the procedure which they must observe. It limits the time within which appeals and applications for leave to appeal may be brought, subject, however, to a discretionary power in the court to extend the period except where the sentence is capital. The grounds or principles upon which the court is to determine appeals are stated, and the duty is imposed on the court of dismissing an appeal, unless on those principles it determines that it should be allowed. The determination of an appeal is evidently definitive, and a conviction unappealed is equally final. No considerations controlling or affecting the conclusion to be deduced from these provisions are supplied by analogous civil proceedings. Appeal is not a common law remedy, and proceedings at law are only subject to that remedy by statute (Attorney-
General versus Sillem (1)" 
His Honour made reference to an area of discretion which did exist where an earlier appeal had not been determined upon its merits, noting at 437: "If the prisoner has abandoned his appeal, the Court of Criminal Appeal in
England will exercise a discretion to allow him to withdraw his notice of abandonment, notwithstanding that it operates as a dismissal of the appeal (Halsbury's Laws of England, 2nd ed, vol 9 p 273 and the cases cited in note o). But in such a case there has been no determination by the court, and there is no English case in which, after such a determination, an appeal has been reopened or a fresh appeal has been entertained." 
This decision, in my view, stands in the way of the existence of any general power or discretion of the kind argued by the appellant to exist. The statutory nature of the criminal appellate jurisdiction, for the reasons explained by Dixon J, in particular renders analogy to civil appellate review inappropriate.

Unless Grierson has been qualified in some fashion this Court has no option other than to follow it: Jacob versus Utah Construction & Engineering Pty Ltd <case>; [(1966) 116 CLR 200] at 207 per
Barwick CJ. Far from having been questioned, its authority has been recognised in a number of subsequent decisions in New South Wales and in those states where a similar point has arisen for decision.

Some exceptions have been noted, including: the discretion to allow a fresh appeal after abandonment of an earlier appeal, on the ground that the earlier appeal had not been the subject of any final determination - per Dixon J in Grierson (supra) and see R v
Cartwright [(1989) 17 NSWLR 243] at 246; the discretion to reconvene and entertain further argument in respect of a submission or ground of appeal which had not been dealt with, if the application to consider the outstanding matter had been made before the judgment of the Court was perfected: Regina versus Lapa No. 2 (1995) l80 A Crim R ;
 the discretion to look at the matter afresh where there had been a denial of procedural fairness in a Court of Criminal Appeal: Pantorno versus R <case>; [(1989) 166 CLR 466] and R versus McNamara [(1997) 1 VR 257.] 
The submission that these exceptions rest upon a more general discretion to intervene, in the interests of justice, is not borne out by an examination of the decisions relied upon by the appellant.

In Cartwright, Hunt and Badgery-Parker JJ accepted the correctness of
Grierson, observing at p 246: "This Court has no power to grant leave to appeal in a case where it has already heard an appeal on its merits and dismissed it : Grierson versus The King <case>; [60 CLR 431](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=60%20CLR%20431 "View LawCiteRecord" ) at 434, 436. However, no such appeal has been heard on its merits in this case. The Court does, moreover, retain an inherent jurisdiction to go behind r to ensure that a miscarriage of justice does not go unremedied: Grierson v
The King (at 437)." 
The case was one in which there had been a notice of abandonment, and the reference to the inherent jurisdiction to go behind r 27 (of the [Criminal
Appeal Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/), which deems an appeal to have been dismissed upon the filing of a notice of abandonment of the appeal) was to the jurisdiction reserved by Dixon J, for such a case.

The Court of Criminal Appeal of New South Wales similarly proceeded on the basis that the law was as stated in Grierson in Regina versus Stephens [(1990) A Crim R 323] at 326.

Lapa ( No.2) was a case where after dismissal of an appeal against conviction, but before the order was perfected by entry of its order, the appellant brought to the notice of the Court of Criminal Appeal it had not determined one of his grounds of appeal. By the time that the matter came back before the Court, and as a consequence of an inquiry having been initiated once the request was received, the order had in fact been entered on the indictment held in the Registry of the District Court.

The facts are accordingly very different from those which arise in the present case. More importantly, however, I am of the view that Clarke JA, who delivered the leading judgment, expressly accepted the authority of
Grierson, although not referring to it in terms. His Honour began by noting, at 402, the position in relation to a matter decided by a judge at first instance, or by an intermediate Court of Appeal: "It is well established at common law that a court may review, correct or alter its judgment at any time until its order or judgment has been perfected:
Smith versus NSW Bar Association (No 2) <case>; [(1992) 176 CLR 256] at 265; Re Suffield & Watts; Ex parte Brown [(1888) 20
QBD 693](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281888%29%2020%20QBD%20693 "View LawCiteRecord" ) at 697; Texas Co (Australasia) Ltd versus Federal Commissioner of Taxation <case>; [63 CLR 382] at 457; Pittalis versus Sherefettin [(1986) QB 868] at 879; Re
Harrison's Share [(1955) Ch 260.] 
The position is different once the judgment or order has been perfected.
Subject to the rules of court and possible exceptions concerning subsidiary matters, a court has no power to reconsider its decision and the judgment can be reviewed only on appeal: Bailey versus Marinoff <case>; [(1971) 125 CLR 529."] 
His Honour expressed some concern in relation to this principle, and in particular questioned whether the administrative action of a Court Officer, in entering a record of the order, should be allowed to affect the rights of parties. So it was that his Honour observed, at pp 403-404: "Where an application for consideration of a judgment is made before the judgment is perfected a court accords great weight to the principle of finality and, primarily for this reason, it is only in rare cases that it does accede to the application. A similar approach in cases where a judgment has been perfected would, in my opinion, more readily meet broad considerations of justice than the present rule does.

In each case the principle of finality would be of primary importance but the court would be able to exercise a judicial discretion having carried out a balancing exercise." 
His Honour then noted that it was not necessary to take that question any further since the order had not been perfected when the application was made.
These observations do no more than reflect his Honour's view as to an approach which would be more desirable than "the present rule".

This is made crystal clear by the introductory words to the passage at p 405, upon the remainder of which the applicant placed considerable reliance: "For my part there are two considerations which lead me to conclude that, accepting that the power of the court to vary a judgment cannot be enlivened, absent any relevant rule, after the judgment has been perfected it does have power to remedy an oversight where application is made before that has occurred, notwithstanding that the judgment is perfected while the court is considering the matter. The fundamental consideration which should determine whether a court of criminal appeal should reconsider its judgment is whether the failure to do so might lead to a miscarriage of justice. To put it another way, the application should be determined upon the interests of justice, giving full weight to the principle of finality. The second consideration is the basic practical one to which reference was made by the High Court in
Jones and Pantorno. That is, that the Court of Criminal Appeal should deal with all grounds of appeal upon which argument was proffered before the case is sent to the High Court for consideration of a leave application." 
This passage assumes the correctness of the principle in Grierson, and its application to a case where the judgment has been perfected. Thereafter it outlines the circumstances in which the Court might intervene in a case where the application for further review is made before the judgment of the Court has been perfected. Upon that basis Lapa is not at odds with Grierson.

In Regina versus Reid Court of Criminal Appeal unreported 21 October 1996, the applicant sought to reopen an appeal against conviction, after an earlier appeal against conviction had been entertained and dismissed, by raising an entirely new ground, which went to the jurisdiction of the original trial. No notation of the judgment on appeal appeared on the indictment, or on the file of the District Court, although the computer records of the Court had been `updated' with the relevant information. The appellant argued that the judgment had not been perfected. Whether or not the entry of a note of the judgment in the computer records constituted a perfection of the judgment was not decided. Simpson J, with whose reasons Mahoney ACJ and Handley JA agreed, noted: "... no argument was directed to this question and it is unnecessary further to go into it. The Crown contended, on the authority of Lapa: `The fundamental consideration in determining whether a judgment or order should be reconsidered is whether failure to do so might lead to a miscarriage of justice.' 
I think it is appropriate to consider the present application on that basis." 
Earlier, however, her Honour observed: "There is jurisdiction in this court to hear further argument on an appeal even after delivery of judgment, at least where that judgment has not been perfected, and the Crown has not argued otherwise: see Pantorno versus Regina <case>; [(1989) 166 CLR 466] at 474, ; R versus Lapa (No. 2) [(1995) 80 A Crim R 398."] 
The application was disposed of upon the ground that, as a matter of law, it had not been shown that any miscarriage of justice had occurred, with the consequence that if leave were given to re-open the appeal, it would inevitably fail. The continuing authority of Grierson which seems not to have been considered was not called into question.

In other States, intermediate Courts of Criminal Appeal have consistently applied the Grierson principle: see for example: 
Western Australia: 
R versus Stone [(1989) 42 A Crim R 189] at and R versus Vella [(1991) 52 A Crim R 298]; 
Queensland: see R versus Smith (No 2) 1969 Qd WN 10 
South Australia: 
R versus Edwards (No 2) <case>; [1931 SASR 376];
R versus Caruso [(1988) 49 SASR 465] and R v
Keogh (No 2)l CCA (SA) unreported 13 May 1997.

The point was also examined in R versus McNamara (No.2) [(1997) 1 VR 256.] That was a case in which the appellant sought to re-open an application for leave to appeal against conviction, which had earlier been dismissed, in order to argue a point which had been raised but not argued on the first application.

The Court first gave consideration to the power to reinstate an appeal, after the filing of a notice of abandonment, in those jurisdictions where the notice was deemed, by a rule of Court, to operate as a dismissal of the appeal. It noted the restriction on that power which had been discussed in R versus Moore [(1957) 1 WLR 841]; R versus Grantham [(1969) 2 QB 574] and R v
Medway [(1976) QB 779], confining it to circumstances where the notice could be regarded as a nullity.

The Court noted that the Full Court in Victoria had adopted the principle expressed in Moore, in holding that the power to permit a notice of abandonment to be withdrawn was "only available to be exercised in circumstances where the notice can be said to be a `nullity' in the sense that the applicant has failed to understand or appreciate the nature or effect of the document; i.e. that his mind "did not go with his act". See R versus Gardiner <case>; [(1970) VR 278] at 280-1; and R versus Zakarian <case>; [(1971) VR 455] at 457-8.

The Judgment continued: "Thus it is apparent that the courts' attitude, even to applications to withdraw notices of abandonment, is one which strictly limits the exercise of the power. It is an attitude quite inconsistent with the existence of a power to recall, re-instate or re-open an appeal which has been decided on the merits.
 ...

The cases so far discussed provide strong persuasive authority for the principal submission made for the Crown in this court that there is no jurisdiction to re-open an application which has been determined on the merits.

However, there is in our opinion authority for that proposition which binds this court".

The authority cited was that of Grierson.

For similar reasons to those I have already expressed, the Court stated in
McNamara (at 264) that it was unable to intervene unless Grierson could be distinguished, and more modern High Court authority identified which would "leave open" the question of jurisdiction raised.

The submission that there was a distinguishing factor, namely that there had been no determination on the merits since the point had not been argued, was not accepted: "It is to interpret the expression "on the merits" as excluding such of the merits as counsel at the time did not regard as worthy of argument, with the result that an applicant can "continue to appeal from time to time ...
whenever a new point occurs to him or to his legal advisers ..." (to quote again some of Jordan CJ's words in Grierson).

The submission that the High Court had opened the gate in the more recent decision of Pantorno versus R  <case>; [(1989) 166 CLR 466], was similarly not accepted. That was a case in which a point taken, but not argued in the Court of Criminal Appeal on a sentence appeal, was allowed to be ventilated in the High Court, upon the ground that the applicant had been inadvertently denied procedural fairness on the appeal.
Mason and Brennan JJ there said, at 474: "The difficulty about this approach is that it was not argued in the Full
Court, though it falls precisely within the second ground of appeal to that
Court. Failure to argue a point before a court of criminal appeal presents a considerable obstacle to an applicant who seeks special leave to argue it in this Court. Even if the point emerges clearly only when a court pronounces its judgment, it should be appreciated by counsel who receive judgment that they are under a duty to draw the court's attention to issues which, in the light of the judgment, require further consideration by that court and to move the court to consider any such issues before the formal order of the court is perfected. On occasions, a court of criminal appeal may have to give further consideration to issues which were relegated to the margin of attention during the argument, though it is not required to consider new grounds which counsel abstained from raising on the appeal." 
Deane, Toohey and Gaudron JJ said at 484: "There is one further matter which should be mentioned. It is that the application for special leave to appeal to this Court was argued on the basis that, once judgment had been delivered by the Court of Criminal Appeal or (at the latest) once the judgment had been perfected, the jurisdiction of that
Court was exhausted. In a case such as the present where there has been an inadvertent denial of procedural fairness in a criminal matter by a Court of
Criminal Appeal, it would ordinarily be preferable that the matter be dealt with by further application to that Court. In view of the shortness of the minimum sentence to be served by the applicant, however, it would be inappropriate for this Court now to re-list the matter for further argument so that the validity of the assumption (about which we express no view) that the
Court of Criminal Appeal now lacks jurisdiction could be examined." 
The Full Court in McNamara observed in relation to Pantorno at 266: "In our view, these observations cannot be read as casting doubt upon the authority of Grierson.

If any residual doubt persisted after Pantorno as to the nature or extent of the relevant power, then that has, in my view, been unequivocally removed by the decision of the High Court in Postiglione versus The Queen <case>; [(1997) 71 ALJR 875.] In that case Dawson and Gaudron JJ said, at 877: `If a final order was made perfecting the decision of the Court of Criminal
Appeal on Postiglione's first application, the assumption of jurisdiction to entertain his second application and the ensuing appeal was contrary to the decision of this Court in Grierson versus The King. It was held in that case that the [Criminal Appeal Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) does not confer jurisdiction to re-open an appeal which has been heard on the merits and finally determined. A fortiori, in a case where what is involved is the hearing of a second appeal. Pantorno does not suggest otherwise. The view was expressed in Pantorno that an intermediate court of appeal can entertain an application to remedy a denial of procedural fairness whether or not its order has been perfected. Nothing was said as to the jurisdiction of an appellate court to entertain a second appeal when the first has been heard and determined on the merits and an order perfected".

McHugh J noted certain procedural difficulties which had arisen in the appeal, at 885-6, of which the second is of immediate relevance: "Second, the competency of the Court of Criminal Appeal to hear the second appeal is called into question by uncertainty as to whether the first order of the Court of Criminal Appeal was perfected. If the first order was perfected, the appeal against sentence had already been conclusively determined on its merits by the first appeal. In that event, the [Criminal Appeal Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) does not permit the Court of Criminal Appeal to conduct a further appeal." 
Gummow J said at 892: `If it transpired that the orders on the first appeal to the Court of Criminal
Appeal were perfected so that the second proceeding was incompetent, the result first reached there would stand. ... I add my agreement to what is said by Dawson and Gaudron JJ with respect to the reliance upon Pantorno versus The
Queen." 
For the reasons mentioned, I am of the view that the present case falls fairly within the decision in Grierson. The facts are not distinguishable, and recent authority in the High Court has neither weakened that decision or opened the gate any wider for the reconsideration of an earlier appeal, or for the mounting of a second appeal. Nor does that authority, or other decision of any intermediate Court of Appeal, support the existence of some general discretion to intervene in the interests of justice.

The present application is not a case where there was any procedural irregularity in the Court of Criminal Appeal. Its order was perfected before the present application was made, and it involved a determination of the matter upon its merits. The question of possession, and the safety of the verdict were fully canvassed at the appeal, and the point as to knowledge of the contents and control of the garage was expressly raised. The only difference now is that the applicant wishes to add to those submissions by reference to the evidence of a witness who, by his own action, had made himself unavailable both at the time of the trial and of the appeal.

The existence of some general jurisdiction, whether inherent or otherwise, that would permit the Court to intervene at any time in the interests of justice, has not been made out. The inconvenience and inappropriateness of such a jurisdiction was adverted to in Grierson and also in R versus Edwards (No.2) <case>; [(1931) SASR 376] at 380. The argument that such a jurisdiction must arise of necessity, since otherwise persons convicted of serious crime might remain without remedy even though conclusive proof of a miscarriage of justice existed, cannot be made good. As I have observed, there is a remedy by way of a referral under [part
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/index.html#p13a) of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) (or under comparable provisions in other States) and at least in the case of
Commonwealth offences, there is an opportunity for judicial review of any
Ministerial decision to refuse a petition brought under those provisions.

Accordingly I am of the view that the application should be dismissed.

SMART J: I agree with Wood J. I desire to reserve, until it arises, the question whether this Court can intervene where, despite a previous order dismissing an appeal on its merits, it appears that the original verdict was obtained by fraud.

Absent such fraud, I do not regard it as anomalous that where an appeal has been dismissed on the merits, any further action about a conviction depends upon an inquiry being conducted or a reference by the Executive Government.

The fresh evidence from the principal of the enterprise covers the issue of the applicant's knowledge, a point which the applicant placed much in issue at the trial. That issue received careful consideration in the Court of Criminal
Appeal. The suggestion that, in the circumstances which prevailed, the applicant did not have the requisite knowledge of what was in the garage was one to which it was hard to attach any credence.

The proposition that this Court has jurisdiction to depart from the finality principle and either reopen the hearing of the original appeal or hear a second appeal based on the proposed fresh evidence on a point which has already been extensively litigated and decided is incorrect.

The application is without merit and should be dismissed.

SPERLING J: I have had the advantage of reading the judgment of Wood J in draft. I agree with the order proposed by his Honour and with his reasons. I have only one minor qualification, which I would like to record. 
The present case being on all fours with the decision of the High Court in
Grierson  <case>; [(1938) 60 CLR 431] and, there being no later decision of that Court overruling the decision, this Court is obliged to dismiss the appeal.

As I understand Grierson, the principle is that a Court of Criminal Appeal has no jurisdiction to entertain an appeal if a prior appeal has been heard and determined; and such a prior determination has been perfected by entry of the Court's order dismissing the earlier appeal.

It does not seem to me that the later cases cited by the appellant are true exceptions. An abandoned appeal is not an appeal heard and determined:
Cartwright [(1989) 17 NSWLR 243.] A jurisdiction to entertain a further appeal as at the time when the further appeal is instituted is not taken away by entering the prior order: Lapa No.
 [(1995) 180 A Crim R 398.]
Where there has been a denial of procedural fairness, the matter has not been heard and determined according to law and entry of the prior order does not therefore perfect a determination: Pantorno <case>; [(1989) 166 CLR 466] and McNamara [(1997) 1 VR 257.] 
In any event, as Wood J has said, the present case is not analogous to any of these later decisions, and they are no authority for a broad discretion to re- determine an appeal of the kind for which the appellant contends.
 * * * 
