

Daly versus NSW Land and Housing Corporation and Anor Matter No 30106/98 [1998]
NSWSC 780 (17 December 1998) 
Last Updated: 10 February 1999 
LOUISE ANNE DALY versus NSW LAND & HOUSING CORPORATION & ANOR /98 December 1998 
Dunford J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT: 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application by the New South Wales Land and Housing Corporation, the first defendant, for summary dismissal of the plaintiff's summons by which she seeks an order rescinding the order for possession made by the Residential Tenancies Tribunal on 6 October 1998, and an order suspending the operation of such order pending the hearing. 
Briefly the facts are that for sometime the plaintiff has been a tenant of the first defendant which provides public funded housing for persons of limited means. She has for a lengthy period been in arrears with the payment of her rent and in her affidavit she explains the reason for that, namely other litigation arising out of various incidents of alleged domestic violence towards her.

There were previous proceedings between the parties pursuant to a Notice of
Termination dated 18 March this year when an order was made by the Residential
Tenancies Tribunal (the Tribunal) for possession of the premises, but subsequently an application was made pursuant to s110 of the Residential
Tenancies Tribunal Act (the Act), and the order for possession was set aside and an order made for the payment of the arrears.

It appears that this order for payment of the arrears was not adhered to and, accordingly, on 13 August 1998 the first defendant issued a fresh Notice of
Termination, and a notification on that document states that it was served by post at 11 am on that same day. Subsequently an application was made to the
Tribunal for an order for possession and for payment of the arrears.

This matter came on for hearing on 6 October at Sydney before Mrs T. Cohen, a member of The Tribunal.

Negotiations having failed to resolve the matter the hearing proceeded and ultimately an order for termination and possession was made, the date for possession being specified as 20 October 1998.

In addition, an order was made for payment of arrears for rent amounting to $577.86 and an occupation fee of $3.79 per day from 21 October 1998 to the date possession was given. It was noted that this order was in substitution for all other orders made regarding the premises.

The plaintiff subsequently, on 16 October, applied pursuant to s110 of the Act for an order revoking the order claiming 'exceptional circumstances' relating to her assets and expenditure, and lack of other accommodation.

This application was rejected by the Deputy Registrar on 20 October 1998 pursuant to s110(2) and the present appeal was then instituted.

The applicant appeared in person and I allowed her to give oral evidence, she not having had the opportunity to prepare an affidavit for the hearing of today's motion.

In such evidence she relied on three matters:
She had not been served the Notice of Termination dated 13 August 1998;
The Notice of Termination dated 13 August 1998 had not been tendered at the hearing, but when she queried the non-receipt of the notice and asked to see a copy of it the representative of the first defendant tendered a copy of the notice dated 18 March 1998;
That Mrs Cohen should not have heard the matter and should have disqualified herself because she had heard previous proceedings involving the same parties in relation to the same premises.

Her evidence was supported by that of a friend of hers, a Mr Henskens who was present at the Tribunal hearing. He said that he recalled that at the Tribunal hearing the plaintiff said she had not received the Notice of Termination and that thereupon the Member requested the document to be tendered and it was tendered in response to that request. He also recalled the Member saying words to the effect of, "I'm not sure whether I should be hearing this matter".

Miss Jones, the representative of the first defendant who was present at the hearing and acting at it on the first defendant's behalf, denied that at any stage the plaintiff requested to see a copy of the Notice of Termination and said that she did not deny receiving the Notice of Termination.

What is significant to me is that in neither the affidavit sworn by the plaintiff on 26 October at the time of the filing of the summons, nor in her application under s110 dated 16 October, was any reference made to any alleged non-service of the Notice of Termination, nor to any alleged actual or apprehended bias on the part of The Tribunal Member. These matters have only be raised for the first time today.

Although it appears that the plaintiff has been making some payments in the meantime she is still considerably in arrears with payment of rent, and the first defendant seeks to enforce its order for possession so accommodation may be made available to another person in need of public housing; and it is for this reason I refused the adjournment.

An appeal from a decision of the Tribunal only lies "with respect to a matter of law" (s107), and so it is not necessary for me to make a final determination on whether the plaintiff had received the Notice of Termination, because there was evidence before the Tribunal that the document had been posted, and s130 provides for documents to be served by post and the Tribunal
Member directed her attention to this issue, as appears from her Reasons for
Decision.

Moreover, I am not satisfied that when the copy of Notice of Termination was tendered the document tendered was that dated in March 1998 and not the one sent in October.

In relation to the suggestion that the Member should not have heard the matter because she had heard previous proceedings between the same parties, there is a prohibition in s110 in respect of applications to set aside or vary orders that such applications should not be heard by the person who made the original order. But there is nothing in the Act to prevent a person who has heard previous substantive hearings from hearing further such proceedings.

Moreover, the plaintiff concedes that she did not specifically ask the Member to disqualify herself. She may not have been informed that she had that right, but bearing in mind that there were admitted arrears of rent, and having read the orders of the Tribunal and its Reasons for Decision, I can see no error of law or denial of natural justice, and no reasonable grounds for any appeal.

I am therefore satisfied this is an appropriate case to summarily dismiss the proceedings pursuant to SCR Pt13, r5(1)(a) and/or (b).

I order that the order for possession made by the second defendant not be enforced before 8 January 1999. Save as aforesaid, I order that the summons be dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
