

Regina versus A M Phillips [1996] NSWSC 456 (27 September 1996) 
REGINA versus ANNA MARIE PHILLIPS /96 
Thursday 25 July 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
Handley JA, Grove J, Ireland J 
RESULT: Appeal allowed 
CATCHWORDS: SENTENCE - COCAINE - SMALL QUANTITIES - PROSTITUTE IN POSSESSION FOR A CLIENT WITH HIS CONSENT TO HER SELLING - RELATIVELY MINOR PRIOR RECORD - APPARENTLY GENUINE ATTEMPTS TO CURE DRUG ADDICTION - HELD - FINDING OF NO SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES (SENTENCING ACT <case>) WRONG - MINIMUM AND ADDITIONAL TERMS OF 12 MONTHS AND 4 MONTHS VARIED TO 6 MONTHS AND 10 MONTHS.
 
JUDGMENT 
HANDLEY JA: I will ask Grove J to give the first judgment.

GROVE J: This is an application for leave to appeal by Anna Marie Phillips against the severity of sentence imposed by his Honour Judge Court QC in the Sydney District Court on 29 March 1996. On that occasion she was sentenced to concurrent terms of sixteen months imprisonment in respect of two charges of supplying a prohibited drug. His Honour expressed the view that no special circumstances within the meaning of [s 5(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/) had been demonstrated and he divided the total sentence into minimum and additional terms of twelve months and four months respectively.

The applicant is twenty five years of age. She has worked from time to time as a prostitute. She has been addicted to drugs since her teenage years although she has made efforts on occasions to become drug free. I shall return to this aspect.

On 28 June 1995 the applicant was standing outside premises in Alfred Street
Milsons Point. She was approached by a number of police and was seen to throw a plastic bag into a nearby garden. This was retrieved and within it were thirty four coloured balloons which contained some capsules of white powder.
The total weight of powder was 6.59 grams and the contents of twenty seven capsules 5.2 grams according to the terms of an analyst's certificate. The applicant was asked by police what the substance was and she replied, accurately "coke". She lived in a nearby unit and police indicated that they intended to obtain a search warrant. She told them this was unnecessary and she consented to search. No drugs were found although some more balloons were located.

The applicant told police that she was minding the drugs for a "client" whose name she knew only as Rodney. Contact between them occurred when he got in touch with her. He had done so and asked her to return the drugs that she was minding for him. She was waiting for him when the police came upon the scene.
She admitted that she had sold one capsule to a friend in Kings Cross for $80 hence the two charges, the first being a "deemed" supply and the second that actual supply.

The applicant has a prior record although I would comment that it is not as extensive as one frequently encounters when attached to persons living a lifestyle such as the applicant. Of significance is the circumstance that on May 1994 she was placed on a recognizance to be of good behaviour for two years in respect of a charge of goods in custody.

If it were the fact that the applicant had been in possession of the drug merely to transfer physical control of it to its owner then she would not be guilty of a deemed supply: R versus Carey [1990 20 NSWLR 292.] In the light of acceptance of the plea of guilty it cannot be contended as suggested on her behalf that the learned sentencing judge should be taken as accepting all of the applicant's version as to the facts in that regard. His Honour observed that the sentence would involve the applicant being placed in custody for the first time and the submission that he overlooked this is not pressed.

The applicant gave evidence that she had become involved in the drug scene and in prostitution as a result of associations which she had formed from her early teenage years. This evidence was confirmed by her sister and also in the material contained in the pre-sentence report about which his Honour said that he accepted the contents "at face value".

That report shows that the applicant was at the time apparently making genuine efforts to rid herself of her drug habit. She testified that after ten years of the lifestyle that I have mentioned she wished to settle down and lead a normal life. She had made contact with a methadone clinic in the regime of which she was participating and her urinalysis demonstrated that she was maintaining herself as drug free. She gave evidence that she was now in a stable relationship with a man who was present at Court and willing to give evidence. For reasons which do not emerge he was not called. The applicant testified that this man was not a drug user and the probation officer who prepared the pre-sentence report noted that he was employed as a security guard and appears to be drug free. The applicant told her that after some initial hesitation she was encouraged to reveal to him the nature of her problems with drug usage and he is supportive of her and they had hoped to marry towards the end of the year.

For my [part
I](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/index.html#p1) detect no error in his Honour's findings nor in his decision to impose a custodial sentence which is not in my assessment outside of the range of the sound exercise of discretion. I am of the view however that the sentencing process manifests error insofar as his Honour held that no special circumstances within the meaning of [s5(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/) had been demonstrated.

The pre-sentence report which the learned judge accepted at face value contained views of the probation officer indicating that the applicant would probably derive more benefit from an attendance centre order in terms of making lifestyle changes. The officer's summary included the observation that "the offender presents as a woman in serious need of guidance and assistance despite a ten year history of abuse and self destructive behaviour. She has a limited criminal history with no prior supervision orders." 
There was no contradiction of the evidence concerning her current attempts to rid herself of drug addiction. As she had not had any prior compulsory supervision it seems to me that the period of four months which would be available under the sentence as presently structured would be far too short to be of genuine utility. In my view special circumstances exist within the meaning of the Act - it is sufficient to identify the rehabilitative steps she initiated and her apparent prospects of success in her aim - and the applicant has demonstrated on the whole of the evidence that she is a person who would benefit by a longer portion of her sentence being served whilst on parole and under supervision. I would divide the total term into minimum and additional terms of six months and ten months respectively. I propose the following orders:
Application for leave to appeal against sentence granted and appeal allowed.
Sentence and orders in the District Court quashed and in lieu thereof the applicant sentenced on each count to a total term of sixteen months imprisonment to consist of minimum terms commencing on 28 March 1996 and expiring on 27 September 1996 together with additional terms of ten months.
The sentences on each count to be served concurrently.
Order that the applicant be released to parole on 27 September 1996 and that whilst on parole she be subject to the supervision of the Probation and
Parole Service.

HANDLEY JA: I agree.

IRELAND J: I also agree.

HANDLEY JA: The orders of the Court will be as announced by Grove J.
 * * * 
