

Industrial Installations and Relocations Pty Limited versus Leiner Davis
Gelatin International Limited (No 2) Matter No 55008/96 [1998] NSWSC 177 (12
May 1998) 
Last Updated: 10 June 1998 
INDUSTRIAL INSTALLATIONS & RELOCATIONS PTY LIMITED v LEINER DAVIS GELATIN INTERNATIONAL LIMITED (NO 2) /96 May 1998 
Rolfe J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division Construction List 
Name of Case: INDUSTRIAL INSTALLATIONS & RELOCATIONS PTY LIMITED versus LEINER DAVIS GELATIN INTERNATIONAL LIMITED (NO 2) 
Proceedings: 55008/1996 
Date of Hearing: 8 May 1998 
Date of Judgment: 12 May 1998 
Counsel for Plaintiff: Mr P H Greenwood SC 
Solicitors for Plaintiff: Cameron Gillingham Boyd 
Counsel for Defendant: Mr M Dempsey 
Solicitors for Defendant: Blake Dawson Waldron 
Costs: Held that in the circumstances of the case costs should be paid to the party, which obtained judgment for the balance of the amount claimed and thus followed the event: Part 52A rule 11.

Held that offers by way of Calderbank letters not shown to have been better than the amount the plaintiff recovered.

Held that in respect of a discrete issue pressed to but abandoned at the hearing without explanation the defendant should pay the plaintiff's costs on an indemnity basis: Huntsman Chemical Company Australia Limited v
International Pools Australia Limited [(1995) 36 NSWLR 242] applied.

I N D E X 
Page 
Introduction 1 
The Form Of Orders 2 
Costs 3 
Plaintiff Seeks Certain Costs On An Indemnity Basis 7 
Orders 8 
HIS HONOUR: 
Introduction 
The history of and issues raised by these proceedings are set forth sufficiently in the report of the Referee, Mr G.R. Easton, dated 28 January , and my judgment of 5 May 1998 adopting it, save for Item 20, as not to require very much further elaboration. I required the parties to bring in
Short Minutes of Order to give effect to my conclusions and, on 8 May 1998, they submitted competing Short Minutes. The plaintiff, in substance, sought judgments in its favour for the amount found for it by the Referee, to which it added the further amount to which I considered it was entitled, and interest thereon; and in favour of the defendant on its cross-claim for the amount found against it by the Referee, with interest. It sought an order that the defendant pay it the balance. The defendant sought judgments in favour of the plaintiff for the total amount to which it was found to be entitled; in its favour on its cross-claim in the total amount found in its favour; and an order that it pay the plaintiff the balance together with interest. In the end the forms of the orders did not throw up different amounts payable by the defendant to the plaintiff, which were agreed as $72,305 and interest, calculated on the contractual rate, at $27,357. Thus the sum to which the plaintiff is entitled is $99,662.

The defendant raised by way of equitable set-off in its Defence both overpayments and its claims for defective work to the extent necessary to meet the plaintiff's claim, and, thereafter, sought the balance by way of cross- claim. The primary issue, which has now arisen, is that of costs. It seems to me that in approaching it the Court should have regard, essentially, to the substance of the matters in issue, which arose out of the same factual matrix, rather than to the pleading form, which was adopted. However, the form of the pleadings and the results achieved make it easier to formulate the final orders.

The Form Of Orders 
Whilst I do not have regard to form over substance, it seems to me that as the amount set off against that claimed by the plaintiff was raised in the
Defence, the appropriate course is to determine, having regard to the Summons and the Defence, the amount to which the plaintiff is entitled, after account is taken of the amount successfully raised by way of defence. In those circumstances, as the figures worked out, the defendant is not entitled to recover on its cross-claim. Accordingly, the orders I propose to make are:- 
Judgment for the plaintiff in the sum of $99,662; and 
Judgment for the plaintiff on the defendant's cross-claim.

Costs 
Two basic submissions were put to me in relation to costs. Firstly, it was submitted on behalf of the defendant that the proper approach was to have regard to the measure of success enjoyed by both parties and, as each had recovered in substance an amount, to order the defendant to pay the plaintiff's costs of the proceedings and the plaintiff to pay the defendant's costs of recovering the money by way of set-off, i.e. reducing the amount to which the plaintiff would otherwise have been entitled, or to which it would otherwise have been entitled on the cross-claim. As I have said, I am not dealing with the matter as one of form. Whether the defendant had claimed by way of set-off or by way of cross-claim does not, in my opinion, alter what I consider is the proper order. The important point is that the plaintiff was ultimately successful in the proceedings, which arose out of the same contractual and factual matrix and, in those circumstances, I am of opinion that the appropriate order for costs, subject to any variations which a consideration of the other matters may require, is that the defendant pay the plaintiff's costs of the proceedings. In that way I will be giving effect to the basic position, as articulated in Part 52A rule 11, that, subject to the provisos referred to therein, costs should follow the event.

The second point raised by the defendant was that on 10 July 1997 it made an offer of settlement by a letter headed "Calderbank Offer", and that the nature of the offer contained therein was such that the plaintiff should not, having regard to the extent of its success, have its costs after its rejection of that offer, or, in the alternative, after the rejection of a further offer, which increased the offer of 10 July 1997, by $40,000, on 18 July 1997. Those offers were made before the hearing commenced. The letter of 10 July 1997 stated:- "We are instructed by our client to make the following offer of settlement: 
Our client is prepared to pay your client: $408,000 in full and final settlement of your client's claim against our client; and $158,000 in respect of your client's party/party costs; and 
Our client will accept payment from your client of: $200,000 in full and final settlement of our client's cross-claim; and $196,000 in respect of our client's party/party costs.

Our client makes the offer of settlement set out above on the basis that in order to accept the offer in paragraph (a), your client must accept the offer in paragraph (b) and vice versa." 
The monetary effect of the offer, which was rejected, was that the defendant offered $170,000 inclusive of costs. The subsequent offer of an additional $40,000 was rejected on 22 July 1997.

The defendant submitted that the offer of $170,000 was a better offer than the amount to which the plaintiff was entitled as at 10 July 1997, on the basis that the costs of the hearing and some interest had not been incurred or accrued at that stage. However, it was not in issue that up to July 1997 the plaintiff had paid to its solicitors $177,805 by way of costs. Therefore, looked at realistically, the defendant was offering the plaintiff $170,000 in respect of a claim, inclusive of costs incurred to that date, of at least $250,110, i.e. the aggregate of $177,805 and $72,305. This calculation takes no account of interest, which would further favour the plaintiff's position.
The further offer of $210,000 also fell short of that figure.

The defendant submitted that I should not take the full amount of costs as the appropriate figure, because I was entitled to take judicial notice of the fact that it would be reduced when assessed. It was suggested that the reduction would be in the order of thirty per cent, (although I do not consider that is a matter of which I can take judicial notice), so that the recoverable costs would be about $125,000 and, when one added to that $72,305, it produced a figure of $197,305. Whilst that was more than the offer of 10 July 1997, it was less than the $210,000 offered, although it would have been if interest to that date is taken into account. There was no evidence that the differential between actually charged costs and costs assessed on a party and party basis was thirty per cent.

I think that when one is looking at an offer which, in substance, is an offer inclusive of costs, and which is made by way of a Calderbank letter, rather than by the more formal procedure for an Offer of Compromise as provided by the rules, one must look at it realistically having regard to the money paid out by the plaintiff. Frequently evidence of that will not be available, but in this case it was. When the various figures are added, and one includes an interest component to that date, the defendant has not satisfied me that the plaintiff did not recover a better figure than either of the offers.

It was also submitted on behalf of the defendant that it is always difficult to make a meaningful offer in relation to a claim such as the present. I am not certain that that is correct, but, even if it is, there are procedures in place for making offers and the most appropriate procedure, if one wishes to ensure that one will obtain the benefit of having made the offer, and on the assumption that the other party does not receive a more favourable result, is by the offer of compromise procedure.

The offers in the letters of 10 and 18 July 1997 should be considered.
However, as I have said, I am not satisfied that the plaintiff did not obtain a better result than either of those offers and, in the circumstances, I do not think they can have the effect of reducing or negating the costs to which the plaintiff is otherwise entitled, either by reference to them alone, or by reference to the further submission relating to the subsequent assessment of costs.

Plaintiff Seeks Certain Costs On An Indemnity Basis 
The plaintiff submitted that it should have its costs in respect of two issues on an indemnity basis. Firstly, it was submitted that one specific item, viz a consequential loss of production claim in the sum of $464,861, was pressed until, but abandoned at, the hearing. This was not in issue, and no explanation for its abandonment was forthcoming. The other claim for indemnity costs was in respect of ten out of twenty four items of defective work claimed, which were not pressed at the hearing.

In my opinion, the plaintiff is entitled to have its costs of the consequential loss of production claim assessed on an indemnity basis. This was a discrete claim for what was a relatively large amount in the context of these proceedings. The plaintiff was required to prepare this issue for the hearing, at which the defendant abandoned the claim and advanced no reason for doing so. The only conclusion I can draw is that, in the circumstances, the defendant did not consider the claim had any merit. Essentially for the reasons I gave in Huntsman Chemical Company Australia Limited v
International Pools Australia Limited [(1995) 36 NSWLR 242], I consider that costs should be awarded on an indemnity basis in respect of this issue. In my opinion, if a party brings forward a relatively substantial claim in the proceedings, obliges the other party to incur costs in meeting it, and then at the hearing abandons the claim without explanation, those facts, in themselves, give rise to the conclusion to which I have referred. All the factors, together with that conclusion, make it proper that the party so acting should pay costs on an indemnity basis, and, in the exercise of my discretion, I propose to so order.

In relation to the abandoned claims for defective work I take a somewhat different attitude. In my view in a case such as this such claims are part and parcel of the overall litigation, and the abandonment of them can occur for a number of reasons. Unlike the consequential loss of production claim, which I think can and should be treated as a discrete claim, it was not demonstrated to my satisfaction that any of the abandoned claims for defective work should be so treated, nor that there was not some overlap in the work, which had to be carried out in any event. I accept that they were separate claims, but I do not accept that they were discrete in the sense to which I have referred.

Orders 
I order:- 
Judgment for the plaintiff against the defendant on the plaintiff's claim in the sum of $99,662, which includes interest.

The defendant's cross-claim be dismissed.

The defendant pay the plaintiff's costs of the proceedings on a party and party basis save in relation to the consequential production loss claim as to which the defendant pay the plaintiff's costs on an indemnity basis.

Exhibits be returned.
 * * * 
