

Regina versus G A J Rozynski [1996] NSWSC 19 (1 February 1996) 
REGINA v. Glen Alan James ROZYNSKI /94 February 1996 
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
SMART J, SPERLING J, HIDDEN J 
CATCHWORDS: CRIMINAL LAW - EVIDENCE - FRESH EVIDENCE - SEARCH WARRANT - EXPERT EVIDENCE AS TO HEIGHT OF OFFENDER AS SHOWN ON VIDEO TAPE - GEOMATIC ENGINEERING - UNSAFE AND UNSATISFACTORY VERDICT.

EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Allowed 
HEADNOTE 
The appellant was convicted of two charges of armed robbery and two charges of possessing a shortened firearm.

The intended 'fresh' evidence comprised: scientific evidence in a field not known to the appellant's advisers and not moderately known in the community. This evidence pointed to the appellant not being the robber.
 evidence supporting the appellant's assertion that the firearms and other incriminating items had been 'planted' probably by a police informer.

Held: 
Although the scientific discipline and process existed at the time of the trial, the scientific evidence could not have been obtained with reasonable diligence. Reasonable but unsuccessful efforts had been made prior to the trial to locate the witness. The fresh evidence was thus not reasonably available at the trial.
The fresh evidence, if accepted, along with the other evidence gave rise to a reasonable possibility of an acquittal.
The verdict was not unsafe or unsatisfactory.

Orders: 
Appeal allowed. Convictions quashed.
New trial ordered.
 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: The appellant appeals against his conviction on two charges of armed robbery and two charges of possessing a shortened firearm. The robberies were alleged to have occurred at a Food Plus store and at the Golf View Hotel.

The appellant relied on two grounds, namely, fresh evidence and unsafe and unsatisfactory convictions.

None of the people at either robbery, which occurred on 8 and 10 January 1993 respectively, was able to identify the robber or robbers. Nor was there any witness who identified the robber or robbers as they were leaving or within a short time later or at all. The appellant contended that he was not involved in either robbery, that he did not know that the shortened firearms were in his flat and that someone had planted them.

The prosecution was largely based on various items allegedly found by the police on 20 January 1993 when they searched the granny flat occupied by the appellant at the rear of a house in Woodville Road Guildford in which his sister, her husband and their family lived. There was a major question as to the security of this flat. The police said that they had to force the door to enter. The force used was kicking the door once with the foot by one officer.
This opened the door immediately. This suggests minimal security. Both the sister and her husband who were called in the Crown case said that it was easy to gain access. The lock on one of the windows was broken.

The police search came as a result of information supplied by an informant who at the time of giving the information had an outstanding serious criminal matter as well as a criminal record. The search warrant was issued on the basis of his information.

Only police officers were present when the search was carried out. The police stated that Detective McNeil (who dealt with the informer) began to search the kitchen. He found a large black vinyl bag in the cupboard under the sink. He pulled it out. It had two handles on the top, some white around it and bore the word "Tupperware". Detective McNeil said that he also found in the cupboard a black plastic bag with "New York" written on the side. He looked inside and saw "what appeared to be rubbish papers." Detective Sergeant Leach also stated that he thought the papers inside this bag were "rubbish papers".

About 15/20 minutes after the search had begun the appellant's sister and her husband arrived home. The contents of the bag as allegedly found were laid out on the grass. They included a sawn-off .303 rifle and a sawn off shotgun, a navy blue and grey sweat top with an attached hood, two balaclavas, two beanies, three sets of gloves, a watch, one TAB card in the appellant's name, a pair of ladies gold earrings, a vinyl or rubber mask and a triangle bandage.
A list was made by the police and countersigned by the appellant's sister.

Detective McNeil said that on 23 February 1993 he went to the Granville Police
Station, obtained a number of the articles found on 20 January 1993 and took them to the exhibit room at the Parramatta Police Station. He said that he went through the "rubbish papers" and materials formerly in the New York bag but then in the large bag. He found pages 12 and 13 of a street map, a footy tab betting ticket with the written words "Float $300", one blue Westpac windowed envelope, one Commonwealth Bank of Australia cheque for $373.30 expressed to be payable to Golf View Hotel, one Westpac deposit slip having a reference to the Golf View Hotel imprinted on it, one bankcard sales voucher for $32.70 and two bankcard vouchers. There was evidence from Mr Frater, the
Manager of Golf View Hotel, that the writing on the betting ticket and on the deposit slip was his. The envelope took the bankcard slips. The cheque came from the pool tables. The bankcard documents came from the hotel. Detective
McNeil said that the first time he looked at the contents of the bag after 20
January 1993 was on 23 February 1993.

It is hard to understand why, if the documents noted on 23 February 1993 were in the bag with "New York" written on the side, on 20 January 1993 they were overlooked or dismissed. Their significance was obvious. They were the strength of the Crown case. It was elementary to look at the contents of the larger bag and the "New York" bag. There was not a lot of material to go through. On no view could a cheque in favour of the hotel, the bank deposit slip and the bankcard documents be or appear to be "rubbish" papers. This is an implausible explanation. There was still the issue of whether they too had been planted by the robber or someone else.

The sister and brother-in-law gave evidence that there was a pool in the grounds of the premises and that the large bag had been up at the back of the premises holding the filters.

The Crown alleged that on 8 January 1993 the appellant entered the Food Plus
Store, cnr Sherwood and Kenyon Rds, Merrylands, armed with a sawn-off firearm and disguised with rubber face mask and hood. He demanded money from the night attendant, Mr Jury, who placed over $400 into a dark plastic bag which was provided and returned the bag to the robber. Initially, Mr Jury could not remember anything about the bag. Some time later the police showed him a black plastic bag with "New York" written on it. Mr Jury then claimed that was the bag. Regrettably, he was not present at the trial to be cross examined. His depositions from the committal proceedings were read. Mr Jury identified a mask as that worn by the robber and a gun as that used by the robber. He said that a shirt which he was shown was "similar" to the one worn by the robber.
Mr Jury was 186 cms tall and the offender was a "fair bit" shorter - he estimated 175 cms (about 5'9").

Mr P Holmes was present at the robbery. He said that a mask and a shirt which he was shown, were similar to those used. He could not positively identify the bag. One of the two guns he was shown by the police was similar to that used by the robber - the one with the bolt action. It was a pity that he was not shown the guns until August 1993. Mr Holmes was 5 feet 11 inches in height.
The robber was shorter. Initially, he said that the robber was about 5 feet 8 inches but subsequently said between about 5'6" and 5'10". In his initial statement he described the robber as "being very small build." He said that the robber had a small frame - he was a small sort of fellow. I would not have so described the appellant.

Kathleen Conquest who was also present at the robbery, estimated that the robber was 5 feet 9 inches in height. The mask, shirt, hood and gun she was shown were similar to those used by the robber. She was not sure if they were identical. She conceded in cross examination that all she could say was that she saw a gun about the size of the one she was shown and that it looked brown.

In his summing up the judge stated that the Crown case on armed robbery on 8
January 1993 relied on the same circumstantial factors as it did for possessing a shortened firearm. These were possession of the shortened rifle by the appellant twelve days after the armed robbery, that weapon being consistent with that used in the robbery, the mask found in the large bag being at least consistent with the appearance of the mask worn by the robber, the shirt in the bag being consistent with that worn by the robber, the plastic bag (New York) in the kitchen cupboard being consistent with the appearance of that used by the robber and the description of the robber being consistent with the appellant. The judge stated that the discovery of the items at the house was the foundation of the Crown case. The judge referred to the video tape of the robbery incident in the food shop and invited the jury to compare what it showed with the evidence given by Mr Jury, Mr Holmes and Ms
Conquest. The judge warned the jury against using the video tape for the purpose of making any direct identification of the appellant. They could use it in assessing and weighing the evidence given by the eye witnesses about what happened and what the robber was wearing and carrying and matters of that sort.

The Crown further alleged that about 12.15 am on 10 January 1993 the appellant and another man entered the Golf View Hotel, each armed with a shortened firearm. The appellant was disguised with a rubber mask. Mr Frater, the manager, was in the process of closing the hotel for business. He was in an office area counting money. A man with a shortened rifle pointed it at Mr
Frater and demanded the money. Mr Frater gave it to him. There was a second person standing at the door carrying a sawn off shotgun. He was wearing a mask. The first robber put the money in a plastic bag and told Mr Frater "Get the big stuff, I want the big stuff." Mr Frater was directed to the safe. He and the first robber entered. The first robber collected all the notes and substantial portions of the money in the safe. Every now and then the second robber (with the mask) put his head around the corner of the safe door. He appears to have been keeping watch.

Mr Frater said that the first robber (the man with the rifle) was about five feet four inches in height with "grey hair on top" in his "forties". The second robber was about five feet ten inches in height wearing a rubber smiling old man's mask.

The appellant's sister and brother-in-law saw the appellant and another man at their premises "just after" 12 midnight on 10 January 1993. The sister thought it was "about 12.30 roughly". Their premises were about fifteen minutes walk away from the Golf View Hotel. She described the second man as "in his thirties, early thirties "with gingery-orangey sort of hair". This description did not fit with that of the robber carrying the rifle.

In his summing up the judge stated that the Crown case on the second armed robbery was based on the appellant being in possession of the guns ten days after the robbery. It also relied upon the description of the second robber being consistent with the description of the accused, the shirt in the bag being consistent with that worn by the first robber, the bandage being consistent with that robber's disguise, the appellant and another man, being in the yard of the sister's house shortly after the robbery when that house was about 15 minutes walk away and the documents from the hotel being in the "New York" bag. The judge stated that much reliance was placed upon those documents, the Crown alleging that they provided a clear link between the appellant and the robbery, certainly in combination with the other circumstances.
 "Fresh" Evidence 
The appellant contended that consequent upon a detailed expert analysis of the video tape it was possible to determine the height of the offender as shown in the video tape. The analysis revealed that he could not have been the offender because that man was measurably shorter than the appellant. Such evidence was not available at the trial but is now available. This evidence goes to the first robbery. If it is correct it would, at least, create a reasonable doubt in respect of that robbery.

The first and second robberies had a number of links. The weapon used by the robber on 8 January 1993 was similar to that used by one of the robbers on 10
January 1993. Items consistent with those used in the first robbery were found in the same bag as items connected with the second robbery. Documents allegedly taken in the second robbery were allegedly found in the "New York" bag. Because of the links a jury could have taken the view that if the appellant was guilty of the first robbery he was one of the two robbers in the second robbery. If the jury thought there was a reasonable doubt whether he was guilty of the first robbery they could have thought that there was a reasonable doubt whether he was involved in the second robbery. Another man may have been involved and not the appellant.

The appellant adduced detailed technical evidence from Professor J C Trinder, the Professor and Head of the School of Geomatic Engineering at the University of New South Wales and Mr B E Donnelly, a Professional Officer in the School of Geomatic Engineering. Both were highly qualified. Mr Donnelly was cross examined. No question of credit arose. His evidence was credible and his views were well supported. Any tribunal would give their views serious consideration.

Their views and conclusions were challenged by Dr David Lowe, Senior Lecturer,
School of Electrical Engineering, University of Technology. He too was highly qualified. He thought that the methodology used by Professor Trinder and Mr
Donnelly had a number of failings. Dr Lowe used what he regarded as similar but less flawed methods. He thought that it can be "reliably concluded that the offender shown in the video is estimated to be approximately 1.78 metres tall with an accuracy of 4 cms." 
Dr Lowe's report led to a detailed closely reasoned 15 page reply from
Professor Trinder and Mr Donnelly. They refuted the criticisms of Dr Lowe and set out their methodology and calculations at some length. They contended that
Dr Lowe had mis-understood the methodology they had used and had made incorrect assumptions. They criticised the two methods used by Dr Lowe. They expressed the belief that their method was the only appropriate one for the determination of the height of the offender. They assessed that the offender's height was 1.69 cm and that the accuracy of their assessment fell, conservatively, within a range of plus or minus five centimetres. They had obtained the same height measurement with Dr Lowe's data, even though that data led to an orientation of lower accuracy.

As a result of Mr Donnelly's measurements of the appellant's height, they assessed that his height for a walking gait while wearing running shoes was .76 cms.

They stated: "... our measurements indicated that the height of Rozynski with running shoes and a cloth head gear, in a walking gait, is estimated to be 1.76 m. This compares with our measurement of the offender in the video image of 1.69 m with an accuracy of +/- 5 cm." 
It was put to Mr Donnelly that if you added 5 cm to 169 cm the result was 174 cm and that it was not possible practically to distinguish between 174 and 176 cms. Mr Donnelly disagreed. The allowance of 5 cm was generous, amply compensating for any errors.

Techniques have been and are being developed for the measurement of features from video images. It is an area of ongoing research in the photogrammetric section of the School of Geomatic Engineering. The available technology includes computers and image boards, referred to as frame grabbers, which extract digital images directly from video cameras or from video tapes through video tape readers. The video images recorded on the video tape are put (or transferred) into a computer. This was done on a Sun work station. Co- ordinates of points in the images, referred to as image co-ordinates, were read from screen displays of these images and transferred to a PC computer, on which the computations of the height of the suspect above the floor were performed.

Measurements by photogrammetry are made from 2 or more photographs or electronic images. The height of a person can be determined from the two images by a process of intersection of the lines which represent the light rays which formed the images of the person at the time of photography.

These lines are reconstructed mathematically in the reverse direction to compute the location of the person in question. This is referred to as stereo photogrammetry and is used regularly for the measurement of objects from photographs.

If only one image is available there is only one line available from the image in the direction of the object to determine the position of the object. Hence the object cannot be determined uniquely unless some additional information is available or some valid assumptions are made.

In the present case only one image is available and there is no additional information available. Valid assumptions have to be made for at least one of the co-ordinates of the offender's position. The steps taken were: "The position vertically below the suspect's head, ie between his feet, was computed from the estimated image coordinates of that point and the known elevation of the floor which is assumed to be horizontal. There are some inaccuracies in this procedure, because the actual position of the suspect's feet must be estimated from the images. The accuracy of this determination is estimated to be about 2-3cm.

Then the location of the suspect's head was assumed to lie on a vertical line above the computed position between his feet.

The position of the head could then be determined from the camera position information, and the image coordinates of the head. The determination of the image coordinates of the top of the head also presented some difficulty, because of the direction in which the camera was viewing the suspect, the fact that the suspect was wearing headgear, and also the different tilts of the head in the Figures 2 and 3 [of our report of 10 February 1995]." 
Their report of 2 November 1995 continues: "In this computation, we have used only those images in which the offender's feet and head are visible. This has been done to ensure that the effect of the essential assumptions have a minimal effect on the accuracy of the computation of the height of the offender. The 2 assumptions to enable us to derive the height of the offender are: 
That the floor is horizontal. This is a reasonable assumption, within approximately 1 cm. From this assumption, we have been able assume the height of the offender's feet, and hence the location of his feet could be computed.

That the head of the offender lies in a vertical plane above his feet.
Having computed the position of the offender's feet, this assumption provides the position of the offender's head above his feet, and hence his height can be computed.

While assumptions have been made in this computation, the ones we have made will have the least effect on the accuracy of the computation of the height of the offender, since they are the most reasonable that can be made for single image photogrammetry." 
I will not set out all the steps which were taken nor the formulas and calculations used but I record that Mr Donnelly attended at the Food Store where the robbery occurred, inspected the area and made a number of measurements.

In cross examination Mr Donnelly readily agreed that he had no qualifications in human movement assessment. However, he had observed the gait and stance of the offender on the computer screen and he had measured the height of the appellant and observed his gait in moving. When Mr Donnelly was at the gaol making his observations he endeavoured to have the appellant make the same movements he had observed the offender in the video tape make. Mr Donnelly insisted that the error allowance made covered more than adequately all possibilities of error.

At the end of his relatively brief and appropriate cross examination he remained of the views expressed in the reports of Professor Trinder and himself and no inroad had been made on the correctness of those views. The position may change after a full hearing. The evidence of Professor Trinder and Mr Donnelly was cogent and credible.

To enable a jury to understand their views and those of Dr Lowe considerable work would have to be done by the legal advisers and the experts in simplifying the expression of their views and illustrating them by suitably large diagrams and other visual aids.

The appellant stated in his affidavit that at an early stage he formed the view that a scientific analysis of the security video would assist his case.
As a result of his bail application a copy of the video tape was made available to him by Detective Leach. In November 1993 the appellant asked an employed solicitor with Legal Aid Commission to take the video tape and have it subjected to a "mathematical analysis". She declined and told him to give it to the private solicitors assigned to represent him at his trial. He was later advised of the solicitors who would be representing him at his trial.

In December 1993 he was visited in gaol by counsel and an instructing solicitor. The appellant said that he told counsel that he had been shown a security video of one of the robberies by the police and had told them that he was not the robber. The appellant asserted that counsel was advised that the video should be analysed as the man shown was shorter than the appellant. It was a non-contact visit, the appellant being separated by a glass barrier and unable to hand written instructions or other items to his legal advisers.

In early January 1994 the appellant changed his solicitor but the same counsel continued to represent him. Counsel visited the appellant at Lithgow Gaol about one and half weeks prior to the trial. The appellant stated that he again mentioned the video and gave him a copy of the written instructions he had earlier shown the solicitor employed by the Legal Aid Commission. The appellant said that on the seventh day of the trial counsel stated that the video could not be analysed as Legal Aid would not fund it.

Counsel conferred with the appellant at Long Bay on 21 December 1993 at
Lithgow on 21 January 1994 and at Long Bay on 2 February 1994. Counsel recalled being instructed by the appellant that the robber shown in the security video was shorter than him. Counsel believed that the issue of having the video analysed was raised at some stage, possibly before the trial.
Counsel did not recall seeing any written instructions as to the video. Prior to and during the trial counsel believed that it was not possible to analyse the video in the way it has now been analysed. For that reason nothing was done. Counsel denied that he said that Legal Aid would not fund an analysis of the video.

It is probable that the appellant requested that the video be analysed and that counsel, thinking that this was not possible, passed over it. He regarded the request as being unreal and not useful.

Until this appeal I had never heard of the area of science or engineering involved in this appeal and what might be established by using it. Indeed, the word "Geomatic" does not appear in either the Macquarie or Shorter Oxford
Dictionaries. Yet there is a school of Geomatic Engineering at one of the
State's major universities. If I had been in counsel's position my reaction would have been similar to that of counsel. I would not have known where to turn. The appellant was in custody and could not pursue the matter effectively. He did not suggest where or how the analysis could be done. In my opinion there was no failure to use reasonable diligence. Counsel's knowledge and instincts told him that what the appellant wanted was not possible.

If the evidence of Professor Trinder and Mr Donnelly had been before the jury it could have made a significant difference. There is a reasonable possibility that when considered along with the other evidence there could have been an acquittal. The evidence of Professor Trinder and Mr Donnelly could have resulted in a jury not being prepared to draw the inferences sought by the
Crown. These were features in the Crown case which raised questions. The informer was seeking to obtain discounts for his own criminality, he seemed to have an intimate knowledge of the position of the firearms, the balance of the evidence suggests that it was easy to gain access to the granny flat and it is hard to explain why the earrings, the watch and the TAB card in the appellant's name were in the large bag. It is not easy to accept the explanation why the contents of the "New York" bag were not inspected promptly. To suggest that a cheque, deposit slip and bank card documents papers look like "rubbish papers" is unusual. The recollections of some of the witnesses seemed to improve after they were shown specific items by the police some time later.

The jury took some time to reach their verdict. They retired at 11 am on 17
February 1994 and before leaving the court on that day at 5.09 pm left some questions as to fingerprints, the kitchen layout, the cupboard and the large bag for the judge. The judge dealt with them the following morning. The jury retired again at 10.10 am and returned at 11 am with their verdicts.

The appellant also complained that the had not been able to adduce the evidence of Gregory John Goodman. In his affidavit of 20 September 1995 Mr
Goodman stated that he had met Kim Simmons in gaol. Some time later when they were both at large Simmons offered to pay Goodman $500 if he stole a car.
Goodman agreed to do so for Simmons.

In the early hours of 17 January 1993 Goodman visited the appellant's home.
Simmons accompanied Goodman who introduced him to the appellant.

On the evening of 17 January 1993 Simmons came to Goodman's place at
Blacktown. Simmons, who had a black or blue coloured sports bag, asked if he could leave a gun at Goodman's place. Simmons handed to Goodman a sawn off
Bentley shotgun and a black balaclava which he placed under his bed. Goodman noticed another sawn off shotgun in the bag. He was unable to see what else was in the bag. Goodman was told by Simmons that he was going to drop the bag off at the appellant's place on the way.

Simmons and Goodman drove to the front of the premises in which the appellant lived. Simmons got out of the car and went around the back of the house carrying the bag. He came back to the car a minute or two later without the bag.

Later on that evening two vehicles were stolen in succession by Goodman in
Simmons' company. Ultimately, Goodman drove Simmons to his home with him promising to pay Goodman the money the following day. The following morning, January 1993, Simmons telephoned Goodman and stated that he had to see his solicitor that morning and would not be able to get to Goodman's place until lunch time. At lunch time Simmons telephoned and said he would be there at .30 pm. At that time the police arrived with a search warrant with specific details of the stolen car and its registration, the balaclava and the sawn off shotgun. Goodman was arrested and charged. The same police were involved as with the appellant. A few days later Goodman obtained bail.

Judge Moore, in sentencing Goodman on 13 August 1993 stated: "It is of considerable significance that the search warrant names exactly the items which the police officers expected to find, and that supports the prisoner's contention, which I accept, that Simmons had set up the prisoner and then informed the police officers, who acted in the course of their duty by taking appropriate action against the prisoner." 
In the present case the police applied for a search warrant early on 20
January 1993. The police application stated: "Information has been received that the occupant of 475 Woodville Road,
Guildford is in possession of a shortened shotgun and clothing which is to be used in the commission of armed robberies." 
The Justice's Record of the Application for a Search Warrant contains this note: "Informant known 1 month. Previously supplied reliable information for Search
Warrant for similar goods on 18-1-93. Address verified 18-1-93 with informant and porn (sic) broker on 19-1-93. Informant told police goods were at premises on 18-1-93." 
It is a reasonable inference that Kim Simmons was the informant in both instances.

In his Report to Authorised Justice on the Execution of a Search Warrant at .40 am on 20 January 1993 completed by Detective Sergeant S J Leach this passage appears: "Property located at premises in granny flat at rear rented by Glen Allan
ROSYNSKI (not arrest (circulated)(sic) one sawn off shot gun. One sawn off .303 rifle (military style) containing four rounds contained in a black and white vinyl bag along with large no. car keys, 1/2 scissor, on navy blue and grey top with hood, 2 screwdrivers, 2 balaclavas, 2 beanies, 3 sets of glooves, one TAB card in the name of Rosynski, 1 Deni Pullen cardboard container, face mask, triangular bandage, watch, also located was a Fairfied
Fire coat and water bottle.

There is no reference to the plastic bag ('New York') or the papers later said to have come from the Grandview Hotel such as the cheque in its favour. There is not even a reference to sundry papers. This is odd and raises a number of questions. I have earlier indicated the difficulty I have in accepting that anyone could have treated the papers in the plastic bag as rubbish papers.

In cross examination Mr Goodman said that after his arrest on 18 January 1993 he next saw the appellant in the police cells at Bankstown after the appellant had been arrested. They spoke and discussed the circumstances of their arrests. Goodman realised Simmons was involved in the search of the appellant's flat by the police. He noted the "same police, and same circumstances and everything." He thought that Simmons was obviously working for the police and had set the appellant up by dropping the bag off with the gun. The appellant probably held the same views. The appellant said that he saw Goodman on an occasion in 1993 at the Bankstown Police Station. They were in different cells and were not allowed to speak with each other. It is probable that they did communicate in some way. It was probably this incident which made the appellant realise that Goodman could be a useful witness.

In his affidavit Detective Sergeant Leach said that Goodman, in response to questions, stated that the sawn off Bentley shotgun was obtained legitimately having been purchased from a man, named Todd. He had been having trouble with some people and got it for protection. Detective Leach said that at no time during the interview on 18 January 1993 did Goodman mention Kim Simmons.

From an early stage the appellant wanted his solicitors to locate Mr Goodman so he could relate the circumstances and events of 16,17 and 18 January 1993.
The appellant believed that this would help his case. He hoped it would show that Simmons had been engaged in planting guns to curry favour with the police for his own advantage. The end result would be lenient treatment for Simmons' own criminal conduct.

I do not regard the differences in recollection of what happened at Bankstown as being of great significance. It is not a critical matter on credit. If
Goodman's version is accepted then perhaps the appellant should have been better able to explain what he expected Goodman to say. I thought that perhaps too much was being expected of a layman. It sufficed that the appellant believed that Goodman could help his case by telling of the events of 16-18
January 1993 and Simmons' activities.

Ms Y Swift was the solicitor who acted for the appellant before and at his trial. She recalled the appellant giving counsel and her a list of potential witnesses to be interviewed and stressing the importance of Goodman. She said that extensive searches were undertaken by counsel and herself to find the witnesses and obtain their evidence. Four of the witnesses were found.
Conferences with them were held on 3 February 1994. Despite significant efforts the appellant's legal advisers were unable to find Goodman. The trial proceeded without him. If counsel had had his evidence and been able to call him it would probably have affected the way he conducted the case. If Goodman had been called his evidence would have added much to the argument that there had been a plant or, at the least, that the appellant had been set up.

In May 1995 the appellant's solicitor was advised that Goodman was at Odyssey
House. He was undergoing treatment for his drug addiction and had been there since about 17 August 1993. The solicitor wrote to Goodman. Subsequently, the solicitor ascertained that Goodman was in gaol and interviewed him.

As Goodman could not be located despite reasonable diligence his evidence was not available at the trial.

There is material from which it could be inferred that, at the relevant time,
Simmons was a drug addict. Goodman and Simmons met in the course of attending a methadone clinic.

A tribunal of fact would approach the evidence of Goodman with caution and some scepticism. He had a bad record including armed robberies and a lengthy sentence. If Goodman's evidence had stood alone I may have doubted whether there was a significant possibility of a different verdict.

The police had an informant with a fairly detailed knowledge of what was at
Goodman's premises and the appellant's premises. The justice who issued the search warrant in respect of the appellant's flat was advised that for similar goods the informant had supplied reliable information for a search on 18
January 1993. The police also advised the justice that the informant had told them on 18 January 1993 that the goods were at the appellant's premises.

The sequence of events, those involved and the pattern revealed tend to add weight to Goodman's evidence. The documentary material is also helpful. It gains added weight when taken with the events relating to the appellant and the search warrant documents.

The combination of Goodman's evidence with the supporting documents relating to the two search warrants and the evidence of Professor Trinder and Mr
Donnelly present a different picture from the one the jury had before it. When considered in conjunction with the other evidence there may well have been a different result.

As was pointed out in Gallagher v. The Queen <case>; [160 CLR 392] the fundamental principle is that a new trial may be granted where there is a miscarriage of justice. The various sub-principles which may be extracted from the authorities are not hard and fast rules but are designed to assist in the application of the fundamental principle.

In Lawless v. The Queen <case>; <case>; [131 CLR 510] at that "great latitude must ... be extended to an accused in determining what evidence by reasonable diligence in his own interest he could have had available at his trial", it being "probably only in an exceptional case" that evidence not actually available to him is to be denied the quality of fresh evidence. Stephen J continued at 669: "But if for want of knowledge of particular evidence there has perforce been no making of a decision against adducing it, and if that want of knowledge is not so unexplained as to lead to the inference that it was the product of an intentional failure to make inquiries, it should, in my view, indeed be "only in an exceptional case" that evidence not called because not known to be available is denied the character of fresh evidence." 
These are important reminders of the need not to be too demanding or unreal when considering whether particular evidence not actually available could with reasonable diligence have been called. It is easy in retrospect to see what should have been done.

The evidence of Professor Trinder, Mr Donnelly and Mr Goodman was not available at the trial. I do not think it was available with the use of reasonable diligence. It would, in my opinion, have required exceptional efforts and some good fortune to obtain it. The lawyers did not believe that it would be possible to obtain expert evidence of the kind in question and discarded that as a possibility. That field of knowledge is not even moderately known. It is hard to make useful inquiries if the existence of the field of knowledge is not known to the inquirer and not moderately known. Mr
Goodman could not be found despite extensive efforts.

Adopting the approach of Barwick CJ and Stephen J earlier mentioned and applying it to the facts of the present case I am of the opinion that the evidence of Professor Trinder, Mr Donnelly and Mr Goodman could fairly be described as fresh evidence. Even if I were wrong in that conclusion the evidence is of such a nature as to necessitate consideration. At the very least there is a significant possibility that that evidence along with the other evidence would have led to an acquittal. The non availability of the "fresh evidence" and it consequently not being adduced have led to a miscarriage of justice.

This conclusion would lead to an order for a new trial.

Unsafe and Unsatisfactory Verdicts 
The appellant went further and submitted that this court should direct an acquittal. He contended that on the evidence before the jury the verdicts were unsafe and unsatisfactory.

At the trial the appellant contended that the bag with the guns etc had been planted in his flat. This was not limited to Simmons (or one of his associates). It was suggested to the police that they had been involved in planting the bag with the guns etc and placing personal items of the appellant in the bag.

The prosecution case included evidence that the appellant occupied and controlled the granny flat, that entry was forced by the police into the flat where they found the sawn off guns and other items capable of being used for armed robberies and items in the bag linking the appellant to the guns and the robberies. There was also evidence from the witnesses of consistency between items they observed at the robbery and subsequently in the alleged possession of the appellant. Unless the police informant or one of his associates was one of the robbers there was no ready explanation of how the items from the hotel (and probably from the safe) ended up in the large bag. Further, that bag belonged to the premises at Woodville Road, Guildford and usually held the pool filters. If the jury accepted that evidence it was entitled to convict.

By contrast there was material which suggested that the guns had been "planted" and the strong evidence that the granny flat was easily entered and poorly secured provided ample opportunity for that to happen. The alleged tardy discovery of the documents from the hotel linking the accused to the robbery was never satisfactorily explained. There is also the fresh evidence.
That was not fully explored in the hearing in this court, and it would have been incorrect to do so. Nor was the contrary evidence of Dr Lowe explored. In oral evidence he would be asked to comment upon the December 1995 report of
Professor Trinder and Mr Donnelly. I have not overlooked that Goodman's evidence as to Simmons leaving a large bag does not fit easily with the evidence that the large bag containing the guns usually held the pool filters.

The identity of the informer Simmons has been so widely disclosed that there would be no point at any future trial in trying to conceal his identity. He may well have to be called in the Crown case to rebut the strong suggestion that he "planted" the guns etc in the appellant's flat. The Crown may take the view that Simmons is not credible. These problems will have to be resolved.

There are a number of important factual issues to be explored and decided. The problem is not so much a shortage of material but which material is credible.
It would be incorrect for this court to direct a verdict.

I propose that the appeal be allowed, that the conviction be quashed and that a new trial be had. The applicant has already spent 161/2 months in custody on these matters. It is a matter for the Crown whether it wishes to proceed with a new trial.

SPERLING J: I have read in draft form the judgment of Smart J in this matter. I agree with the orders which he proposes and with his reasons.
 
HIDDEN J: I agree with Smart J.
 * * * 
