

Cameron versus Grafton District Services Club and Randall No. 5180/92 Gaming and wagering [1995] NSWSC 62 (9 October 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
EQUITY DIVISION
WINDEYER J
HRNG
SYDNEY, 24-25 July 1995 and 9 August 1995 #DATE 9:8:1995 #ADD 9:10:1995 
Counsel for the Plaintiff     R.J.B. St John QC 
Solicitors for the Plaintiff    Foott Law and Co 
Counsel for the 2nd Defendant   I.H. Wallach 
Solicitors for the 2nd Defendant  South Coast Aboriginal Legal 
Service
ORDER
Summons dismissed
JUDGE1
WINDEYER J The question for decision in this action is which of Mrs Betty
Cameron, the plaintiff, and Mrs Isa Randall, the second defendant, is entitled to the proceeds of a poker machine jackpot payment won on a five cent machine
No.105 at the Grafton District Services Club on 7 September 1992.
Mrs Cameron and Mrs Randall were friends. On 11 September 1992 they went to the Royal Tavern Hotel at Grafton. Mrs Cameron's sister, Mrs Jay, was with her and
Mrs Randall's sister, Mrs Hughes, was with her. Mrs Randall had the money that day and asked them whether they would like to go to the club to play the poker machines. She told Mrs Cameron and Mrs Jay that she would lend them $10 each to be repaid on their pension day and that was agreed.
The four women went to the club together. Mrs Cameron changed her money into ten cent coins and played the ten cent machines. She used up all of her moneys. Mrs Randall and Mrs Hughes played five cent machines, Mrs Randall
No.106 and
Mrs Hughes No.104. Mrs Jay also played five cent machines it seems, but there were a number of machines between hers and those which
Mrs Randall and Mrs Hughes were playing.
Mrs Cameron says that after her money ran out she went to machine No.105 which had just been vacated by another woman and said to Mrs Randall that she had done no good and was broke, whereupon Mrs Randall reached across, put a number of coins into the slot of machine No.105 saying, "You can have these coins." She then pressed the buttons a number of times, got five sevens and, on her story, the jackpot of $48,030. Mrs Jay supported, to an extent, this story but whilst in her affidavit she said she heard Mrs Randall say, "You can have these coins", the evidence shows she was unlikely to have been in a position to hear that and in cross-examination she did not appear to have heard anything said. That I find to be the position.
Mrs Randall said she started to play machine No.106, that the woman playing No.105 got up and left, that she then put five cent coins into that machine and started to play No.105 and No.106 for a little while. Mrs Cameron came over and sat next to her in front of No.105 saying, as I have said, that she did no good. Mrs Randall said at this stage she was playing both machines and that there were about 30 credits left in No.105. She said in cross-examination, although certainly this was not apparent from the affidavit evidence, that she did say to Mrs Cameron "You can have those coins" or words to that effect. She accepted, and I also accept, that if the jackpot had been won with those coins then it would have belonged to Mrs Cameron. She said that both machines then ran out and she went to change some more money. She said that she came back and thought that she put coins into both machines but certainly put some into No.105. She said that she mostly played No.105 because it was paying better. After a while she asked
Mrs Cameron to press the buttons for her and they had alternate presses on about three occasions. She then told
Mrs Cameron to always press the five buttons and the first time Mrs Cameron did that the five sevens came up and the all the lights started to flash and the bells started to ring.
All this is, to a large extent, supported by Mrs Hughes, particularly the obtaining of more money, at least it was in her affidavit although she did move from this to some extent in cross-examination saying that Mrs Randall did not go away to get more money. But in any event, she did say that more money was put in.
According to Mrs Randall, in the excitement
Mrs Cameron said she had better ring her daughter, Vicki, and tell her the good news and Mrs Hughes said she would go and ring Mrs
Randall's sister, Ailsa, who, of course, was also her sister. They went to do so. Mrs Cameron said that Vicki did not believe her and she sent Mrs Randall to confirm the good news. I accept all that happened.
At this stage the club supervisor, Anne Hooson, appeared and asked whose jackpot it was. Mrs Hooson said that Mrs Randall claimed it and that Mrs
Cameron said, "It was Isa Randall,
I pressed the button". She asked Mrs
Randall to sign the claim form and asked for a witness. Mrs Cameron said that she would witness it. This happened. Mrs Cameron said that she was signing as claimant and left her glasses at home, did not realise she was signing it as a witness and did not sign on the right line. That evidence about her glasses appears to be correct but she did sign near the line as witness. She said she had claimed the jackpot as hers.
Mr McLean, the duty manager, said that he had said in the presence of both women to Mrs Hooson, "Who won?" and Mrs Hooson said, "Isa Randall". This was not contradicted by Mrs Cameron. Mr Donnelly said much the same thing. He was not cross-examined. His evidence as to the witnessing bears out the story of
Mrs Hughes and is against the story of Mrs Cameron.
As I have said, Mrs Hughes supported the story of Mrs Randall. She was close enough to hear the conversation and said she heard her sister say, "Have a press for me." She confirmed the telephone calls saying that she heard Betty say on the telephone, "Isa pulled the big money". She said Mrs Randall gave
Mrs Cameron a $50 note saying, "Here you are, split this between you". That, I should make quite clear, was after the jackpot was won. This was not denied.
The four went off to lunch.
Mrs Cameron said that the first time that she heard Mrs Randall claim the jackpot was in the car. That was not correct as she admitted in cross-examination that she had heard her claim it at least twice in the club. She never said in the club to Mrs Randall that it was hers although she did say that she had claimed it to be hers to others. When she knew that Mrs Randall was claiming it she never contradicted her or argued about this in any way. Mrs Randall, of course, denies Mrs Cameron ever said it was hers and on that basis there was no need to deny it. That does not apply to Mrs Cameron.
There is a dispute about what happened at lunch. On the
Randall side there is evidence about statements made by Mrs Cameron and her sister that "God had smiled on her"; that Mrs Cameron had told her brother that Mrs
Randall had won and that Mrs Cameron had asked for help with her electricity bill. on the Cameron side all this is denied. Mr Cromelin, Mrs Cameron's brother, said that Mrs Cameron had said to him, "I pulled the five sevens at the club.
It was the big jackpot". It seems from the evidence that it was at this stage when they were talking to Mr Cromelin that Mrs Randall produced in the car the club duplicate claim form that she had claimed for the jackpot and waved it around. That, according to the
Mrs Cameron, was the first time that she had heard Mrs Randall claim it was hers although she conceded later that that was not so.
The two sides split up after lunch. Mrs Cameron and Vicki went up to the club to claim the jackpot and were told to come back at 2pm to see the manager. I should say she did not, at any stage, tell Mrs Randall they were going to the club for that purpose although it was clear by then that she knew that Mrs Randall claimed that she was the winner. For some reason they then went in search of a solicitor but that may have been because they knew by then there was going to be a problem. They returned to claim the jackpot and were told by the club manager that it seems Mrs Randall had won it. Mrs Randall turned up and was told Mrs Cameron had claimed it. She says this was the first she knew of this and I accept that.
This is a very sad story but in the end I am of the view
I must accept the claim of Mrs Randall. There is no presumption of a continuing gifting process and it is perfectly clear on the evidence that the relationship and the arrangement between the parties were such that unless coins or credits were actually handed over by way of gift or loan, the winnings would belong to the party whose coins they were.
I find the plaintiff never claimed to Mrs Hooson or Mr McLean at the relevant time that she was the winner. I do not accept that when she signed as a witness she thought that she was signing as a claimant. I accept that she volunteered to be a witness, as Mr Donnelly deposed. She said nothing about being a winner in the car when Mrs Randall provided the copy of the winner's ticket. Neither did she say anything about it to Mrs
Randall or dispute her claim at the club and her reasons for not saying anything about it or disputing it are, I consider, unacceptable.
What she said to her brother, on his evidence, is at least consistent with the fact of pulling the jackpot rather than an entitlement to it. There is no reason for the club attendants to have any interest one way or the other, and quite clearly they had no such interest when they went down to have the necessary claims forms filled in.
Mrs Jay's evidence in the long run came down to the proposition which she put to the Court on a number of occasions that "if you pull the jackpot it's yours". This is not the case unless the money in it is yours or there is an agreement to that effect. The only question here is whose money it was and I find it was the money of Mrs Randall.
It is right to say that I do not accept all the evidence that Mrs Randall gave and neither do I accept all the evidence that Mrs Cameron gave. It does seem to me, however, that the evidence of other witnesses is strongly in support of Mrs
Randall and the uncontested evidence as to her handing over $50, albeit this could only be regarded as an extraordinarily small amount in view of the very big win, is strong support of her having won and it being accepted she had won. It is quite clear she would not have made any gift at all if she had not won and it is unlikely in the extreme that Mrs Cameron did not realise this and accept that to be the position. I do not accept that this handing over of the $50 was a further loan.
It follows from this the plaintiff's case on the summons should be dismissed and the cross-claim of the second defendant should succeed. (Mr Wallach handed up a facsimile letter from the club's solicitors dated 4
August 1995 being a request regarding the question of costs.)
The order I make is that the summons be dismissed. Subject to the next order I order that the sum of $48,030 paid into court in action 5846/92 and treated as paid into Court in these proceedings together with interest thereon be paid to the cross-claimant. 
I order that the costs of the first defendant in these proceedings and the plaintiff in proceedings No. 5846/92 be paid out of the moneys paid into Court but stand over the question of quantum on the basis of that costs order and any question as to whether the costs should be limited up to a certain time for further hearing. 
I order that the plaintiff pay the costs of the defendant/cross- claimant of the proceedings together with the amount of costs payable out of the fund pursuant to the previous order. 
I will stand over the question of costs and further argument on costs to .30am on 8 September. 
The cross-claimant is to notify the solicitors of the club as to that.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/62.html  
