

Tyre & Tube Australia (Services) Pty Limited versus Martins Stock Haulage
Pty Limited [2016] NSWSC 703 (3 June 2016) 
Last Updated: 7 June 2016 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Decision:
The summons filed on 8 April 2015 be dismissed. 
The plaintiff pay the defendants' costs of the proceedings (including the defendants' costs of the cross-summons). 
The cross-summons be dismissed with no order as to costs.  
Catchwords: 
CONTRACTS - general contractual principles - existence of contract - implication of contractual terms PROCEDURE - application of the principle in
Jones versus Dunkel - operation of the rule in Browne versus Dunn ESTOPPEL - by conduct - promissory Estoppel - Estoppel by convention  
Cases Cited: 
Austotel Pty Limited versus Franklins Selfserve Pty Limited [(1989) 16 NSWLR ] 
BP Refinery (Westernport) Pty Ltd versus Hastings Shire Council (1977) 180 CLR 266 
Browne versus Dunn (1893) 6 R 67 (HL) 
Crabtree-Vickers Pty Ltd versus Australian Direct Mail Advertising & Addressing
Company Pty Ltd <case>; [(1975) 133 CLR 72] 
Freeman & Lockyer (a firm) versus Buckhurst Park Properties (Mangal) Ltd <case>; <case> 
Quickfund (Australia) Pty Ltd versus Prosperity Group International Pty Limited (In
Liq) <case> 
Secured Income Real Estate (Australia) Ltd versus St Martins Investments Pty Ltd <case>; [(1979) 144 CLR 596]  
Category: 
Principal judgment  
Parties: 
Tyre & Tube Australia (Services) Pty Limited (ACN 105 550 089 ) 
Martins Stock Haulage (Scone) Pty Limited (ACN 050 210 985) (First Defendant) 
Gordon Martin Pty Limited (Second Defendant) 
Henri Gordon Martin (Third Defendant) 
Jason Gordon Martin (Fourth Defendant)  
Representation: 
Counsel: 
MT McCulloch SC with RW Notley (Plaintiff) 
V Whittaker with K Madgwick (Defendants)  
Solicitors: 
Norton Rose Fulbright Australia (Plaintiff) 
Equilaw Solicitors (Defendants)  
File Number(s): /103595  
Publication Restriction: 
None  
JUDGMENT 
Introduction
The first defendant, Martins Stock Haulage (Scone) Pty Limited (Martins Stock Haulage), and the second defendant, Gordon Martin Pty Limited trading as Gordon Martin Bulk Haulage (Martin Bulk Haulage) (together, the Martin Group), operate a road transport business. Martin Stock Haulage transports sheep and cattle, and Martin Bulk Haulage transports bulk goods, such as grain and mining equipment, by truck around the eastern parts of Australia.
Mr Henri Gordon Martin (Mr Martin Snr) and his son, Mr Jason Martin (Mr Martin Jnr), are the directors of the Martin Group. They are the third and fourth defendants respectively.
From April 2012 until 15 January 2015, the Martin Group had a contract with the cross-defendant, Colonial Tyre Service Pty Limited (Colonial), to supply, fit and service the tyres on the Martin Group's fleets of trucks and trailers (the Colonial Agreement). The director of Colonial is Mr Allan Carver who had, through various companies for a number of years, been involved in supplying tyres and associated services to the Martin Group. Colonial is now in receivership and did not participate in these proceedings, although I am satisfied that it was properly served and was on notice of the hearing.
Under the Colonial Agreement, Colonial provided services to the Martin Group on a "CPK" (cents per kilometre) basis, meaning that the Martin Group paid Colonial an agreed number of cents for each kilometre travelled by each of the trucks and trailers in its fleets and in return Colonial supplied tyres for those trucks and trailers, replaced those tyres when necessary and provided associated services such as wheel balancing, pressure maintenance, tyre rotation, puncture repairs, retreading and regrooving.
The Martin Group also paid Colonial for other services such as roadside assistance for damaged or punctured tyres. These services were referred to as "exceptions" and were invoiced and paid for separately from the monthly CPK amount.
In order for Colonial to calculate the CPK amount owing each month, the Martin Group provided to Colonial from the trucks' GPS readings information concerning how far each truck and trailer had travelled in the month.
Colonial acquired tyres to be fitted to the Martin Group's fleets from the plaintiff, Tyre & Tube Australia (Services) Pty Limited (TTA).
It is TTA's case that in early February 2014, the contractual arrangements between the parties were changed so that TTA started to supply tyres directly to the Martin Group and the Martin Group agreed to pay to TTA the amount it previously paid to Colonial. TTA claims that in breach of the revised contractual arrangements, the Martin Group has failed to pay amounts owing by it. In this proceeding, TTA claims those amounts. It also claims those amounts from Mr Martin Snr and Mr Martin Jnr under guarantees they are said to have given of the Martin Group's obligations. In the alternative, TTA claims an order that the Martin Group provide it with information concerning the distance travelled by each truck and trailer in the fleets since July 2014 fitted with a tyre or tyres supplied by TTA so that TTA can accurately calculate the amount due to it in respect of the period from July 2014.
TTA also pleads an alternative case based on an estoppel.
The Martin Group denies that there was any contract between it and TTA or that it engaged in any conduct giving rise to an estoppel. In the alternative, by its cross-claim, it claims that if it is liable to pay TTA it is entitled to recover money it paid to Colonial on the basis that that money was paid under a mistake.
For the reasons that follow, I have concluded that there was no agreement between TTA and the Martin Group and that the alternative case based on an estoppel must fail.

Factual Background
The Colonial Agreement is evidenced by a letter dated 11 March 2012 from Colonial to the Martin Group setting out the CPK rate that Colonial proposed to charge the Martin Group for each type of truck in the fleets and an acceptance of those rates signed on behalf of the Martin Group on 1 April 2012 by its commercial manager.
The terms on which Colonial acquired tyres from TTA prior to February 2014 are set out in an Application for Commercial Credit dated 23 November 2012, which was signed by Colonial, and standard terms and conditions attached to that application for credit. Also attached to the application for credit was a Deed of Guarantee & Indemnity signed by Mr Carver by which Mr Carver guaranteed the amounts payable by Colonial. The standard terms and conditions included the following: 
Payment terms  . The terms of payment are strictly thirty (30) days from the date of invoice (i.e. on the twenty-fifth (25th) day of the month following the date of invoice) or such other period as nominated by the supplier herein. Tyre & Tube Australia (Services) Pty Ltd ABN 99 105 550 089 and its related bodies corporate (as that term is defined in the [Corporations Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) may, at any time, unilaterally vary the terms of trade in its absolute and unfettered discretion.  ... 
Prices  . The total price to paid [sic] by the Applicant is the total of the GST exclusive prices and the GST or any other taxes, duties or charges imposed by any government shown on the face of this invoice. 
Orders  . All orders are deemed to have been made by the Applicant in accordance with these terms and conditions subject to any written terms and conditions which accompany the goods or any written agreement between the Supplier and the Applicant. All other terms and conditions including warranties and guarantees whether expressed, implied or statutory are excluded.  . No cancellation or variation of any order shall be effective after the order has been accepted by the Supplier without the written agreement of the
Supplier.  ... 
Formation of contract  . Quotations made by the Supplier will not be construed as an offer or obligation to supply in accordance with the quotation. The Supplier reserves the right to accept or reject, at its discretion, any offer to purchase received by it. Only written acceptance by the Supplier of the Applicant's offer will complete a contract.  . Placement of an order, either verbally or in writing, will imply acceptance of the Supplier's offer and of these terms and conditions.  ...
Colonial was persistently late and fell substantially behind in paying TTA for tyres that it had ordered. By December 2013, Colonial owed TTA in excess of $450,000 and TTA was no longer prepared to supply it with tyres on credit.
In about late December 2013 or early January 2014, Mr Bloxham, the sole director of TTA, had a meeting with Mr Carver during which Mr Bloxham proposed an arrangement by which (to quote from affidavit evidence given by Mr Bloxham) "Tyre & Tube supplies tyres to the Martins directly and Colonial does the servicing. All the billing would come through Tyre & Tube and the difference between the wholesale price of the tyres and CPK payments by the Martins is either reimbursed to Colonial, or used to pay off the debt Colonial has with Tyre & Tube".
Mr Carver indicated that the proposal was acceptable to him and that he would speak to Mr Martin Snr about it.
Neither Mr Carver nor Mr Martin Snr gave evidence. However, according to Mr Bloxham, in late January 2014 he and Ms Beaver, who at the time was TTA's Operations Manager, had a further meeting with Mr Carver. During that meeting, Mr Carver indicated that he had spoken to Mr Martin Snr and that Mr Martin Snr had agreed to deal directly with Tyre & Tube and to open up credit accounts with TTA. Mr Carver then explained how the arrangements between the Martin Group and Colonial worked and, according to Mr Bloxham, assured him that the arrangement was "very profitable".
At the end of the meeting, either Mr Bloxham or Ms Beaver gave Mr Carver two Application for Commercial Credit forms to be signed by each of the Martin Group companies. The forms were in substantially the same terms as the Application for Commercial Credit signed by Colonial and included guarantees to be executed by Mr Martin Snr and Mr Martin Jnr in substantially the same terms as the guarantee executed by Mr Carver.
Mr Carver arranged for Mr Martin Snr and Mr Martin Jnr to execute the Application for Commercial Credit forms and guarantees and returned the executed documents, which were dated 4 February 2014, to Mr Bloxham in early February 2014.
On 1 February 2014, TTA and Colonial also entered into a "Tyre Supply Agreement".
Relevantly, that agreement contained the following terms: 
Tyre & Tube Australia (TTA Truckpower) will supply the full requirement of tyres to Martin's. CTS [Colonial] will be responsible for arranging delivery and service of the tyres to Martin's. 
CTS will carry out all tyre service requirements on Martin's vehicles. To facilitate rapid and reliable supply TTA Truckpower will supply a model Consignment Stock of tyres to CTS. CTS will be responsible for safe keeping of the Consignment Stock, confirm this stock is exclusively for the use of Martins and notify of every tyre taken from this stock and supplied to Martin's. Monthly stock-takes or stocktakes as required will monitor this Model Stock level. CTS must faithfully act to support the interests, minimize costs and risk of Martin's and TTA
Truckpower. 
CTS will advise TTA Truckpower the CPK details every month to enable TTA Truckpower to correctly invoice Martin's the monthly
Lease fee. The kilometre data provided to CTS by Martin's, will be checked against the vehicle registration fleet list included within the Tyre
Service CPK Agreement. Any anomalies will be resolved direct with
Martin's by CTS prior to sending kilometre data to TTA
Truckpower. To enable invoicing the information must be supplied before the end of month following the month of supply.
At the same time that TTA prepared the Tyre Supply Agreement that was signed by it and Colonial, it prepared a Tyre Supply Agreement to be signed by the Martin Group, Colonial and TTA. That agreement had as one of its terms the following: 
The Martin Group guarantee to pay the full TTA account under normal trading terms & conditions (Refer TTA Credit Application and Terms &
Conditions as published).

The Martin Group refused to sign that agreement.
In accordance with the new arrangements, Colonial continued to provide purchase orders to TTA and TTA supplied tyres in accordance with those purchase orders. The first purchase order issued by Colonial to TTA was dated 3 February 2014. Colonial continued to provide associated services to the Martin Group. TTA invoiced the Martin Group for the amount payable under the Colonial Agreement. Mostly, the CPK data required in order to prepare those invoices was supplied to TTA by Colonial, but on one occasion the Martin Group emailed the relevant information directly to TTA with a copy to Colonial.
Generally, the CPK data was provided to TTA in the second month after the period to which the invoice related and the invoice was issued later that month and paid at the end of the month or early in the following month. So, for example, the CPK data in respect of February 2014 was provided by Colonial to TTA on 8 April 2014. TTA issued an invoice for the amount calculated in accordance with those data on 14 April 2014 and the Martin Group paid the invoice on 1 May 2014.
From time to time, TTA also issued the Martin Group exceptions invoices for damaged tyres in accordance with instructions given by Colonial.
Contrary to TTA's expectations, the amount invoiced to the Martin Group each month was not always sufficient to cover the costs of tyres supplied in the month in respect of which the invoice was issued. On 12 May 2014, Mr Bloxham wrote to Mr Carver and Mrs Carver, who also worked in Colonial's business, concerning that matter. In that email, Mr Bloxham relevantly said: 
As you would both know I have also stated several times in these past weeks that the shortfall of the Martins CPK supply arrangement must be paid by
Colonial Tyres at the same time as Martins pay TTA. This was again stated in person when Allan and Sam visited our premises last Friday. Allan personally guaranteed we would receive that lump sum on time to make up the shortfall.
Allan has personally guaranteed this several times in face to face meetings and phone discussions in April/May. So that means before the last day of May any shortfall in that payment of March tyre supply must be forthcoming in its entirety. Estimates are this figure will be circa $100,000.00. 
Frankly I don't see how you will have the funds to pay this - the funds that are absolutely required. TTA will not continue to supply tyres until we have the overdue caught up, based on your commitment below, and also the guarantee of payment for the Martins shortfall at the end of May (and any/all subsequent months). We will not continue supplying tyres until you can satisfy us that you can service the debt. 
We have also requested several times (and been assured) that we would receive the Service Delivery Advice forms, that act as a Proof of Delivery. We started supply on the 1st Feb 2014 and as such have the right to reconcile our supply, to your Consignment stock holding, to the supply of our tyres to
Martins. You know full well that every tyre must be accounted for and cannot be used for any other customer.
The position did not improve and, on 15 June 2014, Mr Bloxham sent Mr Carver an email setting out a proposal to ensure that TTA was paid. The email concluded: 
As soon as the TTA debt and other smaller creditors are brought into terms (excluding Michelin) the interim Management Agreement would become null and void, thus control reverts to Carver. 
Note the above does not buy you more time NOT to pay TTA. We still expect you to meet the commitment made by Denise [Mrs Carver] in the recent email. 
Also note that you have broken the Martins Agreement and must desist immediately fitting other brands on the their [sic] fleet. Also any attempt to approach Martins with a view to having any payments redirected away from TTA and back to Colonial will result in us taking immediate legal action. You must honor all aspects of all the Agreements.
It is not entirely clear from the evidence what happened then. However, the matter was not resolved and in early September 2014 Mr Bloxham and Ms Beaver met with Mr Carver during which there was a conversation to the following effect: 
Mr Carver: "We need to go back to the old arrangement between Colonial and the Martins where we bill them directly." 
Mr Bloxham: "That is not going to happen unless payment of all of the debt owing to Tyre & Tube, by both Martins and Colonial, is forthcoming." 
Mr Carver: "I don't want you contacting the Martins directly." 
Mr Bloxham: "They're a customer of ours and we're supplying a great deal of stock to them every month so we're perfectly entitled to talk to them about relevant issues, such as supply and payment."
Following that conversation, on 5 September 2014, Ms Beaver wrote to Ms Kelly Harvison, the Commercial Manager of the Martin Group. It appears that the text of the email was suggested by Mr Bloxham. In that email Ms Beaver said: 
I have heard back a couple of comments that are slightly at odds with our supply arrangement to the Martin Group. While not in any way do we want to upset the arrangement (as we are very pleased to have your business and appreciate it) we also don't want any misunderstanding that could lead to difficulties in the future. 
As you probably are aware we supply product to the Martin Group to the wholesale value of approx. $110,000 to $150,000 per month. Given we always have product supplied that sits in current, 30 and 60 days, we can have up to approx. $450,000 as outstanding. We also have supplied a large model stock of tyres (to facilitate immediate supply at each depot as required) of approx.
$200,000. So our commitment and investment is very large. 
We are appreciative of your payments each month and also that you are timely in payment. All tyre related payments need to always be directed to
Tyre & Tube Australia to cover both our tyre supply and then as arranged we reimburse Colonial Tyres or other service providers. This system has been in operation since February 2014. Allan Carver did make a comment to us that the system was to go back to how it was. We advised him that the system implemented in February necessitated that the supply and payment system stay the same, due to the large on-going investment by Tyre & Tube Australia.
This avoids any confusion and any doubt. Again we do not wish to stir up anything that is not being considered, however wanted to just confirm the supply arrangement.
Mr Heinrich, the National Manager of the Martin Group, replied to that email on 5 September 2014. In that reply, Mr Heinrich said: 
Yet again I am very confused as to how this is Martins problem. Let me be very clear, there is no supply arrangement with Tyre and Tube and Martin
Group. 
Our relationship is currently with Colonial Tyres and I am aware there has been some informal process in place where we have paid direct to Tyre and
Tube. The fact this has happened has created obvious confusion amongst the parties that I am not prepared to allow to continue. 
I recommend Tyre and Tube and Colonial Tyres sort out their issue so I can get back to dealing with a single service provider for our tyres. If this situation does not go away I will resolve it from the Martins perspective. 
The Martin Group is in no way responsible for the value of stock you have noted below. 
I will also be communicating with Allan Carver to resolve this once and for all.
TTA did not respond to that email. From that time on, TTA was not supplied with CPK data. Nonetheless, it continued to send invoices to the Martin Group based on estimates of the distances travelled by each truck and trailer in the Martin Group fleets.
On 21 October 2014, TTA commenced proceedings against Colonial and Mr Carver in the District Court seeking to recover the wholesale cost of the tyres that it had supplied to Colonial, including tyres that were installed on the Martin Group's trucks. However, it appears that it did not pursue those proceedings.

TTA's contentions
TTA contends that the Applications for Commercial Credit and attached standard terms signed by the Martin Group created contracts between TTA and the Martin Group and that it was a term of those contracts that the Martin Group would pay any invoices issued by TTA within 30 days of the date of the invoice. Alternatively, or in addition, TTA contends that the following were express or implied terms of the two agreements: * (a) That TTA would supply a range of tyres to the Martin Group to be fitted by Colonial to the Martin Group's fleets in conjunction with Colonial providing services to the Martin Group; * (b) That the Martin Group would pay TTA for the use of each tyre supplied by TTA and fitted to its fleets on a CPK basis; * (c) That the Martin Group would accurately calculate the number of kilometres travelled by each truck and trailer in its fleet fitted with tyres supplied by TTA and supply that information to TTA; * (d) That TTA would invoice the Martin Group each month for the amount payable to TTA in accordance with the CPK amount payable in accordance with the Colonial Agreement.
The basis on which the terms are to be implied was never clearly spelled out by TTA. To the extent that the terms are express, TTA relies on the conversations between Mr Bloxham and Mr Carver, who is said to have been acting as the Martin Group's agent in negotiating the terms of the contract on which TTA relies.
As to estoppel, TTA relies on both a promissory or equitable estoppel and, in the alternative, an estoppel by convention.

The case based on contract
As I have said, TTA's primary case is that the Applications for Commercial Credit and attached standard terms signed by the Martin Group created contracts between TTA and the Martin Group by which the Martin Group was bound to pay invoices issued by TTA. It relies on cl 1 of the standard terms for that contention.
In my opinion, that case must be rejected. TTA accepts that cl 1 cannot be interpreted as requiring the Martin Group to pay any invoice that TTA happened to issue to the Martin Group. It accepts that the invoice had to be in respect of tyres fitted to trucks in the Martin Group's fleets; and it accepts that the invoices had to be issued for amounts calculated in accordance with the CPK rates set out in the Colonial Agreement. But those terms are not to be found in cl 1 or any other clause of the standard terms. If they exist at all, they must be found elsewhere.
TTA submits that the additional terms are express oral terms arising from the conversations between Mr Bloxham and Mr Carver or alternatively that they are to be implied.
As to the first limb of this submission, TTA submits that Mr Carver was acting as the Martin Group's agent in negotiating the variations to the supply arrangements, and it submits that the effect of the conversations was that the Martin Group would pay the CPK rate for tyres fitted to its trucks and trailers.
I do not accept either of those contentions. There is no evidence that Mr Carver had actual authority to negotiate and to agree the terms of a supply agreement between TTA and the Martin Group. Mr Carver had no position with the Martin Group; and there is no evidence at all to suggest that the Martin Group engaged him to negotiate a supply agreement.
Similarly, I do not think that Mr Carver had ostensible authority to negotiate and to agree the terms of a supply agreement on behalf of the Martin Group. In order for ostensible authority to exist, there must be a holding out by someone with actual authority that the agent has authority to enter on behalf of the principal into a contract of the kind in question: Quickfund (Australia) Pty Ltd versus Prosperity Group International Pty Limited (In Liq)  <case>; at [70], referring to Freeman & Lockyer (a firm) versus Buckhurst Park Properties (Mangal) Ltd  <case>; [(1959) 101 CLR 298] because Mr Martin Snr and Mr Martin Jnr were not called to give evidence. It also submits that, applying the rule in Browne versus Dunn (1893) 6 R 67 (HL), in the absence of cross-examination of TTA's witnesses, including Mr Bloxham, it is not open to the Martin Group to advance a case that is inconsistent with the evidence given by TTA's witnesses. But in my opinion, these rules are of no assistance to TTA in this case. It was for TTA to prove its case. The Martin Group's position is that the evidence led by TTA did not do that. In particular, the evidence given by Mr Bloxham did not prove that Mr Carver acted as the agent for the Martin Group and it did not prove the oral terms for which it contends. It did not need to call evidence to rebut a case that was not proved and it did not need to put in cross-examination of TTA's witnesses a case that was not inconsistent with the evidence given by those witnesses. I accept that submission.
TTA does not explain clearly how its case on implied terms is put. The case appears to be that the Applications for Commercial Credit and standard terms constituted or evidenced a contract between the Martin Group and TTA and that the terms for which it contends should be implied in that contract as a matter of fact to give that contract a sensible commercial operation.
There are, however, a number of difficulties with that contention.
First, on their face, the Applications for Commercial Credit and standard terms do not create or evidence a contract. Rather, they set out the terms that are to govern a contract that would be formed if and when the Martin Group placed an order for tyres and TTA accepted that order in writing. So much is clear from cl 15 of the standard terms. There is no evidence that the Martin Group placed orders for tyres with TTA. All orders for tyres were placed by Colonial. For the reasons I have given, Colonial was not acting as the agent of the Martin Group in placing those orders. In particular, there was no holding out by the Martin Group that Colonial had authority to place orders on its behalf.
A curious feature of the case is that Mr Martin Snr and Mr Martin Jnr signed the Applications for Commercial Credit. It appears that from TTA's point of view, they were asked to do so in advance of the parties agreeing on a tripartite agreement under which the Martin Group would guarantee to pay amounts payable by Colonial for tyres supplied for the Martin Group's trucks and trailers, which was never signed. In the absence of evidence from Mr Martin Snr and Mr Martin Jnr, it is a matter of speculation why they signed the applications. But the absence of an explanation from them cannot elevate the applications to something which on the face of them they are not.
Second, in order for the terms to be implied they would have to satisfy the requirements set out by the Privy Council in BP Refinery (Westernport) Pty Ltd versus Hastings Shire Council (1977) 180 CLR 266 at 282-3, which were approved by the High Court in Secured Income Real Estate (Australia) Ltd versus St Martins Investments Pty Ltd  <case>; [(1979) 144 CLR 596] at 605-6. Those requirements are that: [the term] must be reasonable and equitable; (2) it must be necessary to give business efficacy to the contract, so that no term will be implied if the contract is effective without it; (3) it must be so obvious that 'it goes without saying'; (4) it must be capable of clear expression; (5) it must not contradict any express term of the contract.
It is not necessary to deal with each of these conditions separately. The difficulty with the terms contended for by TTA is that they do not fit with the standard terms. The standard terms contemplate that orders will be placed for tyres by the Martin Group, TTA will deliver those tyres and invoice the Martin Group for them and the Martin Group will pay those invoices within 30 days. But on the implied terms contended for by TTA, it was entitled to invoice the Martin Group not for the wholesale cost of the tyres but for the amount payable to Colonial for the services it provided. Moreover, it submitted that it was entitled to continue to invoice the Martin Group even after Colonial stopped ordering tyres to be installed on Martin Group trucks, at least until TTA had recouped the wholesale price of the tyres that it had supplied. TTA is unable to explain how those terms met any of the conditions set out in BP Refinery. They are terms that TTA hoped to agree, but could not. They are not terms which are an obvious incidence of the documents signed by the Martin Group.
Third, the conclusion that there was no agreement between the Martin Group and TTA for the supply of tyres is consistent with what happened once the arrangements between them was terminated. On termination of the arrangements, TTA did not demand that the Martin Group pay for tyres that had been delivered and not paid for, as might be expected if an agreement had been reached. Rather, it sought to recover the costs of the tyres from Colonial.

Estoppel
TTA accepts that in order to make out a promissory or equitable estoppel it must prove, to use the words of Priestley JA in Austotel Pty Limited versus Franklins Selfserve Pty Limited [(1989) 16 NSWLR 582] at 610: ... the creation or encouragement by the defendant in the plaintiff of an assumption that a contract will come into existence or a promise be performed or an interest granted to the plaintiff by the defendant, and reliance on that by the plaintiff, in circumstances where departure from the assumption by the defendant would be unconscionable.
In the present case, TTA submits that it assumed that a contract had come into existence between the Martin Group and it and that the Martin Group had created or encouraged that assumption by: * (a) Signing the Applications for Commercial Credit and Deeds of Guarantee and Indemnity; * (b) The acceptance of tyres supplied by TTA; * (c) The issuing of invoices by TTA based on the CPK rate; * (d) The payment of a number of those invoices by the Martin Group.
TTA submits that it suffered detriment by supplying tyres on credit for which it has not been paid and that it would be unconscionable for the Martin Group to resile from assumption because it has had the benefit of the tyres.
TTA accepts that in order to make out a conventional estoppel, it must prove that: * (a) Both parties have adopted an assumption as to the terms of their legal relationship; * (b) Both parties have conducted their relationship on the basis of that mutual assumption; * (c) Each party knew or intended that the other act on that basis; and * (d) Departure from that assumption will occasion detriment to the plaintiff.

See Moratic Pty Ltd versus Gordon  <case> at <case> per
Brereton J.
In the present case, TTA submits that both parties operated on the basis that there was a contract between them and that consequently the Martin Group is estopped from asserting that there was not, although the precise terms of the contract on which the parties are said to have operated were not clearly identified.
In my opinion, the facts necessary to ground either estoppel are not made out. In particular, the most that could be said is that TTA assumed that if it continued to supply tyres for use on the Martin Group trucks in accordance with orders placed by Colonial, Colonial would direct that the Martin Group pay the amounts due to Colonial under the Colonial Agreement to TTA and the Martin Group would comply with that direction. That is what was agreed in the conversations between Mr Carver and Mr Bloxham. The Martin Group created or encouraged that assumption by paying invoices issued to it by TTA. But I do not think that it encouraged TTA to believe that it was agreeing to do more than that, or that both parties acted on an assumption that went beyond that. Orders for tyres were still placed by Colonial. The amount paid by the Martin Group was calculated in accordance with the Colonial Agreement. The Martin Group refused to sign a tripartite agreement that would have imposed greater obligations on it. It did sign the Applications for Commercial Credit and Mr Martin Snr and Mr Martin Jnr signed the Deeds of Guarantee and Indemnity. But in my opinion, the assumptions on which TTA says it relied do not follow from those documents.
Nothing that the Martin Group did suggested that the arrangements in relation to payment would continue for any particular period of time. Consequently, I do not think it could be said that the Martin Group made or encouraged an assumption that the payment arrangements would last indefinitely or until TTA had recouped the amount owed to it by Colonial or some other time. Consequently, it was not unconscionable for the Martin Group to bring the arrangement to an end when it did.
It follows that the cases based on estoppel are not made out.

Orders
The Martin Group has been successful in defending the claim against it. Consequently, it is not necessary to deal with its cross-claim against Colonial. However, in my opinion, it was reasonable for the Martin Group to file a cross-claim against Colonial. At a minimum, it had a reasonable claim that if TTA was entitled to recover amounts from it, then it was entitled to recover that proportion of those moneys that it had paid Colonial. On that basis, the Martin Group should be entitled to recover the costs it has incurred in relation to the cross-claim from TTA. On the other hand, Colonial did not participate in the proceedings and there is no basis for making a costs order in its favour.
It follows that the orders of the court are: * (1) The summons filed on 8 April 2015 be dismissed; * (2) The plaintiff pay the defendants' costs of the proceedings (including the defendants' costs of the cross-summons); * (3) The cross-summons be dismissed with no order as to costs.
 
Amendments June 2016 - Typographical error quoting Priestley JA in [51] - changed "a promise to be performed" to "a promise be performed" * * * 
