

Regina versus Mrb Matter No 60267/98 [1998] NSWSC 746 (27 April 1998) 
Last Updated: 19 January 1999 
REGINA versus MRB /98 April 1998 
McInerney J, Greg James J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
McINERNEY, J: I ask that his Honour Greg James, J. give the first judgment in this matter. 
GREG JAMES, J: Application for leave to appeal against sentence has been made in respect of a sentence imposed by his Honour Acting Judge Coolahan in the District Court at Newcastle on a charge of robbery with violence and wounding [(s.96](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s96.html) of the [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/)). The maximum sentence for such a crime is penal servitude for 25 years. On sentencing, two matters, one of malicious wounding and one of assault, on a Form One were taken into account. 
The learned District Court judge imposed a sentence of six years, comprising a minimum term of three years penal servitude, to commence on 18 November 1996 and expiring on 17 November 1999, and an additional term of three years to commence on 18 November 1999 and expiring on 17 November 2002.

The offence to which the applicant pleaded guilty involved a vicious stabbing.
As to the two offences on the Form One, one involved slashing the victim across the right arm with a kitchen knife, causing a four centimetre long wound, the other involved using a knife to threaten the victim. At the time, the applicant was 17 years of age and had prior convictions including for assault, hinder police and threaten witnesses.

The learned District Court judge, after reviewing the written material tendered, concluded as to the facts of the matters on indictment:- "The circumstances of this offence are somewhat in dispute but it would appear that at somewhere around midnight the victim, Peter Leith Crighton, went into the men's toilets at Islington Park. It is alleged that he sat down on a toilet and the prisoner, who was then standing at the urinal, turned to face the victim with his erect penis. The victim and the prisoner then engaged in oral intercourse and whilst this was taking place the prisoner removed the victim's wallet from his trousers. An altercation had then taken place, during the course of which the victim was stabbed in the chest area. The struggle continued out into the entrance to the toilets where the victim received another stab wound. He collapsed and was subsequently taken to hospital.
 ...

Mr. Crighton was taken, after the wounding, to the John Hunter Hospital where he was admitted. He was diagnosed with having two superficial stab wounds to the left chest and one deep stab wound to the right chest. This stab wound, that is to say the deep stab wound, caused a right hemopneumothorax requiring subsequent intercostal intubation and thoracotomy. In a report of 3 January the treating doctor, Dr. Subramanion, said that in his opinion the injuries were moderately serious." 
The facts relating to the offences to be taken into account were:- "Mayfield 17.11.96 Malicious wounding - the prisoner approached the victim,
Jason Richard TILSE, who was walking on the footpath in Maitland Road,
Mayfield. The prisoner then slashed the victim across the right arm with a kitchen knife causing a four centimetre long wound.

Mayfield 17.11.96 Assault - the prisoner then approached the victim, Craig
Leslie TILSE, who had tried to intervene and protect his brother, Jason. The prisoner threatened the victim with the kitchen knife, lunging at him and telling the victim that he was going to be killed." 
In relation to the offence on indictment, in mitigation an assertion was made that the prisoner was the victim of a sexual assault by the person he stabbed, his Honour held:- "In mitigation it is said on his behalf that there is a dispute as to these facts and in fact the prisoner alleges that he was the victim of a sexual assault by the victim, Mr. Crighton. However, there has been no evidence put in this regard and it seems to me that he should be sentenced on the basis of the Crown brief tendered which includes not only the statement of Mr. Crighton but also a statement of Andrew Harold Klavan who might be said to be (sic) somewhat independent witness and who corroborates the version given by Mr.
Crighton." 
In my view, that conclusion was inevitable.

Tendered on the applicant's behalf was material from psychiatrists and psychologists which led his Honour to accept that the prisoner has had significant problems with anger, has demonstrated little ability to control the anger and Dr. Lambeth concluded:- "He tends to be obsessed by violence in a very childish way and unfortunately it is this that makes him, in my opinion, a quite dangerous person." 
His Honour was of the view that it was an extremely serious assault and that the prisoner was fortunate not to be charged with attempted murder. His Honour was plainly correct in his view of the objective seriousness of the matter, the prisoner's record and the fact that he, being nearly 18, should appropriately be dealt with according to law.

His Honour was of the view that he should recommend, in the light of the psychological material, that the prisoner remain within the Juvenile Justice
System and found special circumstances since the prisoner would require a great deal of supervision upon release. His Honour made, on sentencing, the appropriate recommendations, including a recommendation for treatment. There appears to me no error in such an approach.

In two documents filed in court, the prisoner has asserted various matters in support of an argument that the sentence was in error or excessive. He has asserted that he was not in the right frame of mind at the time of the offence. Notwithstanding an assertion of lack of intent to rob or assault by reference to the effects on him of alcohol and drugs, this does not appear to be an assertion of lack of legal intent or voluntariness, mental illness or some such matter that would vitiate the conviction, but rather a matter to be considered on a plea of guilty going to minimising culpability. In any event, the applicant pleaded guilty and the facts of the offence tendered and the plea clearly disclose the offence. Indeed, the statement of 22 April which has been tendered and accepted into evidence today during the hearing, confirms the commission of the offence. As to the argument that his mental state at the time should have attracted leniency, it seems to me that after considering the remarks of Dr. Lambeth and looking at the objective circumstances of the offence, his Honour has, if anything, been generous in his overall assessment of a person the psychiatrist thinks is quite dangerous.

The prisoner has also sought that his progress to rehabilitation be assisted by his remaining in the Juvenile Justice System. The sentencing judge has recommended precisely that. A further complaint is that the matter proceeded on other peoples' evidence without a statement of the applicant. That is, however, the way in which the applicant and his counsel dealt with the case before the sentencing judge. Material admitted by way of letter or statement from members of his family and by way of report from the Department of
Juvenile Justice, Dr. Richards and Dr. Lambeth all in the defence case, these containing matters which appear to have attracted significant leniency. There is no ground of complaint on the basis that his Honour was not fully apprised of those matters the defence sought to put forward. His Honour appears to me to have given careful consideration to the whole of the material.

However, today, before us, there has been tendered in evidence firstly a report dated 7 August 1996 by Mr. Harry Smith, psychologist, setting out that in 1996, the applicant agreed to be involved in an anger management course on an individual basis, requiring him to attend five one-hour sessions with that psychologist between 25 July 1996 and 7 August 1996, and that, after attending that course and going through the court report with the psychologist, the applicant became keen to attend the sessions and was motivated such that he demonstrated insight into his anger and a willingness to handle it in a more constructive way, including practising techniques taught between sessions. The psychologist was impressed. It seems almost incredible that that report was not provided to the trial judge on sentencing, and, bearing in mind the additional material that has been provided to us, I propose that we admit that material into evidence for the purpose of understanding the context of the applicant's submissions.

A further report dated 15 January 1998, has been provided to us which updates the report of August 1996 and is signed by both that psychologist and Mr.
Craig Perkins, a counsellor, one of the co-signatories to the departmental report provided to his Honour below. That confirms that the applicant has participated in what appears to be a further anger management course in
November 1997 in which he was an active participant and appeared to have developed his capacity to challenge the distorted reprisals underlying his anger.

Again, the signatories are impressed. A recommendation is made that the applicant be considered for further group work on topics like assertive communication. It is felt that the applicant often is overwhelmed by a feeling of defeat in circumstances of conflict with others. Increasing his assertive skills would hopefully provide him with a more appropriate way of getting his needs met. All of this indicates that within the Juvenile Justice System and utilising the anger management courses, the applicant has been able to take valuable steps forward toward obtaining his release when his sentence should permit him to be so released.

It is most important to have regard to the fact that the additional term is not necessarily a term of confinement, but a term within which the applicant might be released to conditional liberty in the event that during the period of full-time custody, he shows that he is worthy of that release and appropriate rehabilitative steps, including seeking appropriate anger management techniques might well fit the applicant for release at a time earlier than he might otherwise have been considered for that release.

In the written submission the applicant has provided today, he re-asserts the contentions that I have referred to in the earlier documents, but, in addition, refers to these additional reports and his future. What he says in that document concerning the additional reports and his future indeed are matters to which I have had regard and indicate a much more hopeful position than appeared at trial. However, even taking those matters at their highest, the sentence his Honour imposed involved a period of confinement in custody for a minimum of three years for three most serious matters involving weapons and wounding, where the maximum for the offence on indictment was 25 years.

The sentence imposed was plainly well within the range of an appropriate exercise of discretion, bearing in mind the objective seriousness of the offence charged and the matters on the Form One.

I detect no legal error. This is not a court of general review when sentence appeals come forward. We can only interfere with a sentence for legal error.
In view of the material put forward by the applicant and by the defence at the sentencing proceedings, the matters adverted to by the High Court in Regina v. Veen (No. 2) <case>; [(1988) 164 CLR 465] had to be considered by his Honour. He has dealt with them in a way that could not be regarded as inappropriately severe. I would propose that, in the circumstances, leave to appeal be granted and the appeal dismissed, but I would, in the light of the material tendered in evidence today, be prepared to add to the recommendations that his Honour has made, with a view to assisting the consideration of the applicant's early release within the additional term, a recommendation that the applicant be permitted to continue the appropriate anger management courses within the Juvenile
Justice System.

McINERNEY, J: Yes, I agree with the order proposed by his Honour and the reasons that he has advanced. And, likewise, I would endorse his recommendation to the authorities that the applicant be permitted to continue with his anger management course. The order of the court, therefore, will be as proposed by his Honour Greg James, J. 
Look, I am sorry, young fellow, but you will appreciate that we have very limited grounds in which to interfere with this verdict and we feel, in the circumstances, that we couldn't do so. But we have made a recommendation that you be permitted to continue with your anger management course and it is very important that you do so because the additional term doesn't necessarily mean that you would be released on parole at the conclusion of your minimum term, but if you strive to pull yourself together and do the right think, then no doubt you will be released. Do you understand? 
PRISONER: Yes. 
McINERNEY, J: The ball is in your court, in other words. We know it will not be easy, but you are a young man and you have got your life in front of you. Let this be a lesson to you and try and get on with your life when you are released. You will have assistance and take that assistance from the authorities, all the assistance you can get. All right. * * * 
