

Vertical versus Time [2008] NSWSC 1024 (24 October 2008) 
Last Updated: 27 October 2008 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: 
Vertical versus Time <case>  
JURISDICTION: 
Equity Division  
FILE NUMBER(S):  /2008  
HEARING DATE(S):  /09/08  
JUDGMENT DATE:  October 2008  
PARTIES: 
Vertical Telecoms Pty Limited versus Time On Systems Pty Limited  
JUDGMENT OF: 
Macready AsJ  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: 
Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): 
Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: 
Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
Mr Ash for plaintiff 
Mr Keith Williams in person for defendant  
SOLICITORS: 
Eakin McCaffery Cox for plaintiff  
CATCHWORDS: 
Corporations Law. Application to set aside statutory demand under s459G of the
Corporations Act. Whether the demand was in respect of a debt. Held it was not. Demand set aside.  
LEGISLATION CITED:  
CASES CITED:  
TEXTS CITED:  
DECISION: 
Paragraph 20  
JUDGMENT:  - 1 - 
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
EQUITY DIVISION  
ASSOCIATE JUSTICE MACREADY  
Friday 24 October 2008  /08 VERTICAL TELECOMS PTY LIMITED versus TIME ON SYSTEMS PTY LIMITED  
JUDGMENT  HIS HONOUR: This is an application under [section
G](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s459g.html) of the [Corporations Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) to set aside a statutory demand dated 22 February 2008 served by the defendant on the plaintiff. The plaintiff did not serve its submissions in accordance with the directions I made in this matter. Accordingly, I gave the defendant an opportunity to reply in writing after the hearing and those submissions have now been received.
 The description of the debt in the demand is in the following terms: "Description of the debt Amount of the debt 
The debt is for the illegal conversion and usage of a router invoiced to the company on the 14/02/2008 (invoice number 1939) and due for $243,100.00 payment within 7 days, a dispute was lodged and that dispute was settled by way of a credit.
 
No other dispute has been made or forwarded. Less credit $26,400.00 
Total amount $216,700.00 
The total amount is now $216,700.00" 
Dated: Friday, February 22, 2008" The plaintiff seeks to set aside the statutory demand on three bases. They are:
There is no debt to support the statutory demand.
There is some other reason why the demand should be set aside under [s
J(1)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s459j.html) of the [Corporations
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) as an abuse of process.
There is a defect in the demand.
 The background to the proceedings arises out of an arrangement made in April whereby the plaintiff entered into two Data Burst Broadband Service
Activation Agreements with the defendant. This was for the supply of wireless connections to the defendant for two links. The terms of each of the
Agreements was for two years. The first link was to premises with which the defendant had a connection at Pennant Hills and that had a monthly access fee of $2,392.50 payable to the plaintiff.  The second link was to Knox Grammar School at Wahroonga with a monthly access fee of $2,816.00. By September 2007 the parties were in dispute over the payments that were to be made following upon some agreement for a credit to resolve previous technical difficulties with the links.
 By early October 2007 the plaintiff was advising the defendant that if there were no resolution the services would be disconnected. In December 2007 the plaintiff restricted the service to the defendant due to non-payment and threatened to disconnect the Knox Grammar School link and then recover its equipment from that customer.
 By late December 2007 and January 2008 the plaintiff was in contact with
Knox Grammar School for provision of internet services direct without the defendant. By the end of January 2008 the plaintiff disconnected the two links which had been provided to the defendant.
 In an email dated 22 January 2008 Mr Williams indicated that if the link was disconnected he would "charge $1,000 per hour for asset until the usage stops". The plaintiff did not accept that suggestion.
 On 14 February 2008 the plaintiff received an email from Mr Williams of the defendant enclosing an invoice. The invoice claimed $221,000 plus GST totaling $243,100. The description of the item was "illegal conversion and usage of a router with no colour of right at $1000 plus GST per hour (from 9.26pm on the /01/2008 until 3pm on the 05/02/2008)".
 There was subsequent correspondence disputing the liability for the amount in this alleged invoice.
 
Is the debt claim sufficient for the purposes of the issue of a statutory demand? It was the plaintiff's submission that the claim was a claim on the face of it based in tort for some wrongful conversion of a right of access held by the defendant. Plainly any such claim requires damages to be assessed before they can be quantified. Even if it were not a claim in tort but on the facts maybe a claim for a breach of the arrangements between the parties there has been no quantification of the damages which have been suffered by the termination which the defendant would wish to contend was a wrongful termination.
 The plaintiff referred to my decision in Reinsurance Australia Corporation
Ltd versus Odyssey Re (Bermuda) Ltd <case>; [(2001) 19 ACLC 401] and the appeal 19ACLC 987. Those cases concerned claims on insurance policies which have slightly different problems.
 At paragraph 20 to paragraph 22 I set out a number of authorities which are useful on the present question in these terms: "There have been a number of cases that deal with the word "debt" in the context of demands under the Corporations Law and its predecessors. The first of these is Rothwells Ltd versus Nommack (No 100) Pty Ltd [(1988) 6 ACLC ] 199.
That was a decision of McPherson J of the Supreme Court of Queensland who was considering a notice under <case> of the Companies (Queensland) Code. That provision required that there must be a "creditor to whom the company is indebted in a sum exceeding $1,000 then due..." His Honour took the word "indebted" to be referring to a debt being a liquidated sum in money presently due owing and payable by one person called the debtor to another person called the creditor. After dealing with some of the facts His Honour went on deal with what was a debt at common law such as would support an action in debt or indebitatis assumpsit. He indicated that there were three ways in which a debt could arise. They were:- . By judgment; . By deed under seal; and . As the quid pro quo for a consideration that was executed.

The factual circumstances related to a promise to pay a sum to a third party. His Honour found in the circumstances that the arrangements did not give rise to a debt which he saw as importantly different from a claim for breach of contract.

The next case is First Line Distribution Pty Ltd versus Paul Whiley & Ors ACLC 1216. This was a decision of Cohen J of the Supreme Court of
New South Wales and was concerned with a contract which gave a right to distribute and sell the company's products. Money was paid to the company for the right to distribute and under the contracts goods were delivered to the defendants. For a while they were paid for but the company was unable to continue to supply the goods. The statutory demand, under the present
Corporations Law, claimed that the monies that had been paid for the right to distribute the company's products were now debts owing to the defendants.
His Honour referred to the fact that contingent or respective liabilities may not be the subject of the demand. He pointed out that the defendant would be entitled to claim damages for breach of the agreement. His Honour went on to say: "However, as none of the defendants have brought an action for damages there is no judgment debt against the company, the company's claim is, and was at the time the demand was served, merely one for unliquidated damages. The amount of damages has not been ascertained and the company does not owe a debt to any of the defendants until then."" As Windeyer J pointed out in the appeal from my decision it matters not whether one characterises this as a genuine dispute or some other reason for setting aside under <case>(b) of the Act. Plainly it is not a debt which is required to support a statutory demand. For this reason the demand must be set aside.
 
Abuse of process It is submitted that there has been an abuse of process in the circumstances in which Mr Williams has issued the statutory demand. In this regard the plaintiff refers to the fact that it is apparent on the face of the demand that there was a dispute about the matter at least to the knowledge of
Mr Williams.
 It was also suggested that after the issue of the demand the defendant made evident his purpose in issuing the demand by making a demand in a letter of 29
February 2008 in which he said he would withdraw the demand if the matter were referred to an independent arbitration without lawyers to take place within 90 days thereafter.
 The dispute referred to in the demand was not over the alleged correction but an earlier dispute over service difficulties which was settled in 2007.
There was no cross-examination as is usual in these matters and correspondence before issue of the demand did not raise the relevant question, namely, that the claim in the invoice was not a debt.
 Mr Williams, who represented the defendant, is not a lawyer and in these circumstances I would not infer that the claim was "bundled up to create a debt capable of being demanded". Therefore I am not satisfied that there has been an abuse of process and I would not set aside the demand on this ground.
 
The defect in the demand This case seems to be predicated on the assumption that the claim in the demand was false because it falsely says that there was a dispute which was settled. There was no elaboration on this submission and in any event it would seem that there is no substantial injustice which has been demonstrated.
Accordingly, the demand should not be set aside on this ground.
 I make orders 1 and 2 in the Originating process.
 
LAST UPDATED:  October 2008 * * * 
