

Maciejewski versus Telstra Super Pty Ltd Matter No 4210/97 [1998] NSWSC 376 (17
August 1998) 
Last Updated: 29 September 1998 `HELEN MACIEJEWSKI versus TELSTRA SUPER PTY LTD` `4210/97` `17 August 1998` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is a summons brought by a beneficiary under the Telstra Superannuation Scheme for relief against a purported determination by the trustee of that scheme that she was not entitled to a benefit as on a total and permanent incapacity. 
Unfortunately in many ways the scheme that was set up by the Commonwealth
Parliament to review these matters has fallen foul of the Australian [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/), so that it is still necessary for this Court to superintend trusts because ultimately it is this Court that is responsible to see that trustees comply with their duties and that beneficiaries receive what is rightfully theirs, no more, no less.

The summons, as amended, seeks an order that the defendant pay over the appropriate benefit. However, in argument Mr Fernon for the plaintiff, acknowledged this went too wide and merely wishes the matter to be sent back to the trustee for a proper determination.

It is a fact of life that a person's superannuation is an extremely important right. The problem is in many cases, of which this is one, that a large employer with an extremely large number of employees and an in-house trustee company, whose board consists of doubtless busy people, does not have overmuch time to deal with each matter. To the board no doubt the claim made by an individual typist is just a matter of sifting through a couple of hundred sheets of paper and making a decision. However, the beneficiary herself is a living human being who has, at least in part, paid for her superannuation and is entitled to be considered as a human being, not just as a file, and is entitled to have her case properly considered by the trustee.

It is true that this Court does not usurp the position of the trustees. This
Court does not reach the view that the trustees ought to have reached. The role of this Court is to ensure that trustees behave fairly and properly and treat the beneficiaries as human beings.

The Court also expects that solicitors who advise trustees, and who present matters before the court present them in a professional, proper and humane manner. I have seldom seen a case so badly presented by the lawyers for the defendant, who have a very well-known name as a large firm, and it may be that because this was just a claim by a humble worker that it was dealt with by people without really paying proper attention to it.

Indeed, when the case for the defendant was presented in court the slackness had extended to such an extent that not even the original exhibits were available to the Court. The only record of the decision made by the trustee is a one-liner in an extract from a minute. The Court was presented with perhaps two hundred sheets of paper that were before the trustee, with not the slightest bit of evidence as to which, if any, of those pieces of paper were actually considered by the board. Indeed, the submission seems to have been, as appears in the letter from one of the Phillips Fox lawyers in Melbourne, that the Court had no right to review the trustee's decision.

Although the Court will not interfere with the proper discretion of trustees, the Court will also not allow people who are using their power under a trust deed to deny the beneficiary rights by incompetence or inaction; see Dundee
General Hospitals Board of Management versus Walker [1952] 1 All ER 896, 905.

It also must be remembered that it costs thousands of dollars for a person to approach this Court for relief. That may not be very much in the eyes of the defendant, but it does mean that because it is so difficult and expensive for a worker who challenges decisions of this nature that those who are given the job of acting fairly under superannuation schemes must be scrupulously professional, careful and assisting. If they are not, then this Court will need to step in.

The papers that are part of exhibit DX02 show that the board of the defendant had before it when considering the plaintiff's claim a document headed "Invalidity Benefit Claim - Appeal File Summary and Recommendation". This document was signed by a Mr Ian Pullar, who describes himself as "Manager -
Death and Invalidity Benefits". The minutes of the directors show that there were in attendance various people, including the person described as Chairman and five persons described as directors. As well there were in attendance six other persons, including Mr I Pullar.

Mr Pullar's report does set out that the present claim is an extremely awkward one to assess. It does set out various extracts from medical reports of both the plaintiff and the employer. It notes at page 9: "Although the reports were specifically gathered for the purposes of establishing Workers' Compensation liability, I submit that they are, in total, well and truly adequate for the Trustee to fairly assess Miss
Maciejewski's claim for a Total and Permanent Invalidity benefit from the
Telstra Superannuation Scheme." 
The board was not favoured with one reason why that was so.

The report then goes on to say that the key question is whether: "In the opinion of the Trustee, after consideration of all relevant information, evidence and advice, is the member unlikely ever to engage in any gainful work for which s/he is, for the time being, reasonably qualified by education, training or experience?" 
He then goes on to remark: "Not all of the reports received address the issues of capacity to work or prognosis. Of those that do, there is a range of views as to the situation, varying between her being fully fit for duties, fit for light duties, possibly on a part-time basis and totally unlikely to return to any work." 
The argument for "Yes" is then put, but it is put with some most critical comments contained in square brackets such as when assessing Dr Parker's report the report notes: "As a surgeon, it should be noted that he is talking outside his area of expertise." 
There was then another reporting orthopedic surgeon, who gives his report, and the same comment is made of that report.

The argument for "No" then goes on for a page and a half, ending with a one- liner: "My personal view is that there is a heavier weight of evidence in favour of "NO" on this point." 
At the end of the report Mr Pullar said: "It is my belief that Miss Maciejewski did not satisfy the criteria under the
Trust Deed clause 2.3.3 for the payment of Total and Permanent Invalidity benefit as at the time she ceased employment with Telstra.

RECOMMENDATION: I recommend that Miss Maciejewski's claim for Total and
Permanent Invalidity benefit from Telstra Superannuation Scheme be denied." 
The defendant has not indicated anything of what happened at the board meeting about that report. All that we do have is an affidavit from a Mr Slack, who was not actually present at the meeting, saying that the plaintiff's initial claim was made on 5 August 1993, and it was this 1993 claim that was actually decided by the board of directors three and a half year later on 11 March .

It would seem that what actually spurred the directors to consider the matter at that date was that the plaintiff had commenced proceedings in the Common
Law Division of this Court in late 1996. Then all we are told is: "On that date the directors unanimously resolved to deny the claim." 
That, from a person who was not at the meeting, is of very little value because had the plaintiff wanted to cross-examine someone she could not because what has happened is that, presumably deliberately, an affidavit has been made by a person who was not at the meeting, putting forward to the Court minutes which tell the Court absolutely nothing.

However, courts are not fooled by this sort of tactic. The rule that courts have proceeded on for many years is that if there is evidence within a party's camp, which a party could have produced but chooses not to, then a court can assume that none of that material could have assisted the defendant.

Mr Johnson for the defendant, kept urging the view that the trustee was not bound to give reasons. This was an insufficient defence. As Robert Walker, J said in Scott versus National Trust <case>; [[1998] 2 All ER 705], 719, "If a decision taken by trustees is directly attacked in legal proceedings, the trustees may be compelled either legally (through discovery or subpoena) or practically (in order to avoid adverse inferences being drawn) to disclose the substance of the reasons for their decision." 
Because this case was so appallingly presented I adjourned for a short period of time to see whether either some arrangement could be made or else the Court could be put in a better position. However, that adjournment produced absolutely nothing.

Mr Fernon put forward a seven page summary of his submissions. He said that he agreed that the trustee was not required to give reasons when exercising its discretion, but the applicant was entitled to a real and genuine consideration of her claim.

I consider that that submission correctly states the law. Why I specifically mention it is that the bundle of papers with which I was presented, as well as one of the exhibits, seem to suggest that because the trustee is not bound to give any reasons, therefore the matter is completely unreviewable. Nothing could be further from the truth. Indeed, whilst trustees do not have to give reasons in a case where a plaintiff puts forward a prima facie case that the trustee's discretion has miscarried, the absence of reasons and the absence of any evidence before the Court as to what happened, will tend to make that prima facie case a virtual certainty.

Continuing with Mr Fernon's submissions, he puts that first of all the trustee considered the applicant's condition at the wrong date. What the trustee had to determine was whether at the date of the decision the plaintiff was a person who was totally and permanently disabled, that is, whether at that date she was unlikely ever to engage in any gainful work. As Mr Pullar's report highlighted, this was the question, but the material on which it was assessed was material which was at least five or six years old.

As to that, Mr Johnson said there was an invitation to the plaintiff to put forward any further material, but she did not. He put that it was no part of the trustee's job to actually go out and find material, it just had to assess the material on what it had before it.

I can see no basis for that submission. Very often if a trustee and its officers have acted fairly and conscientiously they will have ensured that sufficient material is before them, so that they can make a decision. However, it is just a complete "cop out" to act on material which Mr Pullar's report indicates is inadequate, and then say that the plaintiff has not supplied sufficient material. If the plaintiff has not supplied sufficient material then, if that is necessary to make a proper decision, it has to be obtained somehow or other. One cannot merely dismiss the plaintiff's claim out of hand.

The extent of trustees' obligations is well set out by Robert Walker, J in
Scott versus National Trust supra, at p 717, "I have heard a lot of submissions about the duties of trustees in making decisions in exercise of their fiduciary functions. Certain points are clear beyond argument. Trustees must act in good faith, responsibly and reasonably. They must inform themselves, before making a decision, of matters which are relevant to the decision. These matters may not be limited to simple matters of fact but will, on occasion (indeed, quite often) include taking advice from appropriate experts, whether the experts are lawyers, accountants, actuaries, surveyors, scientists or whomsoever. It is however for advisers to advise and for trustees to decide: trustees may not (except in so far as they are authorised to do so) delegate the exercise of their discretions, even to experts." 
His Lordship continued at p 718, "In reaching decisions as to the exercise of their fiduciary powers, trustees have to try to weigh up competing factors, ones which are often incommensurable in character. In that sense they have to be fair. But they are not a court or an administrative tribunal. They are not under any general duty to give a hearing to both sides (indeed in many situations `both sides' is a meaningless expression), and I think that some of
Mr Aldous' submissions on this point were put too high. Nevertheless, if (for instance) trustees (whether of a charity, or a pension fund, or a private family trust) have for the last ten years paid £1,000 per quarter to an elderly impoverished beneficiary of the trust it seems at least arguable that no reasonable body of trustees would discontinue the payment, without any warning, and without giving the beneficiary the opportunity of trying to persuade the trustees to continue the payment, at least temporarily. The beneficiary has no legal or equitable right to continued payment, but he or she has an expectation. So I am inclined to think that legitimate expectation may have some part to play in trust law as well as in judicial review cases ...".

I respectfully agree with and apply what his Lordship said.

It is clear from Mr Pullar's report that the material was in fact the material which was gathered for workers' compensation purposes. That material was directed towards the question as to whether the plaintiff had suffered an accident or other event which qualified her for compensation. It did not go to the question, except incidently, as to whether she was fit for work for the future. Indeed, some of the material which was relied on by Mr Pullar is an extrapolation from reports which were directed to another question and to a degree could be misleading when one considers what was the question that the trustee ought to have been considering.

Having looked at the material presented by the plaintiff, and having considered that material which the defendant deigned to put before the court, the assessment on the balance of probabilities is that the defendant has failed to deal with the matter fairly and adequately as a trustee.

Accordingly, the court orders that the defendant properly consider the plaintiff's claim no later than 30 November 1998, and present to the Court a report as to its consideration no later than 11 December 1998. The matter will be listed before me to consider that report on 15 December 1998 at 9.30am.
That is, of course, a mention date.

The defendant is to pay the plaintiff's costs of the proceedings to date on the indemnity basis. The exhibits are to be retained.
 * * * 
