

Williams versus Public Trustee of New South Wales [2007] NSWSC 921 (20 August )

Last Updated: 3 September 2007 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: Williams versus Public Trustee of New South Wales <case>  
JURISDICTION: Equity Division 
Probate List  
FILE NUMBER(S): 106723/06  
HEARING DATE{S): 6, 7 and 20 August 2007  
JUDGMENT DATE: 20 August 2007 
EX TEMPORE DATE: 20 August 2007  
PARTIES: 
Susan Diane Williams (aka Dionnet) - Plaintiff 
Public Trustee of New South Wales - Defendant  
JUDGMENT OF: Palmer J  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
L.J. Ellison SC - Plaintiff 
P. Hallen SC - Defendant  
SOLICITORS: 
David Pain & Co - Plaintiff 
Clinch Neville Long - Defendant  
CATCHWORDS: 
EVIDENCE - EXPERT - Documents provided to expert for purpose of forming opinion - all documents provided not identified in expert's report or otherwise sufficiently identified to other party prior to calling expert - whether admission of report unfairly prejudicial.  
LEGISLATION CITED:  [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/) - [s.135(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/s135.html)  
CASES CITED:  
DECISION: 
Report rejected; evidence of expert deferred.  
JUDGMENT:  /06 Williams versus Public Trustee of NSW & Ors  
JUDGMENT - Ex tempore  August, 2007  Mr Hallen SC, who appears for the Defendant, seeks to read an affidavit of
Fay Norma Christie of 22 February 2007. Mr Ellison SC, who appears for the
Plaintiff, wishes to cross examine Mrs Christie.  Mr Hallen proffers a letter from Mrs Christie's medical practitioner, Dr
Olgers, which is dated 5 August 2007. In that letter Dr Olgers says that he has been Mrs Christie's treating doctor for some six or more years. Dr Olgers says that when Mrs Christie attended his surgery on 3 August she was very emotional about this hearing and progressively became more agitated and teary, and that she hyper-ventilated as she spoke about the case. Dr Olgers says further that Mrs Christie had experienced chest pains earlier, even while thinking about the case. He says that initial cardiac investigations were satisfactory, but says that Mrs Christie was referred for further cardiological assessment.  There is no information later than 5 August indicating what the further cardiological assessment revealed. Dr Olgers concludes by stating:  "I feel that participating in this case could have serious repercussions for her psychological and physical health. I don't feel she is able to participate in any way, neither in person nor by telephone hook up."   The evidence of Mrs Christie in her affidavit is of particular significance as to the circumstances in which the deceased's will of 4 August 1997 came into existence. According to that evidence, it was the deceased himself who requested that he be taken into Gosford to attend to some business to do with the Public Trustee.  According to Mrs Christie's evidence, the suggestion clearly is that it was the deceased himself who arranged the appointment with the Public Trustee to make the will of 4 August 1997. The deceased went there of his own volition and he was in no way influenced or prompted in making that will by the actions of Mrs Christie or her family.  That evidence could be of considerable materiality in the case. Mr Ellison should have the opportunity of cross examining upon that evidence, unless I were satisfied that there is a serious risk to the health of Mrs Christie if she is compelled to give evidence.  I am not so satisfied from the report of Dr Olgers, which was given more than two weeks ago. All that Dr Olgers says, after referring to Mrs Christie's general condition and the fact that she becomes agitated when speaking about the case, is that participating in the case, "... could have serious repercussions for her psychological and physical health". No further particulars of the particular repercussions or particular aspects of her health are given. The degree of likelihood or probability of adverse effects is not stated.  In those circumstances I am not prepared to conclude that Mrs Christie would suffer such adverse consequences from being called for cross examination, even by telephone hook up, as to lead me to accept her affidavit without affording the Plaintiff the right to cross examine. The affidavit will therefore be rejected.  The Plaintiff tenders a report of Dr Julian Parmegiani. The report is dated July 2007. It goes to the deceased's testamentary capacity at the relevant dates of the making of the two wills in contest, that is, his capacity in
August 1997. The report was provided in accordance with the direction of the court given on 22 June 2007. At a pre-trial directions hearing on that day I directed the Plaintiff to serve on the Defendant by 23 July 2007 all further affidavits relied upon in support of the issue of testamentary capacity. The report of Dr Parmegiani was provided on or shortly after 17 July 2007, although Dr Parmegiani's formal affidavit verifying it was not sworn until 1
August 2007. However, no issue arises as to the date of swearing of the affidavit.  Mr Hallen objects to the tender of Dr Parmegiani's report upon the basis that the facts and materials provided to Dr Parmegiani for the purposes of expressing his opinion have not been sufficiently identified in the report.
The first paragraph of the report states:  "I did not assess Mr Gleeson while he was alive and my opinion is based on documentation provided. A schedule of documents was enclosed with your letter of instruction dated 9 July 2007. Additional documents were attached to a second letter dated 12 July 2007. These documents were from the Northern
Sydney and Central Coast Area Health Service."  The schedule of documents attached to the letter of instruction dated 9
July 2007 was not included in Dr Parmegiani's report. Neither was there a schedule identifying the documents which were attached to the second letter of July 2007. The Plaintiff now proffers a copy of the letter of 9 July 2007 to Dr Parmegiani which appends the schedule referred to by Dr Parmegiani in the first paragraph of his report.  The Defendant says, and it is not contested, that while it had a copy of the letter of 9 July 2007, it has not had until now a copy of the schedule of the documents enclosed with that letter. It says that also it has not ever had a schedule of the additional documents attached to the letter of 12 July 2007.
It does not appear from the face of Dr Parmegiani's report what documentary material was provided to him.  In the course of his report the doctor refers to certain documents provided to him. Sometimes an expert is presented with material for the purpose of giving an opinion, but does not refer to some of it in his report. When cross examined as to why some material provided is not referred to, he may demonstrate that his opinion has not properly taken into account important relevant material which he had in his possession. In other words, when assessing the weight to which an expert's opinion is entitled, it is often the case that the Court must look at material produced but not referred to, just as much as to material produced to the expert and referred to.  Without precise identification of the documentary material provided to Dr
Parmegiani for the purpose of his report, the Defendant is seriously hampered in its ability to assess the weight to which the report is entitled. It seems to me that the report of Dr Parmegiani is flawed in this respect - through no fault of his, I should add. The documentary material provided to Dr Parmegiani ought to have been identified to the Defendant's solicitors at the time the doctor's report was provided to them.  It seems to me that the production of the schedule of documents attached to the 9 July 2007 letter, at this stage of the trial, unfairly prejudices the
Defendant in the conduct of its case. The material is said to be material which is contained in the Guardianship Tribunal file, but the significance of that material, even though it may now be located at fairly short notice by the
Plaintiff, would have to be reflected upon in order to enable the Defendant to cross examine Dr Parmegiani adequately.  It seems to me, therefore, that the report of Dr Parmegiani, in the form in which it was presented to the Defendant causes it material prejudice if it is now sought to be supplemented in a necessary particular by the addition of the schedule of documents provided to Dr Parmegiani. In the exercise of the
Court's discretion under [s.135(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/s135.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/) , I think that, in fairness to the Defendant, the report of Dr Parmegiani ought to be rejected.  It is unfortunate that Dr Parmegiani has taken so much time and trouble to prepare a report and the Court really is not able to use that report with justice to the Defendant. That, as I said before, is not the fault of the doctor, but I do not think that at this stage of the trial injustice can be remedied by allowing the report to go in and requiring Mr Hallen to cross examine now without due consideration of the material which was provided to the doctor.  (A further discussion ensued.)  Despite further submissions made by Mr Ellison, and after listening to the submissions of Mr Hallen in response, I am not persuaded that my previous ruling should be revoked. I am entitled to accept from Mr Hallen his assertion, as Senior Counsel, that no express objection was taken to Dr
Parmegiani's report on the ground that material provided to the doctor had not been adequately identified, because, in the absence of the schedule to the 9
July 2007 letter, he believed that the material provided to Dr Parmegiani was only that material expressly referred to by the doctor in his report and the other material included perhaps in the Plaintiff's Tender Bundle, whereas in fact the material provided to Dr Parmegiani includes material in addition to those two categories.  For those reasons I do not think that the report of the doctor should be admitted.  (Further discussion)  Mr Ellison seeks an adjournment of the case, there being no other evidence available to be called this afternoon, until tomorrow morning for the purpose of re-calling Dr Parmegiani and re-tendering his report. This is sought on the assumption that Mr Ellison, through his solicitors, will make available to Mr
Hallen very soon this afternoon a precise specification of the documents provided to Dr Parmegiani and referred to in the first paragraph of his report.  Mr Hallen objects to such an adjournment on the basis that he would be unfairly prejudiced in the conduct of his case. He points to such entries in the schedule of notes attached to the 9 July 2007 letter as "November-
December 1997 various file notes of the Guardianship Tribunal officers". He says that there is no way that he can know what particular notes which Dr
Parmegiani had before him which are summarised in that entry in the schedule.
That is a valid point. However, I do not know at this stage how extensive the problem is in reality.  Mr Hallen frankly and fairly concedes that he has had access to the
Guardianship Tribunal file so that nothing in it will come as a surprise to him, even at this stage. There may be one or two notes in the category of documents to which I have referred, for example, or there may be dozens. I do not know the nature and extent of the problem at this stage. However, the evidence of Dr Parmegiani is undoubtedly important to the Plaintiff's case.
Its general thrust must have been apparent for some time to the Defendant. I do not think that at this stage I ought to presume that the difficulties which
Mr Hallen says he may have in dealing with precise identification of the documents referred to are of such magnitude that he is not fairly able to deal with the matter by tomorrow morning.  I bear in mind that, even though this is the second last day of the trial, there is no other witness available to be dealt with this afternoon, so the matter will have to be adjourned at about 3 o'clock today and that, as matters presently stand, even with the possible addition tomorrow of Dr Parmegiani's evidence, it looks as if the matter will conclude within the time allotted, that is, by the end of tomorrow.  If the difficulties to which Mr Hallen referred were of such magnitude that the matter had to be adjourned part-heard for months, there may be different discretionary limits coming into play. I do not know that at this stage. I do not think I should make any presumption in that regard until Mr Hallen has had an opportunity of examining the precise list of the documentation referred to or provided to the Dr Parmegiani and is able to tell me what his position is tomorrow.  I bear in mind that it would be contrary to the basic principle of cheap, efficient and timely justice to allow this trial to go over part-heard beyond tomorrow, and that justice requires the parties have the fullest opportunity to present their cases. I think that, therefore, the better course is to stand over the question of whether Dr Parmegiani's report should be admitted until o'clock tomorrow morning and hear then from Mr Hallen. Of course, if Mr
Hallen is not provided in a very timely fashion with a precise enough list of the documentation provided to Dr Parmegiani this afternoon, it would be rather difficult to persuade me tomorrow that fairness requires the report of Dr
Parmegiani to be admitted nonetheless.
 - oOo - 
LAST UPDATED: 31 August 2007 * * * 
