

Permanent Trustee Australia Ltd versus Fai General Insurance Co Ltd [1996]
NSWSC 193 (13 June 1996) 
PERMANENT TRUSTEE AUSTRALIA LTD & ANOR versus FAI GENERAL INSURANCE CO LTD /95 50231/95 
Tuesday 11 June 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMERCIAL DIVISION 
Brownie J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: In each of these cases the plaintiffs move by notice of motion filed in court on 31 May 1996 for orders setting aside certain subpoenas or for lesser alternative relief. On 31 May Rolfe J made certain orders and stood the balance of the motion over for hearing before me today. 
Some of the issues that divided the parties earlier are no longer in issue. By letter dated 7 June the defendant's solicitors advised the plaintiffs' solicitor that the defendant would not call upon subpoenas directed to fourteen persons, strangers to the litigation. The defendant has however reached agreement with these fourteen persons or perhaps some of them that those persons will produce to the defendant's solicitors certain documents without the subpoenas addressed to each of those persons being called on.

The plaintiffs have been concerned about this. In the circumstances of these cases that concern seems quite reasonable. In the present litigation the plaintiff seeks indemnity from the defendant in respect of part of its possibility liability in what has been called the ASC proceedings. It may be that certain documents in possession of the fourteen persons subpoenaed would be the subject of a successful claim for privilege or confidentiality and the plaintiffs are concerned that their claim to keep these documents confidential or privileged might be lost without the plaintiffs having an opportunity to protest about this.

The introduction of part 37 rule 11 in the Supreme Court Rules permitting a party to release a stranger to litigation from the obligation to comply with the subpoena to produce documents is a source of possible abuse of the process of the court, that is the abuse of the power to issue and serve a subpoena. It may be that a party can issue a subpoena calling for production of documents to which the issuing party is not entitled to have access and then negotiate with the person subpoenaed so as to see a document in question without the documents being produced to the court at all and without the opposing parties knowing anything of what is going on.

I accept that this has not happened in these cases but this may be a question which the Rules Committee should consider or which will arise for resolution in future litigation.

The defendant now offers to advise the plaintiffs' solicitors of the details of the documents which it seeks to obtain informally from the fourteen persons mentioned and the plaintiffs are content to accept this situation. I will not make any order about this matter at this stage but if the question has not been resolved by Thursday 13 June when the cases are to be listed before me for directions again the question may be ventilated then.

I understand that another subpoena has been served upon Joseph Charles
Learmonth Duffy which raises similar questions. If those questions have not been resolved by next Thursday they can also be ventilated then.

Next, the parties debated questions concerning subpoenas to produce documents directed to various directors and officers of the plaintiffs or former directors and officers of the plaintiffs as well as the proper officer of
Sedgwick James Limited and the partners of Ebsworth and Ebsworth.

The plaintiffs contend that each of these subpoenas was too wide in its terms, and that it was premature, and the plaintiffs raised the spectre that privileged or confidential documents also might be called for. Dealing first with the subpoenas addressed to the directors and officers of the plaintiffs, the defendant has made it clear that it seeks the production of documents in the possession power and control of these persons personally as distinct from whatever documents they may have as officers and directors of the plaintiffs.

I understand that the plaintiffs' list of documents will be served either late today or early tomorrow and this event may take much of the heat out of this debate. However, the defendant is entitled generally speaking to subpoena the directors and officers in question to produce documents which they hold personally since those documents might be different to the documents discovered by the plaintiffs. For example they may contain notations which are different to the documents held by the plaintiffs themselves.

However, that leaves outstanding the question whether the plaintiffs have standing to move to set aside these subpoenas and if so whether the subpoenas are too broad in their terms or whether something should be done to protect the plaintiffs in respect of privileged or confidential documents.

As to the question of standing, Part 38, rule 7 provides: "The court may of its own motion or on the motion of any person with a sufficient interest set aside a subpoena wholly or in part." 
In Compsyd Pty Limited versus Streamline Travel Services Pty Limited [(1987) 10
NSWLR 648], McLelland J, as he then was, held that a party to litigation may be a person with an interest sufficient to make an application under the rule and that whether that party had a sufficient interest to make a particular application depended upon the interest of the moving party in relation to the production of the documents called for by the subpoena. As the defendant in these cases submits it is necessary to consider the question separately in every individual case.

In the circumstances of this litigation I think it is clear that the plaintiffs have the necessary standing to move for appropriate relief in relation to the production to the defendant of documents that might be privileged or confidential. No particular submissions were made related to particular documents said to be privileged or confidential and I do not think that the present evidence justifies the view that any order should be made setting aside subpoenas on this basis at least at this stage. In any event I doubt that it would be proper to set aside a subpoena on this basis as distinct from making an order restricting or prohibiting the granting of access to documents once they were produced to the court in answer to the subpoena.

However, the plaintiffs submitted that the subpoenas were too widely drawn.
The defendant's first line of resistance to this submission was that the plaintiffs did not have a sufficient interest for the purpose of Part 37, rule to move to set aside the subpoenas on this basis.

At first blush this submission has force but at least in the particular circumstances of this case I consider that the plaintiffs do have sufficient interest to make the application. The issues in the present two cases are in one sense quite wide-reaching, but when compared to the issues in the ASC litigation which is to be tried shortly after the determination of the present two cases, the issues are relatively narrow and I consider that the plaintiffs have a legitimate concern that documents which are not relevant to the present two cases but which are relevant to the ASC case may be produced.

The circumstance that the persons subpoenaed are or at least were officers or directors of the plaintiffs or one of the plaintiffs does not seem to me to negate this conclusion.

I think that it is necessary to consider the question whether the plaintiff has standing to move to set aside the subpoenas in question on the ground that those subpoenas are too widely drawn in the context of the terms of the subpoenas and the issues both in the present two cases and the ASC litigation.
The issues are complex and the subpoenas are cast in very general terms and all things considered I conclude that in the circumstances of this litigation the plaintiffs do have the necessary standing, in that there is a risk that the persons subpoenaed may produce documents access to which the defendant would not otherwise obtain over the opposition of the plaintiffs, by reason of some mistake or misapprehension of the persons subpoenaed as to what documents ought properly to be produced in answer to the subpoena. It is not reasonable in the circumstances of this case to expect the persons subpoenaed to have an understanding of the issues in the various pieces of litigation.

Having reached that conclusion I also conclude that the subpoenas are too wide in their terms. Paragraph 1 of the subpoena addressed to Mr Scanlen who is the
Chairman of the second plaintiff, issued in case No.50231, calls for the production of: "All original and/or copies, files, memoranda, filenotes, notes, personal files, personal filenotes, minutes of the meetings of the Board of Permanent
Trustee Australia Limited and/or Permanent Trustee Company Limited, agendas on meetings of Permanent Trustee Australia Limited and/or Permanent Trustee
Company Limited, notes of meetings of the Board fo Permanent Trustee Australia
Limited and/or Permanent Trustee Company Limited and reports to the Board of
Permanent Trustee Australia Limited and/or Permanent Trustee Company Limited relating to Aust-Wide Trust and/or Australian Flexi Property Fund and/or the property at No.1 O'Connell Street, Sydney NSW 2000." 
Summarising that paragraph, in a practical sense it calls for the production of all documents "relating to" the named trust, fund or property. There is no limitation as to date or topic.

I accept without question that the defendant is entitled to subpoena from Mr
Scanlen whatever documents he personally has so far as those documents concern the trust fund or property mentioned insofar as those documents go to issues raised in the pleadings but the subpoena goes well beyond those issues.

Similarly paragraph 2 of the subpoena to Mr Scanlen calls in a practical sense for all documents, "relating to professional indemnity insurance" of the plaintiffs from 1 January 1987 to date. In my judgment this is also too wide, both as to time span, and in that it does not call for documents limited by reference to the issues raised in the pleadings.

It is not appropriate to issue subpoenas in these wide terms, leaving it to the stranger to the litigation, that is the person subpoenaed, to try to form a judgment as to what should be produced, and leaving it to the opposing parties to object, perhaps on the spur of the moment when the subpoena is called upon and answered. In my view if a party to litigation opposing the party issuing such a subpoena and having a sufficient interest in the production of the documents called for makes an application under Part 38 rule , then it is appropriate to set aside such a subpoena.

In the time available I have not gone through each of the other subpoenas similar to the subpoena addressed to Mr Scanlen but I will not make any formal order today. I leave it to the parties to work out between themselves what should be done and to seek appropriate orders on Thursday next.

Turning then to the subpoenas which are addressed to Sedgwick Limited and to
Ebsworth and Ebsworth, the subpoena to Sedgwick Limited called for documents in the following terms: "1. All original and/or copies files, correspondence, memoranda, filenotes, proposals, insurance policies, placing slips, extension and endorsement thereof of Sedgwick Limited and/or Sedgwick James Limited relating to professional indemnity insurance for Permanent Trustee Australia Limited and/or Permanent Trustee Company Limited during the period 1 January 988 to date, included but not limited to: correspondence or written communications between Sedgwick James Limited and/or Sedgwick Non-Marine Limited and/or Sedgwick Professional Indemnity and
Financial Institutions Services Limited; 
Correspondence or written communications between Sedgwick James Limited and/ort Sedgwick Limited and the insurers of Permanent Trustee Australia
Limited and/or Permanent Trustee Company Limited; and 
Correspondence or written communications with any person appointed on behalf of Permanent Australia Limited and/or Permanent Trustee Company
Limited.

Correspondence or written communications between Sedgwick James Limited and/or Sedgwick Limited and any director, officer, or employee of Permanent
Trustee Australia Limited and/or Permanent Trustee Company Limited.
All original and/or copy correspondence, reports, notes, memoranda, claim forms and files relating to any claim made by Permanent Trustee Australia
Limited and/or Permanent Trustee Company Limited on any policy of professional indemnity insurance from 1 January 1988 to date.
All original and/or copy correspondence, filenotes, and memoranda relating to notification of any circumstance likely to give rise to a claim or which could give rise to a claim under any policy of professional indemnity insurance from 1 January 1988 to date received by Sedgwick James Pty Limited and/or Sedgwick Limited or sent by Sedgwick James Limited and/or Sedgwick
Limited to any person." 
In my judgment this subpoena is also too broad in its terms. It is just not limited to the issues raised by the pleadings. There may well be difficult questions which arise as to privilege in relation to the documents called for by this subpoena or another subpoena in similar but more restricted terms. As
I understand the position at the moment Sedgwick Limited acted as the plaintiffs' insurance broker, at least at some stages, but at some other time or times, on instructions of various insurers, Sedgwick Limited instructed
Ebsworth and Ebsworth to take various steps in relation to the litigation called the ASC proceedings and in relation to the facts giving rise to that litigation.

Subject to what might now be submitted I consider that the appropriate course is to direct that the present subpoena be set aside and that any further subpoena addressed to Sedgwick Limited be made returnable before me so that I can deal with any issues that arise as to privilege. Alternatively, if any party considers that I as the trial judge ought not to deal with the matter that circumstance should be made known to the opposing party or parties and my associate and I will arrange for another judge to deal with that question.

In any event it seems to me that the question is difficult and complicated and it ought not to be foisted without warning upon some luckless Registrar.

Turning now to the subpoena addressed to the partners of Ebsworth and
Ebsworth, pars. 1 to 10 call for the production of a large number of documents. Each of those paragraphs is directed to documents related to a particular document issued by Ebsworth and Ebsworth. The defendant submitted that one could see by reference to the pleadings that each of those ten paragraphs related to an issue raised by the pleadings. The plaintiffs do not dispute this and I accept that the position is as the defendant submitted. In those circumstances I consider that pars. 1 to 10 of the subpoena are not wide and that any question that might arise relating to privilege and confidentiality should be resolved not by setting aside the subpoena but by dealing with an application for access to the documents subpoenaed.

Again, subject to what might be said, I consider that any such question should be decided by me or alternatively by another judge and not by some Registrar.
Given the complexity of the case it would not be fair to any registrar to ask him or her to deal with the matter, and perhaps it would be unfair to the parties. If there is a problem about it, it can be raised on Thursday.

I note that Ebsworth and Ebsworth are acting as solicitors for the plaintiffs in the ASC litigation and that case is also listed before me for directions next Thursday. It seems that Thursday might be the most appropriate day to deal with any issues that might arise.

Paragraph 11 of the subpoena addressed to Ebsworth and Ebsworth is in a different category. It seeks the production of "all original and all copies, files, memoranda, letters and filenotes concerning" the plaintiffs as trustees of property investment trust regarding the property at 1 O'Connell Street and the provision of legal services by Ebsworth and Ebsworth to the insurers and/or the insurers' broker of the plaintiffs in relation to the above.

In its form this seems to me to be too wide. It goes well beyond the issues pleaded and there is no qualification or restriction as to date. I consider that par.11 of this subpoena should be set aside. In all the circumstances I do not propose to make any particular order today and I invite the parties to bring in short minutes which I will deal with on Thursday and subject to what might be said about the cost, I consider that the costs of 31 May and today should be costs in the proceedings and unless anybody has anything to say I will adjourn the matter until Thursday.

Associate's Note: Further hearing adjourned to 2pm Thursday 13 June 1996.
 * * * 
