

Harding versus University of New South Wales Matter No 10289/98 [1998] NSWSC (2 October 1998) 
Last Updated: 28 October 1998 
HARDING versus UNIVERISTY OF NEW SOUTH WALES /98 October 1998 
Simpson J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
INTERLOCUTORY JUDGMENT: . Application for Security for Costs: . Claim for Privilege: 
HER HONOUR: By summons numbered 10289/98 issued on 4 February 1998 the plaintiff, Ms Kathleen Harding, commenced proceedings against the defendant, the University of New South Wales. The orders she sought concerned an application made by her, and rejected by the University, for enrolment in the University's Faculty of Medicine for the year 1998. 
After a contested hearing in which Ms Harding appeared unrepresented, on 27
February Bruce J dismissed the summons. Because he considered that errors had occurred in the University's administrative procedures and had not been corrected until after the institution of the proceedings, he declined to award costs in favour of the University.

Before judgment was entered Ms Harding filed a notice of motion seeking, pursuant to SCR Pt 40 r 9(1), an order that the judgment of Bruce J be set aside. This application has been fixed for hearing to commence on 24 November.
In relation to that proceeding, Ms Harding issued and served upon the
University a subpoena requiring production of a variety of documents. The
University moved to set aside the subpoena and, having heard the parties,
Acting Prothonotary Irwin ordered the production of some but not all of the documents sought, and the University duly produced those within the order. In doing so the University solicitor separated one document from the others, claiming that it was privileged from disclosure to Ms Harding. By notice of motion filed on 9 September Ms Harding disputed the claim for privilege. On 28
September 1998 I heard argument from the University and from Ms Harding, who has, throughout the proceedings, continued to represent herself, and upheld the claim for privilege, reserving reasons for that decision. The consequence of that determination is that the notice of motion of 9 September must be dismissed I shall proceed shortly to give those reasons.

The remaining matter for determination is an application made by the
University by notice of motion that certain pending proceedings be stayed unless Ms Harding provides security for the University's costs. This application relates not only to the present summons and notice of motion, but to two other matters that are listed for hearing also to commence on 24
November 1998. It will be necessary to mention these at a later point.

The University's Claim for Privilege 
The disputed document was produced to the court by the University in a sealed envelope bearing a note of the claim for privilege. I was provided with a copy which was marked "Confidential Exhibit A" and which will be placed in a sealed envelope and will remain in the court file at the conclusion of this interlocutory determination.

Before moving to the substance of the debate it is convenient to dispose of an ancillary question that arose during the argument. Initially the envelope produced to the court could not be found and it was for that reason that a copy was provided. Subsequently the envelope was found, in the possession of
University's solicitors. Mr W Murphy, solicitor for the University, gave evidence that, when the envelope was produced to the court registry in response to the subpoena with the privilege claim clearly noted, it was returned by an officer of the Court and remained in the custody of the solicitors until the hearing. Mr Murphy agreed that the more orthodox procedure would have been for the document to have remained in its sealed envelope in the custody of the court pending the determination of the claim for privilege. Ms Harding claimed to have been prejudiced as a result of the document having been returned, but it is not clear on what factual basis she made this claim. The envelope was handed to Mr Murphy in the witness box for the purpose of enabling him to open it and compare the letter it contained with the copy that had been marked as an exhibit. Before doing so, Ms Harding invited him to inspect the envelope for signs of tampering. He found none. She herself then performed the same exercise and stated that the envelope did not appear to have been unsealed. I therefore reject any suggestion that something untoward may have occurred in relation to the document. Insofar as it may have been suggested that the circumstances indicated that the privilege was waived,
I reject that suggestion also.

The basis for the claim for privilege is what was, before the introduction of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), known as legal professional privilege, and is now known as client legal privilege. 
There is a question whether the claim is governed by the common law principles concerning legal professional privilege, or the statutory provisions concerning client legal privilege. This is because the relevant sections of the Act [(ss ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s118.html) and [119](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s119.html)) are expressed to apply to the admissibility of evidence in a court, and do not, on their face, extend to pre-trial production or inspection.

The distinction could have been (but ultimately was not) of considerable significance. For present purposes the relevant distinction concerns whether the test to be applied in determining whether the privilege applies is that of the Act (the dominant purpose test) or that of the common law (the sole purpose test, enunciated in Grant versus Downs <case>; [(1976) 135 CLR 674).] 
I am persuaded by a preponderance of authority that, notwithstanding that the
Act is not expressed to apply to ancillary procedures such as inspection of documents produced on subpoena, the law relating to those procedures must be taken to have been adapted to accommodate the changes made by the Act:
Telstra Corp Limited versus Australis Media Holdings Pty Limited [(1997) 41
NSWLR 277] at 280 (McLelland CJ in Eq); Trade Practices Commission v
Port Adelaide Wool [(1995) 60 SCR 366 (Branson] J);
Sparnon versus Apand Pty Limited [(1996) 138 ALR 735 (Branson] J);
Towney versus Minister for Land and Water Conservation for NSW [(1997) 147 ALR (Sackville] J); Adelaide Steamship Co Limited versus Spalvins <case>; [(1998) 152 ALR 418 (Full] Court of the Federal Court, Olney, Keifel, and Finn
JJ); BT Australasia Pty Limited versus State of New South Wales (No.7) (1998) <case>; [153 ALR 722] Sackville J; Director of Public Prosecutions versus Kane (unreported, David Hunt CJ at CL, 10 September 1997). I am therefore satisfied that the dominant purpose test applies. In reaching that conclusion I am not unaware of the contrary views of Goldberg J and Foster J respectively in
Meltend Pty Limited versus Restoration Clinics of Australia Pty Limited [(1997) ALR 391] and Esso Australia Resources Limited versus FCT [(1997) 150
ALR 117.] 
I have inspected the document. It is a letter written by Mr Murphy, as a partner in the firm of solicitors who advise the University, addressed to Mr
Ken Grime, the University in house solicitor. It is as plain as it could possibly be that it was a confidential communication made between the
University and its lawyer for the dominant purpose of the lawyer providing legal advice to the University as his client. In those circumstances I am satisfied that [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s118.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) renders the letter inadmissible as evidence in any proceedings, and, having regard to my earlier conclusion that the principles that emerge from the Act apply also to ancillary procedures, I am satisfied that [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s118.html) protects it from disclosure to Ms Harding.

Moreover, having regard to the date of the letter (6 February 1998) and the date of the institution of the proceeding (4 February 1998) I am also satisfied that [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s119.html) protects the document from disclosure.

However, it is as well to note the following. Mr Murphy gave evidence. He said that, in preparing the letter, he had no intention other than that of providing legal advice to the University. In those circumstances, I am also satisfied that the document came into existence for the sole purpose of enabling the solicitors to provide legal advice to the University, and that, if I am wrong about the effect of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), the common law test drawn from Grant versus Downs has also been met.

Accordingly, I upheld the claim for privilege.

The University's Application for Security for Costs. 
Summons No.10289/898 is not the only proceeding against the University commenced by Ms Harding.

In 1988 she applied for enrolment in the Faculty of Medicine. In 1989 the application was decided against her. She issued a summons in the
Administrative Law Division of this court claiming judicial review of the decision. On 11 October 1991 McInerney J dismissed the summons and ordered
Miss Harding to pay the University's costs. She appealed to the Court of
Appeal which in 1993 dismissed the appeal and awarded costs to the University.
She sought leave to appeal to the High Court, but discontinued the application before it came to hearing. Costs were awarded against her.

On 4 August 1998, the same day as she sought an order setting aside the judgment of Bruce J, Miss Harding filed a notice of motion in the
Administrative Law Division claiming an order setting aside the 1991 judgment of McInerney J, together with a variety of other orders and declarations, including an order that her former solicitor, Ian Harley Mcdonald, and his professional indemnity insurance company, Lawcover Pty Limited, be joined as parties to the proceedings; also on the same day she filed a notice of motion in the Court of Appeal, seeking an order that the 1993 judgment of that Court on the appeal from the decision of McInerney J be set aside and the appeal re- opened.

On 1 September 1998, on the University's application, Dunford J entered summary judgment in favour of the University on the application to set aside
McInerney J's judgment, and ordered Miss Harding to pay the University's costs. There is no evidence before me of the fate of the application to the
Court of Appeal. In March 1995 Miss Harding issued a statement of claim (No.10678/95) in the Common Law Division. She alleged negligence and breach of statutory duty against the University in its decision on her 1988 application for enrolment in the Faculty of Medicine and claimed damages that she quantified as in excess of $1 million. On 9 June, on the application of the
University, Master Greenwood struck out the statement of claim and ordered
Miss Harding to pay the University's costs. He granted her leave to re-plead.

Miss Harding appealed the Master's decision and filed an amended statement of claim. The University has filed a notice of motion seeking an order striking out the amended pleading. The appeal and the University's notice of motion are the second and third matters fixed for hearing on 24 November.

There appear to be in the court file a number of other notices of motion filed by Miss Harding but it is not clear that any of these has been allocated a hearing date.

Not all the orders for costs made against Miss Harding have yet been the subject of assessment. Of those in respect of which a certificate of assessment has issued, the total amount assessed is $26,790.22. No amounts have been paid direct by Miss Harding in satisfaction of these costs orders.
Pursuant to an order made by the Registrar of the Court of Appeal the sum of $4,100 has been paid to the University from funds held in the Court of Appeal as security following an earlier order of that kind. Still outstanding, therefore, from the costs orders which have been assessed, is the sum of $22,690.22. Other costs orders, as yet unquantified, remain unsatisfied.

On 9 September 1998 Miss Harding filed two further notices of motion. One of these concerned the University's claim for privilege, with which I have already dealt. By the second Ms Harding claims declarations numbered 23-35 in the notice of motion. These again relate to the procedures adopted by the
University in determining Miss Harding's application for admission to the
Faculty. They do not appear to have been dealt with, and I am not clear whether it is anticipated that they will be also the subject of the hearings commencing 24 November. If it is not presently anticipated that they will be dealt with on that day, the parties should prepare themselves so that they can be. It is desirable that all outstanding matters be resolved as early as possible and in as unfragmented a manner as possible.

Counsel for the University relied upon the inherent power of this court to stay proceedings pending the payment of funds by way of security for costs. I accept that the power exists: Rajski versus Computer Manufacture and Design Pty
Limited [[1982] 2 NSWLR 443]; on appeal [[1983] 2 NSWLR 122.] 
Defending the application, Miss Harding put before me a great bulk of material. Much of this went to the merit of her various claims against the
University, the history of her relationship with the University, and her applications for enrolment. It included a bundle of material apparently extracted from medical texts and other works concerning a medical condition from which she has suffered.

There was no evidence as to her financial position or her ability to meet either a costs order against her, if eventually made, or to provide any money required by way of security. Notwithstanding that, I do infer that there is, at the very least, a possibility that the prosecution of her claims will be impeded if she is required to provide any substantial sum, or, indeed, any sum that would be adequate to protect the University's position. I bear this assumed fact in mind.

The University cannot bring itself within the specific provisions for security for costs contained in SCR [Pt .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/index.html#p53)
They are therefore not directly applicable. Nevertheless, the notes to that
Part contain some useful guidance as to the principles to be applied in the determination of an application under its inherent power. The editors of
Ritchie; Supreme Court Practice observe that the fundamental purpose of the power to make an order is to secure justice between the parties, principally by ensuring that unsuccessful proceedings do not occasion injustice to defendants (53.2.1).

In my opinion, great caution should be exercised in making an order for security for costs where its effect might be to shut out a litigant from pursuing a legitimate claim. In this respect I emphasise the word "legitimate". While the plaintiff's prospects of success in the litigation are a relevant consideration, it would generally be inappropriate to use this procedure to prevent the prosecution of a claim, as, in effect, a substitute for the entry of summary judgment. It would be only in the clearest possible case that such a step should be taken. Indeed, I consider the test to be analogous with, but perhaps even stricter than, that applied in applications for summary judgment: see General Steel Industries Inc versus Commissioner for
Railways  [(1964) 112 CLR 76.] 
In my opinion this is an exceptional case. I have carefully read the material contained in the file, and the material provided to me by Miss Harding. It persuades me that she has virtually no prospects of succeeding in any of the applications she makes. I bear in mind that what Miss Harding seeks to do is to have decisions legitimately made after contested hearings set aside. It appears that she proposes to do this by tendering in evidence material produced by the University in response to her subpoena, but none of this is new material in the sense that would, in the ordinary course, warrant the setting aside of a validly obtained judgment. Nor am I persuaded that, even if she succeeds in persuading the judge who hears the application that the material should be admitted, it would make any difference to the outcome. In my opinion the prospect that she will fail in her applications weighs heavily in favour of the University on the present application.

So too does the history of the litigation and the inefficacy of the costs orders the University has to date secured in obtaining. I am of the view that the University is entitled to have its position protected so far as may be by the making of an order staying the proceedings unless Miss Harding provides the security sought.

There is evidence from Mr Murphy of the anticipated costs of the proceedings on the assumption that only one day of hearing time is taken. They are quantified at $16,650.

Miss Harding did not challenge this assessment and, so far as I am able to determine, the costs so estimated are in the order that might be awarded should the University be successful and obtain another costs order in its favour. Accordingly I propose to make orders in terms of the draft orders proposed by counsel for the University.

I order: the plaintiff's notice of motion filed 9 September 1998 (relating to privilege) be dismissed; the plaintiff pay the defendant's costs of the notice of motion; that further proceedings on the plaintiff's notices of motion filed on 20
March, 4 August and 9 September 1998 (the latter containing paragraphs 23 - ) be stayed until security towards the costs of the defendant be provided by the plaintiff in the sum of $16,650 in such form as may be acceptable to the defendant or failing that as may be determined by the Prothonotary.
the defendant be at liberty to apply to a judge for additional security for its costs on seven days notice to the plaintiff.
The plaintiff pay the defendant's costs of its notice of motion filed 31
July 1998 so far as they relate to the issue of security for the defendant's costs.
 * * * 
