

Bush versus Hanlon and Anor Matter No 4806/92 [1998] NSWSC 327 (11 August 1998) 
Last Updated: 9 September 1998 
BUSH versus HANLON & ANOR /92 August 1998 
Young J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: In these proceedings I was all ready to hand down judgment on 22 July 1998, when I was requested to delay doing so so that the plaintiff could file a motion seeking to amend his pleadings and to reopen his case. I agreed to do that and on 30 July 1998 such a motion was filed. I heard it on 4 August and dismissed it with costs and then published my reasons in the principal proceedings. I indicated that I would give reasons as to why I did not favour the application made by the plaintiff in that notice of motion to expand its case to deal with estoppel in due course. This now carries out that undertaking. 
The defendants amended to add defences under ss 54A and 23C of the
Conveyancing Act at the last moment. After some hesitation, I allowed those amendments. The motion seeks to amend the pleadings so that it may be alleged that the first defendant is estopped from denying that he made an enforceable agreement with the plaintiff for the acquisition of the plaintiff's interest in the partnership and from relying upon those sections of the Conveyancing
Act by reason of representations and promises made to the plaintiff with the intention that the plaintiff would act on the same.

Such an amendment would be a waste of time because of my finding in the principal judgment that there was no such agreement. However, for present purposes I must assume that I am dealing with the pleading point before making my decision on the merits.

On that basis, what the plaintiff is doing is pleading an implied term that the defendants would not rely on the Statute of Frauds. As far as I am aware, such a term has never been implied in any agreement since 1677 when the predecessor of <case> was enacted and indeed, to uphold such an implied term would completely outflank the whole effect of the Statute of Frauds. It is not the sort of term that would be implied as a matter of law, nor to my mind is it the sort of implied term that would be implied under the principles laid down by the Privy Council in BP Refinery (Westernport) Pty Ltd versus Hastings SC CLR 266, 283.

Other aspects of the case which could be included under the estoppel head have already been debated before me and the issues raised at the trial.

Accordingly, I cannot see any purpose in granting the amendment.

The other matters contained in the notice of motion had already been dealt with at the trial even though there was no formal pleading.

Accordingly, the appropriate order was that which I made on 4 August, namely, that the notice of motion of 30 July 1998 be dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
