

Walsh and Ors versus Permanent Trustee Australia Ltd and Ors [1997] NSWSC 50 (21 February 1997) 
WALSH & ORS versus PERMANENT TRUSTEE AUSTRALIA LTD & ORS /94 
Friday 21st February 1997 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
HODGSON J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: In this judgment I am dealing with two applications for amendment by the Permanent Trustee parties. The first is to amend the second cross-claim brought against Minter Ellison, so as to raise a new cause of action arising out of events in May 1990. The second is to put on replies to defences to various cross-claims which raised contributory negligence, to the effect that any reduction of the Permanent Trustee parties' damages on the ground of contributory negligence should take into account the responsibility for the damage of Aust-Wide Management Limited (AWM), and of certain other persons who are not parties to any proceedings before me.

It is convenient to deal first with the second of those applications, and to justify an earlier decision which has led to the Permanent Trustee parties' application to put on the reply. In order to deal with these matters, I need to outline very briefly the relevant effect of existing pleadings, and the circumstances giving rise to this application.

The main proceedings before me were begun by a Statement of Claim brought against the Permanent Trustee parties in the name of the plaintiffs by the
Australian Securities Commission, purportedly pursuant to [s.50](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/asca1989364/s50.html) of the [Australian Securities Commission Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/asca1989364/). In the
Statement of Claim, the plaintiffs purport to claim on behalf of all unitholders of what have been called the Aust-Wide and the Flexi trusts: however, an application which they made for a representative order has been dismissed.

The claim made against the Permanent Trustee companies is that they committed breaches of trust in relation to the Aust-Wide and Flexi trusts, by way of breaches of what might be called general fiduciary duties and also breaches of particular terms of trust deeds. The principal remedy sought is in terms of "restitution, equitable compensation and damages", and interest is also sought.

As the case has been opened, the plaintiffs are claiming that the appropriate remedy is to the effect of an order that the Permanent Trustee companies make good the complete loss which the trusts have suffered as a result of the breaches, amounting to something like $150 million plus interest. Whether that remedy is open on the pleadings in all the circumstances of the case, and having regard to the terms of [s.50](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/asca1989364/s50.html) of the [Australian Securities Commission
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/asca1989364/), will be a matter for final submissions in the case.

The Permanent Trustee companies have put on cross-claims against four firms of solicitors and two valuers, based on causes of action which might broadly be described as breach of contract, the tort of negligence, and misleading conduct under the Fair Trading Act and/or the Trade Practices Act. The remedies sought under these cross-claims can broadly be described as falling into two categories: firstly, damages as trustee and former trustee of the
Aust-Wide and Flexi trusts; and secondly, damages in respect of any liability that the Permanent Trustee parties may be found to have to the plaintiffs. As
I understand it, the second category of damages is itself sought on two bases: firstly, on the basis of duties owed directly to the Permanent Trustee parties; and, secondly, on the basis of the second limb of Barnes v. Addy.

The solicitors and valuers have denied any liability, and they have also alleged contributory negligence against the Permanent Trustee parties. It is possible that there may in some respects be difficulties with the defence of contributory negligence.

Assuming the claims under the Fair Trading Act and/or the Trade Practices Act can be maintained, there may be a question as to whether contributory negligence applies at all to those claims; although it is conceivable that somewhat similar issues may arise on the question of causation. That matter is examined in an article in [81 ALJ 146.] 
The second question about defences of contributory negligence is that they may not apply to damages sought by a trustee in respect of trust property; and in that regard I refer to the case of Austrust Ltd. V. Astley, a decision of the Full Court of South Australia, handed down on 1st July 1996.

The third question in relation to contributory negligence is whether it is available if any dishonesty is established, and that may be a matter which arises.

The fourth question in relation to contributory negligence is whether or not it is available in circumstances where Permanent Trustee's damage may not be as a result of "fault" as defined in the [Law Reform (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1965404/). That is, it may not be the result of tort or negligence. For example, if the
Permanent Trustee's liability to unitholders is the result of an unauthorised investment, it may be considered as being due to a breach of a strict contractual obligation, which may not be "fault" as defined, even if it is itself the result of negligence.

There are cases referred to by Balkin & Davis, Torts, 2nd Ed., p.792, which assert that proposition in relation to the liability of defendants; but it may be that the same principle applies to the liability of the plaintiff where contributory negligence is alleged. It may also be that if the Permanent
Trustee Company's liability to unitholders is for breach of trust, it is not a tort, nor within the description of negligence: see Wickstead v. Browne [(1992) 30 NSWLR 1.] On the other hand, it may be that a broader approach, such as that adopted by Davies, J. in relation to contribution under [s.5](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1946404/s5.html) of the [Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1946404/), would be applicable: see Jones v. Mortgage Acceptance Nominees Ltd. <case>; [(1966) 63 FCR 418.] 
Some of the cross-defendants have put on a claim for contribution against the
Permanent Trustee companies, and others are applying to put on such a claim.
As I see it, conceivably there might be a claim for contribution, either as contribution between tortfeasors under [s.5](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1946404/s5.html) of the [Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1946404/) or on general equitable principles.

As regards the first possibility, it seems to me that the cross-defendants could conceivably be considered as tortfeasors liable in respect of damage to unitholders, if they are ordered to make good that damage by reason of the action brought by the Permanent Trustee parties; and the Permanent Trustee companies could conceivably be considered as being liable, or as being persons who would if sued have been liable, subject to the above points that I mentioned concerning the nature of the Permanent Trustee companies' liability.

As regards the second possibility, contribution on equitable principles, although the relevant proceedings are cross-claims brought by the Permanent
Trustee parties against the cross-defendants, equity does look to the substance and not to the form; and it is conceivable that the substance of these matters is that the Permanent Trustee parties and the cross-defendants have co-ordinate liability to the unitholders, so as to attract the equitable doctrine.

Since the question of some kind of sharing of the ultimate loss has been at the forefront of this case from the start, and having regard to the difficulties of the legal principles in the matter, as presently advised I would be inclined to allow any reasonable application brought within the next few days by any of the cross-defendants to seek contribution on either or both of these bases.

With that background I need to consider first the Permanent Trustee parties' tender of evidence which was said to go to the negligence of the Corporate
Affairs Commission and others, and said to be relevant to showing that the damage suffered by the Permanent Trustee parties was a result partly of the fault of the Corporate Affairs Commission and associated persons. I have already ruled that I would not permit that evidence on the basis on which it was tendered without an amendment, and I want to include in this judgment the basis of that ruling.

The tender of that evidence raised two questions; namely, a question of relevance, and a question of whether it was within the pleadings. Usually those questions are dealt with by first considering the pleadings, and then looking at the matter of relevance. However, because of the way the matter developed, it is convenient in this case to look first at the question of relevance.

The relevance of the evidence was supported by Mr. Douglas QC on behalf of the
Permanent Trustee parties on the basis of the contributory provisions of the [Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1965404/).
[Section (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1965404/s10.html) of that Act provides as follows: 
Where any persons suffers damage as the result partly of his own fault and partly of the fault of any other person or persons, a claim in respect of that damage shall not be defeated by reason of the fault of the person suffering the damage, but the damages recoverable in respect thereof shall be reduced to such extent as the Court thinks just and equitable having regard to the claimant's share in the responsibility for the damage.
 
Fault is defined in [s.9](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1965404/s9.html) of the Act to mean: ...negligence, or other act or omission which gives rise to a liability in tort or would, apart from this Part, give rise to the defence of contributory negligence but does not mean or include a breach of statutory duty.
 
Mr. Douglas submitted that in determining the extent of any reduction of the plaintiff's verdict on the basis of contributory negligence, it was necessary to consider the plaintiff's share of the entire responsibility for the damage, that entire responsibility including that not only of the parties to the action but also of persons who may not be parties. I was referred to Barisic v. Devenport [(1978) 2 NSWLR 111] at 121, and 131, and to Nathan v. Vos [(1970) SASR 445] at 465, 469-70, -3 and 476-7.

Mr. Douglas submitted that, it being established by those cases that the reduction of the plaintiff's damage had to be approached by first comparing the responsibility of the plaintiff with that of all other persons responsible for the damage, and only subsequently looking at the responsibilities as between those other persons, it followed as a matter of principle that the consideration should not be limited to the responsibility of parties to the action; and Mr. Douglas submitted that the consequence was, in fact, directly supported by the cases to which he referred. The principle that the reduction in the plaintiff's verdict had to be arrived at by first comparing the responsibility of the plaintiff with the total responsibility of all other persons was also supported by the House of Lords decision in Fitzgerald v.
Lane <case>; [(1989) 1 AC 328], in which the decision of Barisic was approved.

In fact, the case of Barisic itself directly concerned only the positions of parties to the case, and the same is true of Fitzgerald v. Lane. The view of
Barisic that it directly relates only to parties to the case has some support in the summary of the effect of the decision given in the later Court of Appeal case of Daniels v. Anderson [(1995) 37 NSWLR 438] at 572.
There is also direct authority to the effect that the responsibility of non- parties should be disregarded, in another South Australian case, namely, Vail v. Formato [(1989) 10 MVR 12.] 
However, in my view, it would be inappropriate to make a final determination of that question at this stage of the case, and it would be particularly inappropriate to make a determination which, on one view of the matter, would be contrary to what amounted at least to considered dicta of the Court of
Appeal of New South Wales. In those circumstances, I think I do have to proceed on the basis that this material would be relevant to a question of the quantum of reduction for contributory negligence, if that issue is properly before the Court.

This brings me to the next question of whether that issue is properly before the Court, having regard to the existing pleadings. Mr. Douglas has submitted that it is not a matter which need have been pleaded in reply by the Permanent
Trustee parties to the defences of contributory negligence raised by the cross-defendants. He referred me to Pt.15 r.10 of the Rules, which is relevantly in the following terms: 
A party need not plead a fact if: ...
 the burden of disproving the fact lies on the other party, except so far as may be necessary to meet a specific denial of that fact by the other party in his pleading.
 
He submitted that, having regard to the principle that any reduction of the plaintiff's verdict on the basis of contributory negligence has to be arrived at by comparing the plaintiff's responsibility for the damage with the totality of the responsibility of other persons, it was incumbent on a defendant raising contributory negligence to plead as to the totality of that responsibility; and therefore, in any case where conceivably some other persons might be involved, it was incumbent upon the defendant raising contributory negligence to plead facts quantifying or negativing the responsibility of other parties.

Mr. Douglas submitted that that principle was in accordance with the general principle that a plaintiff is entitled to recover the entirety of damages from any one of a number of defendants who caused those damages, and does not have to claim against all of the defendants. If the plaintiff sues just one defendant, it is a matter for that defendant to seek contribution from other persons for the damages which the one defendant sued by the plaintiff has to pay to the plaintiff.

The cross-defendants referred to Pt.15 r.7, which, so far as relevant, requires that pleadings contain, and contain only, "a statement in a summary form of the material facts" relied upon; and also to Pt.15 r.13, particularly in relation to surprise, which relevantly states: 
The plaintiff shall, in his statement of claim, plead specifically any matter which, if not pleaded specifically, may take the defendant by surprise.
 
It was submitted that what this contemplates in a contributory negligence situation is that the plaintiff will plead material facts which support the liability of the defendant; and the defendant will plead material facts which suggest that the plaintiff suffered damage partly as a result of the plaintiff's own fault. Those pleadings will raise an issue as to the respective responsibility of the plaintiff and the defendant. If then the plaintiff wants to say that its share in the total responsibility is less than what might be suggested if one considered only the responsibility of the plaintiff and the defendant, then it was up to the plaintiff to allege material facts going to that issue in a reply. In my opinion, that is the correct analysis.

In my opinion, there is nothing in the terms of [s.10](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1965404/s10.html) to suggest that defendants raising contributory negligence are given the responsibility of alleging and proving either that no-one else had any responsibility for the damage, or that someone else did and this person's share in the responsibility was a particular percentage. Furthermore, the raising of facts concerning the responsibility of a non-party is a matter solely in the plaintiff's interests. In my view, it would be unfair to put on defendants the burden of investigating and then disproving or minimising something which was solely to the plaintiff's advantage. This is especially so when in many cases the relevant facts are likely to be more within the plaintiff's knowledge than the defendant's.

In my view also, this approach is confirmed by considerations of fairness. If the responsibility of a non-party can be raised at the hearing by a plaintiff without the necessity for any pleading, not only may a defendant be taken by surprise but also, as is said in this case, the defendant will have lost the opportunity to put on a cross-claim against this non-party; so that the non- party can be joined in the action and bound by the result, and also multiplicity of proceedings can be avoided. Furthermore, if a plaintiff is permitted to take that course, the matter will come before the Court with no- one having given any particulars of the alleged negligence of the non-party, and the fair and expeditious resolution of the issue will be prejudiced.

For those reasons, in my opinion, if a plaintiff does wish to rely on the negligence of a non-party to bring about the result that the plaintiff's share of responsibility is lessened and the reduction of the plaintiff's damages is lessened, then this is an issue that should be raised by the plaintiff in a pleading put on in reply to the defence of contributory negligence.

It is as a result of a view to that effect which I expressed earlier this week that the Permanent Trustee parties have now put on an application for leave to file a reply alleging the fault of AWM, two firms of solicitors, and the
Corporate Affairs Commission and parties associated with the Corporate Affairs
Commission.

In short, it is alleged against AWM that its fault partly caused the Permanent
Trustee parties' damage, the fault being that involved in the proposing and promoting of the investment which has caused the loss. The fault alleged against the two firms of solicitors concerns their roles in the approval of prospectuses which were issued in relation to the investments in 1988. The fault alleged against the Corporate Affairs Commission and associated parties is in relation to the registration of the trust deed.

Mr. Douglas has provided written submissions in support of the application, and they will be left with the papers. In those submissions, he referred me to a number of recent cases which strongly support the allowing of amendments to enable the real issues between the parties to be decided; in particular, the case of Cohen v. McWilliam [(1995) 38 NSWLR 476];
Macquarie Bank v. NML Association (NSW Court of Appeal, unreported, /11/96); Penthouse Publications Ltd. V. McWilliam (NSW Court of Appeal, unreported, 14/3/91); National Australia Bank v. Nobile <case>; [(1988) 100 ALR 227.] 
He also referred me to authorities in support of the proposition that where, as in this case, there was evidence concerning relevant facts, particularly in the present case fault by AWM, amendments should be allowed to bring the pleadings into line with the evidence. He referred me to the cases of State of Queensland v. JL Holdings Pty. Ltd. <case>; [(1997) 141 ALR 353] and Leotta v. Public Transport Commission of New South Wales [(1976) 50 ALJR 666.] Mr. Douglas also submitted that the other parties to the proceedings had been advised that the Permanent Trustee parties would be relying on the fault of non-parties, in the following ways.

In July 1996, an application had been made to join the Corporate Affairs
Commission and associated parties as further cross-defendants in the proceedings. In written submissions in support of that application, the case of Barisic was referred to, and it was submitted that it was necessary to take into account the fault of other persons in relation to contributory negligence, even if those other persons were not parties to the case.

In the ninth cross-claim in these proceedings, which is brought against
Messrs. Freehill Hollingdale & Page (Freehills), Messrs. Christie &
Partners and Messrs. Ternes & Salier, breaches of duty by AWM were squarely alleged. In a separate set of proceedings, which are being heard together with the main set of proceedings, with evidence in one being evidence in the other, the Permanent Trustee parties have put on a cross-claim against
AWM alleging liability of AWM for the same damages as is under consideration in the main case.

Mr. Douglas pointed out that in his opening he had referred to the fault of
AWM, had referred to the case of Barisic, and had said that, if AWM were responsible to the extent of 40% or 50% of the loss, then that was not available as a defence against the Permanent Trustee companies. The fault of the two other firms of solicitors was also referred to in the opening, although I would interpolate that it does not appear that either the case of
Barisic or the relevance of this fault to the defence of contributory negligence was adverted to at the same time. In opening, the fault of the
Corporate Affairs Commission was referred to, and there was some reference at that time also to the relevance of this in determining shares of responsibility.

As regards prejudice alleged by the cross-defendants, Mr. Douglas submitted that it was only alleged in generalised terms in relation to the conduct of the case, except insofar as Freehills in particular had said that they would have considered joining the Corporate Affairs Commission and its associates and the two firms of solicitors, had the issue been properly raised in reply when it should have been raised.

Mr. Douglas submitted that that allegation of prejudice should be supported by evidence if it is to be relied upon. On the other hand, Mr. Douglas submitted that there would be very substantial prejudice to the Permanent Trustee parties if leave is refused. They would lose entirely the opportunity of a reduction which the law allows them of the effect of contributory negligence, if contributory negligence is established. The Permanent Trustee parties may not be able to sue the Corporate Affairs Commission and the solicitors in subsequent proceedings because they may well be statute-barred. On the other hand, the cross-defendants have, subject to the ultimate ten year limit, two years after judgment to seek contribution from those parties. That is an opportunity that they have, even if leave is refused to the Permanent Trustee parties, in which event they may recover from the Corporate Affairs Commission and the solicitors a contribution towards a liability found against them, which is a smaller liability because the fault of the Corporate Affairs
Commission and the solicitors has not been taken into account.

All of the cross-defendants submitted that their conduct of the case to date had been on the basis that the fault of AWM and of the other proposed parties was not a matter in issue in the case. It would be a great disruption to the case to change course now and deal with the case on the basis that the fault of these parties was a matter in issue. It was submitted that the Permanent
Trustee parties' case was coming towards an end now, and all the Permanent
Trustee witnesses had been cross-examined on the assumption that these matters were not issues in the case.

Mr. Wood on behalf of Richard Ellis gave a particular example of part of his cross-examination which was directed to showing a greater responsibility of
AWM as well as of the Permanent Trustee parties, with a view to minimising the responsibility of Richard Ellis.

The very great impact of the reply in relation to Aust-Wide was suggested by
Mr. Robb on behalf of Jones Lang Wootton. Without in any way suggesting that these percentages were likely, he pointed out the huge difference in the result that would follow if percentage responsibilities along the lines of 30% for the Permanent Trustee parties, 50% for AWM, and 5% for each of four other parties were ultimately found. Applying those percentages to a verdict of, say, $100 million (again without in any way suggesting that that is a likely verdict or a possible verdict), on one approach the Permanent Trustee parties would get a verdict against the four 5% parties of $70 million. On the other approach, in which the fault of AWM was altogether left out of account, the
Permanent Trustee parties would get a verdict of $40 million, a difference of $30 million in total damages of $100 million.

As has been mentioned, the point was made on behalf of Freehills, but I think also adopted by other cross-defendants, that had the responsibility of these non-parties been raised in a reply, they would have carefully considered joining those parties and would even have looked into the possibility of bringing AWM's directors into the case.

It is convenient to look first at the application in relation to AWM. In relation to that application, it seems to me that the Permanent Trustee parties' application is the strongest, for a number of reasons. Firstly, AWM is actually before the Court, with claims of fault giving rise to the same damages actually made against it. It seems that, if the cross-defendants now seek to claim contribution from AWM, it is unlikely that AWM can effectively raise any opposition to that course. It seems clear that AWM itself cannot make any significant contribution to any damages, so it is not a case where there has been a lost opportunity to put on a cross-claim against AWM.

The first matter I looked at in relation to AWM is the utility of allowing the reply to be put on. It follows from what I said in relation to the relevance of the evidence previously tendered against the Corporate Affairs Commission that, if the reply is allowed, the issue is arguably one which could affect the result. I am certainly not saying that it would necessarily, or even probably, affect the result. I have already adverted to the possibility that a decision might be made that the negligence or fault of non-parties should not be taken into account. Even if that view were not taken, it seems to me to be arguable that, at least in some cases where it is affirmatively proved that the non-party has no assets and cannot make any contribution, the Court may find it "just and equitable" in terms of s.10 of the 1965 Act that the responsibility of that person be disregarded.

It seems to me that it is also arguable that this case is in substance a case which concerns contribution rather than contributory negligence, and that contribution principles should prevail over the contributory negligence principles if they are different; and on contribution principles, the responsibility of a person wholly unable to contribute (as appears to be the case with AWM) would ultimately be disregarded: see for example Fisher v. CHT
Ltd. [(1966) 2 QB 475] at 481, Woolmerhausen v. Gullick [(1893) 2 Ch. 514] at 529-30.
However, it would, in my view, be inappropriate at this stage of the case to come to a final view on that matter. Furthermore, even if I came to a final view on it, an appeal court might disagree.

For those reasons, it seems clear that the reply would have utility; and it seems to me that, subject to considerations the other way, which I will come to, the Permanent Trustee parties should not be deprived of the chance, even if it may not be a very large chance, of greatly increasing their recovery, as the figures which I previously quoted indicate.

Coming to the matter of discretion, there is great force in the arguments of the cross-defendants concerning the conduct of the case. This a case of enormous difficulty and complexity and size, and I accept that the case would have been prepared differently if the cross-defendants had had it in mind that the fault of AWM would be an issue in this way. There is force also in the submissions that steps already taken in the conduct of the case cannot satisfactorily be undone, and that there is some irremediable prejudice if the reply is allowed. There is also great force in the submissions that, in a case of this size and complexity, parties should not have the burden of recasting their case on the run. I think there is also some force in the submission that consideration may have been given to bringing them Aust-Wide directors into the case, if only for tactical reasons rather than any real prospect of very substantial recovery from them.

On the other hand, the Permanent Trustee parties have taken the view that they did not need to plead this matter to raise it, and I cannot say that that view was entirely unreasonable. There is no previous authority on the matter. As I have outlined, the matter was expressly opened and, although in a case of this complexity I would not wish to give too much weight to a short part of a long opening, in my view that is an important factor to be taken into account.

Next, there is the circumstance that AWM is before me in a case which is heard together with this case, so that the issue is before me and facts bearing on this issue will be before me. There is force in the submission from the cross- defendants that the listing before me of this other case, with the claim against AWM, occurred only shortly before the commencement of this hearing; and that if the cross-defendants had realised the consequences it might have, they would not have meekly permitted this to happen.

However, taking all these things into account, on balance my view is that the amendment in relation to AWM should be allowed with conditions, which I recognise cannot go anywhere near eliminating the prejudice, but I hope will keep it to a minimum. At present - and this can be the subject of further submissions - there are four conditions I have in mind.

The first condition is that very soon there be clear allegations and precise particulars of the fault of AWM which is relied on, and I would add that in general terms those particulars should not go outside the parameters of what has been discussed during the hearing of this application.

A second condition would be that no more evidence in chief will be allowed from the Permanent Trustee parties on this issue, and that in a very short time they should identify all the documents relied on and give an adequate explanation of how these documents are relied on. I would interpolate here that since I have, in effect, held that the onus is on the Permanent Trustee companies to allege and prove this fault, any deficiency in the evidence will count against them. I have to say that my present view, from my limited understanding of the material, is that it is likely that even a substantially documentary case may be sufficient to establish some fault in AWM. It is another matter whether a documentary case will be enough to satisfy me to the requisite degree of a percentage of fault which will count very substantially in the ultimate reckoning.

A third condition would be that the Permanent Trustee parties would make any witness already called available for further cross-examination, on reasonable notice, at any time up to the close of evidence.

A fourth condition would be that the cross-defendants have three months from now, with liberty to apply to extend, to put on any additional evidence they would wish to put on on this particular issue.

There was a suggestion that leave should be given provisionally because some great prejudice might be discovered as this matter proceeds. I do not propose to make the leave provisional, and the parties should proceed on the basis that leave has been granted. However, I will expressly make it subject to the possibility of reversal if some party can later establish some great unforeseen prejudice.

It follows, I think, from my decision that the Permanent Trustee parties must pay any costs which are increased by reason of this application being made at this time. I would give leave for the cross-defendants to put on cross-claims against Aust-Wide within a few days if they wish; and I would add that if
Aust-Wide come up with some reason why those cross-claims should not be allowed, then I would have to reconsider this decision, although at present I cannot see that as a realistic possibility.

I turn now to the applications in respect of the other persons. There are important differences in these applications. These persons are not before the
Court, and there is no possibility of joining them now in the proceedings.
Apart from the Corporate Affairs Commission and its associated parties, there is no detailed pleading against them.

In relation to those parties, clearly, if a reply had been put on in the ordinary course of pleadings, there would have been an opportunity to the cross-defendants to bring them into the case, and there is no reason to think that would not have been a reasonable course.

Next, it seems to me that the possible impact on the Permanent Trustee parties of not joining them is far less. On any view of it, it seems to me that the percentage responsibility of these parties would not be of the same order as the possible percentage responsibility of AWM.

I would also add that, in the opening of the case, the Barisic point was not spelt out so clearly in relation to the Corporate Affairs Commission as AWM, and it was not, as I read it, spelt out at all in relation to the other possible parties.

Mr. Douglas has submitted that there is no real prejudice to the cross- defendants, because they have the opportunity to bring proceedings against these parties at a later time. In my view, in a case of this expense and complexity, that is not sufficient to greatly reduce the prejudice to the other parties.

I would say, however, that having regard to the amounts of money involved in this case, it is not absolutely inconceivable that cross-defendants found liable in this case may wish to pursue other parties afterwards. If they were to do so, there is the possibility of any unfair advantage being obtained, in the way spelt out by Mr. Douglas.

I would propose to refuse the application in relation to these other parties, but make the refusal conditional on the imposition at the end of the day of such conditions as may appear to be fair in relation to possible future actions which might be taken by cross-defendants against these other persons, in particular conditions requiring some accounting to the Permanent Trustee parties in respect of the net proceeds of any such action.

I return now to the first of the two applications I am dealing with.

The Permanent Trustee parties seek to amend to introduce a new cause of action against Minter Ellison, arising out of Minter Ellison's actions in relation to investments which took place in 1990. This was a matter adverted to in opening, but only as being relevant to causation of loss arising out of the causes of action alleged against Minter Ellison concerning Minter Ellison's conduct in late 1988 and early 1989. The significance of the introduction of this new cause of action would be that, if the Permanent Trustee parties failed in their causes of action based on the events of 1988 and 1989, they may nevertheless succeed in relation to this 1990 cause of action; and this in turn could give rise to damages of the order of $30 million.

Mr. Hutley SC for Minter Ellison submitted that the amendment should not be allowed. He pointed out that the Statement of Claim against the Permanent
Trustee parties was dated 21st April 1994, and that the cross-claim against
Minter Ellison was dated 3rd November 1994. This cross-claim had been amended in 1995 and 1996, and the events of 1990 had been opened by Mr. Douglas in
November 1996. All facts relevant to this cause of action had been known to the Permanent Trustee parties since 1994, and no explanation was now offered as to why the cause of action had not been originally relied on, but was now being sought to be relied on.

Mr. Hutley submitted that he had prepared the case to date on the basis that valuation evidence concerning the Richard Ellis valuation was not a matter which justified a great deal of time and expense: as he saw the case, the events of 1990 related only to causation and could only affect the liability of Minter Ellison to the extent of about $600,000.00 at most. If the amendment was allowed, so that the Permanent Trustee parties could succeed against
Minter Ellison even if no breach of obligation was shown against Minter
Ellison arising out of the events of 1988 or 1989, then the 1990 events could make a difference of $30 million to Minter Ellison; and that being so, it would be necessary to go into the valuation issue in some depth. The Permanent
Trustee parties were shortly to call their valuation expert Mr. Davis, Mr.
Hutley was not in a position to deal with Mr. Davis, and it would take some months to get expert valuation advice in order to prepare to cross-examine Mr.
Davis. It was unreasonable that Minter Ellison should be put under the burden of a wholly new case, on the run, in a case as large and complex as this.

Mr. Douglas submitted that, on a proper analysis, Minter Ellison were always at risk as to tens of millions of dollars in relation to the events of 1990: any decision not to deal with the valuation issue was a risk taken by Minter
Ellison's legal advisers, which should not redound to the disadvantage of the
Permanent Trustee parties. It was unreasonable that the Permanent Trustee parties should now be shut out of a possible $30 million claim, particularly when all of the facts will, in any event, be before me: see Cohen and
Leotta above.

In my opinion, whether Mr. Hutley was correct or incorrect in the view which he took as to what was at stake concerning these issues, I accept that he did take the view which he asserted, and that the amendment would have meant that he felt it necessary to recast the case considerably and to set about preparing a large valuation issue. If Mr. Hutley was mistaken in his view, then that could be to the disadvantage of Minter Ellison as the case is presently structured; but I do not think it means that a new cause of action should be allowed, just on that basis.

It appears that all the relevant facts were known to the Permanent Trustee parties long before the commencement of the hearing, and that a decision was made not to include the 1990 cause of action; and no explanation is offered for this decision or for the change of decision, except by reference to a remark made by Mr. Wood during the hearing. On the facts of the case as I understand them, it seems unlikely that the Permanent Trustee parties would fail on the 1988-9 cause of action, yet succeed on the 1990 cause of action. I accept that the amendment would involve substantial prejudice to Minter
Ellison, and could lead to adjournments which would substantially disrupt the proceedings for all parties.

In those circumstances, I refuse the application.
 * * * 
