

Matter No 20217/95 [1998] NSWSC 34 (13 February 1998) 
Last Updated: 3 April 1998 
DANIEL FRANCIS O'BRIEN versus N M ROTHSCHILD AUSTRALIA /95 February 1998 
Simpson J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HER HONOUR: The plaintiff was born on 30 September 1975. In the early hours of 7 May 1994, at eighteen years of age, he was injured when he was struck by a motor vehicle whilst he was a pedestrian on the Pacific Highway at Chatswood. His injuries were serious and include permanent brain damage. Pursuant to the provisions of the [Motor Accidents Act 1988](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/) he sues the owner and the driver of the motor vehicle for damages for the personal injury he sustained. In order to succeed it is necessary that he establish that his injury was caused by the fault of the owner or the driver of the vehicle in its use or operation [(s 69(1)).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s69.html) The defendants deny any fault in the use or operation of the vehicle and claim that, even if some fault on the part of the driver, who is the second defendant, were shown, it was not the cause of the injuries suffered by the plaintiff. They further claim that, if both fault and a causal connection are established against them, the damages awarded to the plaintiff should be reduced by reason of contributory negligence on his part. On behalf of the plaintiff it is conceded that he must bear some responsibility for his injuries and that any award of damages should be reduced accordingly. 
The paramount question on liability is whether any fault has been established on the part of the driver of the vehicle. If it has, the second question for determination is whether that fault was the, or a, cause of the plaintiff's injuries.

Facts 
In the evening of Tuesday 6 May 1994 the plaintiff with some friends was celebrating the birthday of one member of the group. After having dinner they travelled by train to Chatswood where they went to a hotel located on the western corner of the intersection of the Pacific Highway and Mowbray Road.
During the evening the plaintiff consumed a substantial quantity of alcohol.
After he was injured blood alcohol testing revealed a concentration of 0.176 percent. It is not in dispute that the plaintiff was intoxicated. The group of which he was a member was described by one of his companions as "rowdy, singing", and the plaintiff as "fairly unsteady". The party left the hotel a little after midnight and walked on the footpath on the western side of the highway towards Chatswood Railway Station. There were, by this time, five young people in two groups. In front were Mark Horan, David Eager and Suzanna
Kearsey. A few metres behind them were the plaintiff and Michael Coyne.
Shortly after leaving the hotel the plaintiff, by then in the centre of the north bound lane, was struck by Ms Hill's car. Evidence about what occurred was given by Mark Horan (in the plaintiff's case), and the driver of the vehicle, Ms Sarah Hill and David Eager (called in the defendants' case).
Although the plaintiff gave evidence in the proceedings he has no recollection of events immediately before he was struck and his evidence does not assist on this question.

There is little real factual dispute concerning the circumstances in which the plaintiff met his injury. The Pacific Highway at Chatswood consists of three northbound and three southbound lanes divided by a median strip. It is a sealed road, well lit. Photographic evidence and maps show a clear open sweep of road. There was at the time little traffic and there was no obstruction to visibility.

Mark Horan, walking in front of the plaintiff, glanced backwards and saw the plaintiff sitting on the median strip putting on his shoe and tying his shoe lace. According to Mr Horan: "He put his shoe on, sort of got back onto his feet and then just walked straight onto the road ...[and] ... was collected by the car." 
He collided with the centre of the vehicle. This is confirmed by photographs of the vehicle (ex A). Mr Horan saw the plaintiff slumped onto the bonnet, and saw the car come to a halt a little further up the road. He estimated the speed of the vehicle as "just driving the basic speed limit", and did not hear any sound of braking prior to the collision. That is consistent with the evidence of Ms Hill.

David Eager was walking ahead of the plaintiff with Mr Horan and Ms Kearsey.
He thought he heard the two behind "kicking a can or something like that", and heard someone call out to the plaintiff. He turned and saw the plaintiff sitting on the median strip, and as he (Mr Eager) turned around: "I saw him sitting there and in the one scene saw him getting up and this car coming and they went together." 
He said that he believed that while the plaintiff was sitting on the median strip his feet were on the roadway. When asked to describe the plaintiff's motion when leaving the median strip he said: "Standing up and stepping forward in the one motion, like say someone, if they have been knocked up in the football match or something just getting up to go back into it sort of thing." 
He had the impression that the car, when the plaintiff began to step upwards, was about 20 feet from him, and travelling at about 50 kms per hour. He saw the plaintiff apparently come to the realisation of the presence of the car, and try to avoid it by running in front of it for a moment, and then saw the car hit the plaintiff and throw him onto the bonnet. He estimated the distance from the plaintiff's sitting position to the point of impact as no more than two paces.

Neither of these witnesses was able to say in which of the three northbound lanes the defendant's vehicle was travelling. Ms Hill's evidence was that she was travelling in the middle lane, at a speed of 55-60 kms per hour and that she was unaware of the presence of the plaintiff (or any other person) on the road or on the median strip until: "Something hit my windscreen and went to the left of the car and I pulled over and saw that I had hit someone".

She had previously, a couple of seconds earlier, seen the pedestrians on the footpath.

There was no evidence to explain how or why the plaintiff moved from the western footpath to the median strip.

Ms Hill was, at the time, an arts student and spent the evening adjudicating a debate at a high school, after which she had coffee with friends, and then drove a friend to Mascot. She consumed no alcohol and was not tired. She was, as she drove, keeping a lookout for pedestrians, and immediately before the collision was looking straight ahead. She denied having lost concentration on the roadway. I found her to be a truthful witness, giving as accurate an account according to her recollection as she was able. Indeed the same may be said of all witnesses, who I considered attempted to assist the court to the best of their ability.

The fault attributed to Ms Hill on behalf of the plaintiff lies in her failure to see him on the median strip or on the roadway at any time before the impact. It is pointed out that, given that she was travelling in the centre of three lanes and the collision occurred at about the midpoint of the vehicle, it was necessary for the plaintiff to have traversed one and a half lanes of well lit clear roadway before the impact. There is, as well, the evidence of
Mr Eager that the plaintiff actually ran ahead of the car "just for a moment" in an attempt to avoid being hit. Notwithstanding Mr Eager's description of the plaintiff's movement as "all in one motion" (a description of fluidity, not speed) there is no suggestion that the plaintiff was moving with any undue speed, at least not until he began running in his apparent attempt to avoid being hit.

A good deal of the defendant's argument is concerned with the time available to Ms Hill to take action to avoid the plaintiff once he had left the median strip and before the impact. Two assumptions underlie this argument. They are the estimates of Mr Eager that the distance between the plaintiff and the vehicle at the time the plaintiff began to step upwards from the median strip was 20 feet, and of Ms Hill that her speed was 55-60 kms per hour. Tables placed before me without objection show that a vehicle being driven at 60 kms per hour travels 16.7 metres or 54.77 feet per second, and traverses 38.1 metres (or 125 feet) before coming to a stop. At 60 kms per hour Ms Hill would have travelled 20 feet in 0.366 of a second. Clearly, if both estimates are accepted, it would have been impossible for Ms Hill to take any action effective to avoid the plaintiff.

While I am prepared to accept Ms Hill's estimate of her speed, in my view caution should be exercised before accepting Mr Eager's estimate of the distance. This is not because there is any doubt in my mind about his bona fides, but because his estimate was given as an "impression" only, and because almost immediately after he declined to attempt to estimate the distance between the plaintiff's sitting position and the point on the road at which he was hit because he was looking at it from a 40deg. angle. His estimate of 20 feet was an estimate, also from an angle, of the distance between the front of a rapidly moving vehicle and a less rapidly moving human being. Such distances are notoriously difficult to estimate, even in daylight, and while the lighting on the highway was good, it was, nevertheless, night time. With no disrespect to Mr Eager, it would not be safe to make the present determination using his estimate of distance as a principal foundation.

A more objective and reliable gauge of the distance may be drawn from the undoubted fact that, after the plaintiff stood up, he traversed one and a half lanes of the highway, and, according to Mr Eager, ran a couple of steps in the centre lane in front of the car. This, realistically, he could not have done in just a little over one third of a second. That in itself is sufficient to cast doubt on the accuracy of Mr Eager's "impression". The distance between the vehicle and the plaintiff at the time he stood up could be calculated accurately if the distance he covered, and the speed at which he moved, were known. It is sufficient, I think, to observe that the distance from median strip to the centre of the centre lane is likely to have been about 15 or 16 feet; the plaintiff was, clearly, moving at only a fraction of the speed of the car. If he took just two seconds from the time he stood to the time he arrived in the centre of that lane (and on the assumption that Ms Hill was travelling at her stated speed), then her vehicle must have been 109 feet from him at the commencement of his movement. Senior counsel for the plaintiff argues that this was sufficient, if not ample, time for her to see the plaintiff, and that, had she been exercising reasonable care, she would have done so. I am inclined to agree at least with the proposition that, with due attention to conditions on the road, Ms Hill would have seen the plaintiff at a point before he was struck by the car. There is however, no evidence of the clothing he was wearing, or of the speed with which he moved.

Ms Hill was, of course, aware of the time. She was very familiar with the road on which she drove regularly. She knew that a large hotel (the one the plaintiff and his friends had just left) was on the intersection she had just passed. She knew that it was a place that provided entertainment and alcohol to young patrons, that it normally closed late, and that sometimes the patrons as they left it engaged in boisterous or high spirited behaviour. She had that evening seen a couple of groups of young people on the western footpath of the hotel. It was a Friday evening (more accurately, very early Saturday morning ) when the average Sydneysider knows hotels are well patronised and some patrons emerging from them are likely to be less cautious than they otherwise might.
These are all relevant circumstances in considering Ms Hill's duty of care, and what was necessary in its discharge.

But this is not sufficient. For the plaintiff to succeed, he must establish that, driving with due prudence, Ms Hill would have seen him in time to take effective evasive action. I am unable to conclude that he has done so. She could not have been expected to see him or to anticipate his movement, before he stood up. There would, once she saw him, be only two courses of action open to her: either to brake heavily, or to swerve into the left lane. Either carries its own dangers, and, in any event, on the figures I have quoted, braking would have been unlikely to bring the vehicle to a halt before the point at which it struck the plaintiff. Ms Hill could not have been expected to be fully aware of the traffic conditions in the adjacent lane, and swerving into that lane would have exposed both her, and the occupants of any other vehicle travelling in that lane, to danger. She could not reasonably have taken that course without first ensuring that the lane was clear, and the time available to her did not permit that. In my opinion the plaintiff's emergence onto the road was so sudden as to make it impossible for Ms Hill, even if she had seen him the moment he stood up, to do anything effective to avoid hitting him. It follows that I conclude that the plaintiff's own actions were the sole cause of his injuries. There must, accordingly, be a verdict for the defendant.

In case I am wrong, however, it is appropriate to assess the damages to which he would, if successful, be entitled.

The plaintiff is now twenty-two years of age. He is a member of a close knit and extremely supportive family, the fourth of five brothers. He attended high school until year ten where his academic performance was undistinguished, and his preferred subjects were in the practical areas. He was a keen sportsman, popular and self-assured. He had undertaken part time work from the age of fifteen, to help the family finances, and after leaving school he took some short TAFE courses as preparation for an apprenticeship in carpentry. At the beginning of 1993 he began such an apprenticeship. He was considered by his employer to be a very enthusiastic and keen worker, with an aptitude for what he was taught. I am satisfied that, uninjured, he would have remained in that employment, successfully completed his apprenticeship and entered the industry in his own right.

There was not a great deal of dispute about his past or present medical condition. Following the accident he was admitted to Royal North Shore
Hospital where he remained an in-patient until 2 June. He then spent ten days at the Coorabel Rehabilitation Unit. He sustained a fracture of the left ankle but the most substantial injury was a fractured skull with severe brain damage and massive haemorrhaging. He underwent partial right temporal lobotomy, and contracted meningitis which in turn developed into arachnoiditis causing severe and continuous sciatic pain in both legs. He has, as a result, some difficulty walking. He has lost his capacity for sport. He has a condition called quadrantanopia with loss of vision in one quarter of each eye. He had severe lung injuries with pulmonary contusions. There has been a personality change and, not surprisingly, episodes of depression. There is no prospect of any improvement. Dr Seaton, a consultant orthopaedic specialist, who examined the plaintiff at the request of his solicitors, considered that the whole body impairment, taking into account brain damage, meningitis, arachnoiditis and left ankle fracture, was approximately 40 percent. Dr Seaton considered that the consequences of the anachroiditis alone rendered him unfit for work in the open labor market and permanently eligible for the Disability Pension, which he currently receives. His cognitive deficits consequent upon the brain injury are independently sufficient to render him unemployable. He has, in fact, attempted some work since his injury. After his discharge from hospital, but at an otherwise unspecified time, he returned to his former apprenticeship employment, but only as an observer. It was plain that he would be unsuited to working with the kinds of machinery and equipment used on building sites. His parents operate a mail order business from their home and have attempted to interest the plaintiff in participating in some of the more routine tasks associated with it, but without any success. The plaintiff lacks the necessary concentration and attention to detail. He continues to live with his parents and needs a good deal of their time and attention and is not really capable of looking after himself. He would not be able to live independently of his very supportive family. In reaching this conclusion I am conscious of the contrary view of Dr Matheson, a neurosurgeon who examined the plaintiff on a number of occasions on behalf of the defendants and who considers that he could live alone. The preponderance of medical evidence in this regard is in accord with the views of Dr Seaton that he would not be able to live autonomously.

The plaintiff himself gave evidence and it is clear that he has considerable insight into his present circumstances. He suffers from some depressive interludes and from frustration at his loss of capacity. This latter circumstance is particularly relevant to the [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s79.html) assessment.

The plaintiff claims damages for non economic loss, for past and future domestic assistance, for past and future medical and pharmaceutical treatment, for future handyman assistance, and for past and future economic loss, and for future investment and management charges.

Non Economic Loss 
I have outlined briefly the plaintiff's present circumstances. He has obviously lost a great deal of quality of life, and is in the unfortunate position of being reasonably aware of what he has lost. He has become somewhat withdrawn, and prefers not to socialise. He has lost the opportunity of a satisfying career, or indeed any career. He suffers and will continue to suffer considerable pain as a result of his arachnoiditis. Senior counsel for the plaintiff argued for an assessment that his case represents 90 percent of a most extreme case; senior counsel for the defendant contended for 60 percent. Not surprisingly perhaps, I consider the appropriate figure lies in between, at 75 percent. The maximum amount applicable to a most extreme case is $250,000, 75 percent of which is $187,500.

Past Domestic Assistance 
The parties agree that [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s72.html) of the Act in its unamended form applies and the plaintiff is not entitled to compensation for past domestic assistance for the first six months following his injury or the first six hours in any week thereafter. The parties further agree that the hourly rate for past assistance, rendered for less than forty hours per week, is $15.00.

It is quite apparent from what I have said that the plaintiff's family have provided a great deal of assistance to him in the years since his injury. His mother has been able to maintain her level of support only because she and her husband operate their business from their home. The plaintiff is demanding of her attention and cannot be left alone for more than an hour or so.

On his return to the family home the plaintiff was quite aggressive, very demanding, and entirely dependent upon the members of his family. A good deal of this burden fell upon his mother but his father and brothers were also heavily involved in care giving. His leg injury created an additional physical dependency in the early stages but this improved after about 12 or 18 months.
Since then his level of dependency has remained more or less static. He receives a Disability Pension but is unable to manage his own money and is given to losing his possessions such as his automatic teller machine card. His mother handles these matters for him. He is emotionally very dependent upon his mother and father and brothers and accompanies his mother in particular when, for example, she does the family shopping, but he is of no assistance to her. Mrs O'Brien estimates that she spends three to four hours per day attending to him and that this has been the case from the beginning. I rather suspect that she underestimates the time initially devoted to her son's care but I accept her own assessment. That gives a total of twenty-eight hours per week of which he would be entitled to compensation for only twenty-two commencing on 7 November 1994. At $15 per hour he would be entitled to $330 per week or $17,160 per annum. For three years and three months he would be entitled to $55,770.

Future Domestic Care 
The future must be calculated on much the same basis although a time will come when Mr and Mrs O'Brien are not able to provide care at the level they now do.
I will do as the parties have done and assume that that occurs at the end of ten years from now. The plaintiff has a life expectancy of another fifty-four years. For the ten years from February 1998 to February 2008, on the 5 percent tables (multiplier 412.9) at $15.00 per hour for four hours per day he would recover $173,418. Thereafter for the remaining forty-four years of his expected life span he would be entitled to care at the agreed commercial rate of $17 per hour. It is difficult to assess the level of care he would then need. I consider it realistic to estimate that at six hours per day, a weekly amount of $714. Over a forty-four year period, deferred ten years, the amount to which he would be entitled is $414,065.

Handyman Assistance 
Dr Buckley estimated that the plaintiff would require four hours per week handyman assistance from the time he ceases living with his parents. I will assume that this event occurs ten years from now. Allowing $15 per hour, or $60 per week for 44 years, yields $56,670 but this must be discounted to take account of the probability that with advancing age he would in any event have required additional assistance in this respect. I would allow $40,000 under this head.

Past Economic Loss 
The plaintiff was earning $260 net per week in his apprenticeship. His earnings would have increased annually during the apprenticeship, to January when he would have become a qualified tradesperson/carpenter, earning $455 net per week. To January 1997 he would be entitled to $36,140. From 14
January 1997 to 13 February 1998 he would be entitled to $25,480.

Future Economic Loss 
Figures produced by the plaintiff show that average weekly earnings of qualified carpenters and joiners are $538 net per week. Assuming the plaintiff would have worked to age sixty-five (another forty-three years) he would be entitled to $429,039 after the conventional 15 percent discount for vicissitudes. I reject the argument advanced on behalf of the defendant that he retains a capacity to earn $200 per week, or any amount.

Future Medical Expenses 
Dr Buckley estimates that the plaintiff would require six attendances on his general practitioner each year, one at level C and five at level B. There was no direct evidence of the cost of a level B consultation which I estimate at $35. Level C consultations at a doctor's surgery are charged at $43.85. The average weekly cost of the two combined is $4.20 over 54 years. These come to $4,170 and would be allowed. Dr Buckley also recommended allowance for two rehabilitation specialist consultations per annum, at $61.75 per consultation, or a weekly amount of $2.38 (an amount of $2,363), and four annual reviews by a multi-disciplinary pain clinic for the next five years, two annually thereafter. I assume the rates of charge are roughly similar to those for rehabilitation consultations. He would be entitled to $1,100 for the first five years, $1,762 for the years following. The total is $9,395. Rounded off,
I would allow a total of $10,000. The plaintiff uses pain killing medication, at a cost of about $3 per week. I would allow $3,000 under this head.

Out of Pocket Expenses 
These are agreed at $9,496.

Future Investment and Management Charges 
The total amount of damages to which the plaintiff would be entitled is $1,383,908. On the figures provided to me the management fee payable on the initial amount would be $22,749. There is an additional 5.25 per cent payable on income received from the capital. I am not in a position to calculate the capitalised value of the award. Should it ever become necessary, the parties have liberty to apply for this figure to be clarified.

The orders I make are:
The statement of claim is dismissed.
There will be a verdict for the defendants.
The plaintiff is to pay the defendants' costs.
 * * * 
