

Geoffrey Clarence Howell versus S.R.A. of NSW [1996] NSWSC 179 (7 June 1996) 
Geoffrey Clarence HOWELL versus STATE RAIL AUTHORITY OF NEW SOUTH WALES /93 
FRIDAY 7 June 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
ABADEE J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: In this matter I propose to deliver an ex tempore judgment. It is abundantly clear that there are some disadvantages in doing so in a case that has lasted as long as the present one. In fact, the case commenced last Friday and has continued for much of this week. Nevertheless, for reasons that will appear when I come to deal with the matter of damages, there is a degree of urgency required in delivering a judgment right here and now. Those reasons particularly arise from a recent report of Dr Whitaker's which will be discussed in greater detail in relation to the matter of damages.

The case is, on any view, a most unusual one. Further, it has been complicated by the nature of the evidence, which is of a psychiatric and psychological nature, and by the plethora of medical reports that have been tendered in relation to such issues, not only in connection with the subject of damages but also in connection with the subject of liability. The case has been further complicated by the fact that the plaintiff has on a number of different occasions since his accident given inconsistent histories to the different psychiatrists or psychologists that he has seen. There has thus arisen in the evidence some inconsistencies in relation to some matters.

Against this background, however, I now propose to deliver my judgment. On 4
December 1992 a woman committed suicide by throwing herself in front of a train in the railway cutting between Dallinger and Union Roads in the vicinity of the Union Road overpass, Lavington. The scene of the accident was about four and a half kilometres north of the Albury Railway Station where the plaintiff was employed at the time as an assistant station master. It appears that following the suicide, the train operated by the defendant stopped some distance from the location of the impact. The remains of the deceased woman's body were found between points designated 6.41250 and 6.41650 kilometres. The driver of the train estimated that from the time he reacted to seeing the woman about to throw herself on the line, to the time he applied the emergency brakes and then brought the train to a stand-still, a distance of approximately two kilometres had elapsed.

The accident had occurred at approximately 2035 hours on 4 December 1992. On that date, the plaintiff, whilst on duty as the assistant station master of
Albury, received advice of the fatality which had occurred, and immediately made a number of telephone calls and gave instructions to another assistant station master to take charge of the station. He departed from the station to the scene of the accident, leaving the station shortly after 2035 hours. It appears that he arrived at the Fallon Street Crossing near the scene of the accident between 2045 hours and 2050 hours.

It was part of the plaintiff's duties to immediately respond to the accident.
Tendered in evidence as Exhibit C were the instructions for emergency situations that are given to railway employees, including the plaintiff. At p provision is made as follows: "As soon as possible after an incident has occurred in which an employee or member of the public is injured or fatally injured an employee must be placed in charge of the scene of the incident. This employee must supervise the transfer of any injured persons or removal of the body and if necessary must protect the site." 
A number of other responses are dealt with in the document. I have quoted, as
I have said, part of the immediate response instructions and I have done so deliberately, because that instruction is said inter alia to be particularly relevant to the question of breach of duty that arises in connection with one of the ways the plaintiff advances his case as and against the defendant.

The nature of the instruction is, as I have said, set forth. The intent of the instruction is, in my view, quite clear. It is something to be brought into account in considering the question of breach of duty having regard to what was said by the High Court in Wyong Shire Council versus Shirt <case>; [(1980), 146 CLR 40] at 47 and 48, as referred to in Abalos versus Australian
Postal Commission <case>; [(1990) 171 CLR 167] per McHugh J at 180.

It appears that in obedience to the instruction and as part of his duty the plaintiff, as I have said, proceeded to the accident location. Upon arrival at the Fallon Street Crossing the plaintiff proceeded to the stationary XPT which was then positioned approximately 500 metres to the north of the Fallon Street
Crossing. There he found the train driver in front of the train. He spoke to the driver, Mr Smith, who was apparently badly shaken and in shock. That is, of course, not altogether surprising, bearing in mind the very nasty accident that had occurred and which had involved, as I have said, a woman throwing herself onto the line. As to what happened, I also have had the benefit of the materials that were tendered before me, including a report, Exhibit 5, which incorporates a whole bundle of documents and the like pertaining to the circumstances of the accident. These documents include a lengthy statement from the plaintiff dated 5 December 1992. It is a contemporaneous document brought into existence shortly after the occurrence of the accident. It seems to me that it is a document that can be acted upon safely as being a description of what the plaintiff did on the occasion of his visit to the subject accident site, and also in terms of what thereupon happened.

It appears that the plaintiff, having spoken to Mr Smith, who was badly shaken and in shock, then accompanied police officers and returned to the actual point of impact. He described proceeding to the point of impact by way of his walking or running or hurrying along the track. It seems that he was also anxious to implement the inter alia instructions, that I have referred to.

It also appears that after Mr Howell spoke with the driver, and while he proceeded to the rear of the train to confer with the guard, he also instructed passengers not to leave the train. It seems to me that his attendance at the location was, therefore, one warranted in the circumstances, having regard to what had occurred and one reasonably required in accordance with the performance of his duties as per the instructions to which I have made reference. It appears that Mr Howell accompanied the police officers along the line also, as I have said, to the actual point of impact.

In his contemporaneous statement, Mr Howell said that he was contacted at 2035 hours and was advised that a train had run over a person. He advised the
Albury police and a Mr Duke, another assistant station master. He proceeded, as he said, to the scene in the company of another railway officer. He gave instructions to a fellow employee at the Fallon Street level crossing to secure the crossing. He has described what he did, including speaking to the driver and walking to the rear of the train. What is also clear is that as he did so, inter alia, he cleared away unauthorised persons.

The remains of the victim's body were found between 6.41250 kilometres and .41650 kilometres. Thus, clearly the plaintiff had to travel some distance to get to the scene after he had arrived at the Fallon Street crossing. He initially spoke with the driver who was badly shocked and badly shaken. It appears that at about 2050 hours Mr Duke, an assistant station master, reported for duty. He was conveyed to the accident scene where he arrived at about 2110 hours. He suggested to Mr Howell that he return to the Albury station. He took charge. At about 2145 hours the XPT train was permitted to return to the station. The train was brought to Albury platform at 2206 hours at which point of time the plaintiff was at the station.

Clearly the plaintiff was at the scene of the accident for some significant period of time between 2050 hours and perhaps up to a point of time no later than 2145 hours. One cannot, however, be precise on the evidence as to the exact period that he was at the scene of the accident in the vicinity of where the unfortunate victim's body parts were strewn in or about the line area or adjacent to the lines. The plaintiff in his evidence in chief gave evidence that he had been at the scene for a period of time in excess of up to about four hours, perhaps with some minor adjustment being made for a short period in which he left the scene.

It is appropriate for me to say that this estimate of the plaintiff's is one that I do not accept. It is inaccurate. Having said that, I am nevertheless satisfied that he was at the scene for a significant period of time and not only at the scene but at a scene which was associated with some degree of horror. The fact of the matter is that the victim's body parts, numbering perhaps some 41 to 42 parts, were strewn over the vicinity of the line. It is true that the plaintiff, as he proceeded up the line, in accordance with his instructions and the requirements of his employment, did not personally involve himself in picking up pieces of the victim's body. Nevertheless, I accept the evidence that he gave in chief that as he walked along the track there were bits and pieces of body to be seen. I accept his evidence that the first one that he came into contact with was a severed hand, and further that there were bits and pieces of bone and flesh in or about the vicinity. These pieces of the victim's body were visible in the torch light. As the parts were located, it appears that their position on the ground was marked. The plaintiff was involved in looking for the parts, he saw the parts, he had already been exposed to seeing and speaking to the driver, he also had been told at an earlier point in time before he actually went to the precise scene by a person that he did not need an ambulance but rather a "Kleen Away".

There can be absolutely no doubt that for whatever period of time the plaintiff was at the scene, and there can be no doubt that for a significant period of time the plaintiff was confronted with a horrendous situation, a situation of some horror, and the sort of situation that fortunately most human beings as they go through life would not be exposed to. Indeed, that he was exposed to a scene in circumstances where it appears on the evidence that there was the potential or risk for a human being who had been so exposed, to thereafter suffer from a condition known as Post-traumatic Stress Disorder, is accepted by the experts and indeed by the State Rail Authority itself.

The plaintiff, as I have said, returned to Albury station and at about 2206 hours the train was brought into the Albury station. The plaintiff appears to have finished, and signed off duty at or about 1am. He gave evidence that about 3.30am he arrived home. He received a phone call from a psychologist, a
Mr Langmead, who apparently had in turn been earlier instructed by the State
Rail Authority Rehabilitation Service to provide or to establish contact and communication with the plaintiff for the purposes of providing to the plaintiff debriefing and counselling following a traumatic experience of the type which had occurred.

It appears that the State Railway Authority itself recognised that in some circumstances it was extremely important following an accident of this type that railway personnel, including personnel such as the plaintiff, should be given trauma debriefing and indeed, trauma counselling. Tendered in evidence before me is a document headed "Trauma Group Debriefing" which deals with the management and procedures of trauma counselling and more significantly the process of trauma and the necessity for "critical incident debriefing". That document also refers to the aims of trauma debriefing, the importance of providing employees with counselling, and the importance of providing professional assistance to persons such as the plaintiff who had been involved in an incident or involved in a matter of the nature that I have just described. Trauma debriefing was regarded as being mandatory in such circumstances and in other cases was highly recommended.

The same document referred to the need for trauma debriefing sessions to be conducted by trained and experienced health professionals and to take place as soon as possible after the incident and preferably within 48 hours. This document itself also suggests, in terms of foreseeability, that the defendant itself acknowledged or recognised that accidents of the type that occurred in the instant case were the type of accidents that might give rise to persons such as the plaintiff attending in the course of their employment and pursuant to instructions inter alia of the type I have earlier referred to, a risk of suffering from trauma in consequence of the performance of their duties.

It is a document which it seems to me, at least suggests that debriefing sessions should take place, not only as soon as possible after the incident but really within 48 hours. Reading between the lines, I would have thought that the document pointed to the need for debriefing and counselling to take place upon a face-to-face basis, but even if it is otherwise, it really does not matter. What seems to be important is that there be a debriefing as soon as possible after the incident and preferably within 48 hours. The railways, as I have said, recognise the need for debriefing and counselling in such circumstances. It seems that it was foreseeable, that an injury of the type that I am concerned with in the instant case, a Post-traumatic Stress
Disorder, was the sort of injury that might arise in consequence of the performance of duties at the scene of the accident of the type that I have described.

It seems, therefore, that the question of debriefing training and the need for trauma counselling was recognised in advance by the State Rail Authority. Its necessary implementation in the early hours of the morning appears to have been recognised by those employed in the State Rail Authority rehabilitation section. As I understand the evidence, in the early hours of the morning a
Miss Kilby from the State Rail Authority Rehabilitation or Occupational Health
Section contacted a local psychologist, a Mr Langmead, with instructions to debrief and counsel the plaintiff.

It appears that the plaintiff, as I have said, arrived home shortly after .30am. I am satisfied from the plaintiff's evidence and some of the medical reports that after the accident the plaintiff did imbibe in some alcohol and I would infer that he did so in order to try to alleviate the horror and stress which had arisen from his involvement in the post-accident activities at the scene of the accident.

In any event, the plaintiff was contacted by a Mr Langmead, a local psychologist. Mr Langmead plays a significant role in respect of this matter because in my view, for reasons that will appear in due course, despite what he did, I am satisfied that in respect of the important initial debriefing and counselling that was required, the standard of care exercised on his part in going about the performance of those duties fell short of the standard that was required in the circumstances of this particular matter both initially and during the weekend following. I will return to this matter in due course but I foreshadow, as I foreshadowed during submissions, that it was in this area that I considered that a breach of duty on the part of the defendant has been established; namely, in and about the post-accident trauma debriefing and counselling area.

Pausing at this point of time, it seems to me that the medical evidence, and I accept from the evidence of Dr Sime on this point as well as the documentation that I have referred to, that it is critical to debrief as soon as possible. I also accept Dr Sime's evidence that it is really critical to debrief on a face-to-face basis. Where there is evidence suggesting to the contrary, I reject it. Indeed, implicit in the trauma debriefing training program is a suggestion that the debriefing should be on a face-to-face basis. Commonsense would suggest that wherever that debriefing was to take place, it should be on a face-to-face basis. It is treatment by at least a trained clinical psychologist that is required and one would expect that, if possible, not only should the trained psychologist be speaking to the person being debriefed but also that the trained psychologist should be able to observe the behaviour of the person being debriefed and bring it into account in his/her clinical assessment of the situation. The spirit, as I have said, of the Trauma Group
Debriefing document would suggest that this ought to have been done. As I have said, I accept Dr Sime's view that debriefing should usually be done on a face-to-face basis.

I am satisfied in the circumstances that if there was any failure on the part of Mr Langmead, a psychologist retained by the Authority to properly debrief and counsel the plaintiff, then any such failure would be the responsibility of the defendant. The defendant was the employer of the plaintiff. It is accepted by the parties before me that the decision of the High Court of
Australia in Kondis versus State Transport Authority <case>; [(1984) 154 CLR 672] would make the defendant liable to the plaintiff if there was relevant failure on the part of Mr Langmead, as I consider there was, and has been in the circumstances of this case.

So much seems to be beyond dispute. The principles of non delegable duty would therefore make the defendant liable for any act or omission on the part of Mr
Langmead that materially contributed in a causative way to the plaintiff's injury, which in the instant case is a serious case of Post-traumatic Stress
Disorder. It appears that Mr Langmead did speak to the plaintiff in the early hours of the morning at a point of time when he was probably under the influence of alcohol and had not been to bed. I would not regard what he did at 4 am as representing a proper debriefing or counselling of the type that is postulated as being required in the circumstances either by the Trauma Group
Debriefing manual or by Dr Sime whose evidence generally, in respect of the need for critical face to face counselling I accept. Nor do I accept that anything else Mr Langmead did on Saturday 5 December, whether at 8 am or 12.30 pm, constituted in the circumstances a proper performance of the need for proper counselling or debriefing of the plaintiff. Indeed, I am satisfied in the circumstances of this case that the plaintiff's Post-traumatic Stress
Disorder was materially contributed to by the omission on the part of Mr
Langmead to properly debrief and counsel the plaintiff after the trauma. I am satisfied that by 12.30 pm on Saturday 5 December 1992 Mr Langmead was in a position when he knew or ought to have known that the plaintiff was showing signs of a Post-traumatic Stress Disorder. Also, I am of the view that as at that particular point of time, namely, at or about 12.30 pm on the Saturday, the plaintiff had told him enough for Mr Langmead to definitely conclude that an appointment was required as a matter of urgency and that such an appointment should have been made there and then for that day. In my view Mr
Langmead had enough information in his possession to know that the plaintiff was showing even early signs of Post-traumatic Stress Disorder, or alternatively, he would have known this from the nature of the accident itself, the nature of the instructions he had received, generally, from Miss
Kilby early in the morning, from some of the things which Mr Howell had told him either at about 4 am, and certainly in consequence of things that the plaintiff had told him at or about 12.30 pm.

It also appears to me that in the circumstances, at least by 12.30 pm, Mr
Langmead was on notice that the plaintiff was showing signs or indications of a Post-traumatic Stress Disorder and an appointment was definitely required.
Why Mr Langmead failed to take appropriate steps to implement immediate face to face counselling is something that I find hard to explain. His explanation, having seen him in the witness box is not one that I accept. It seems to me that in the circumstances there was a critical time period in which debriefing and trauma counselling was required. It was not given. Indeed, what Mr
Langmead did on 5 December 1992 fell short of the standard of care required in the circumstances. It fell short of the standard set forth in the railways debriefing instruction. It fell short of the standard postulated by Dr Sime, which I accept. In my view, there was a breach of duty that occurred on the
Saturday in the failure on the part of the defendant by its servants or agents to properly debrief and properly counsel the plaintiff within a critical time frame in respect of any particular problems that he might suffer from arising from the horrendous events that he had been involved in earlier that morning.

Indeed, I am bound to say that Mr Langmead was an unimpressive witness and that I was singularly unimpressed with his demeanour, veracity and credibility. It seems to me, as I have said, that he was at all material times on Saturday in a position where he ought to have recognised that the plaintiff had been involved in a classical incident which could lead to the condition which did ultimately occur of Post-traumatic Stress Disorder. Not only did he recognise that, but I am satisfied that from what he had been told no later than 12.30pm on Saturday, there were early signs that such a condition had, in fact, commenced to occur.

As I have said, he definitely knew that the plaintiff needed to have an appointment by no later than Monday. It is significant that Mr Langmead knew that he was hired not only to speak to the plaintiff but to also see him. I am satisfied what happened was that the defendant expected Mr Langmead to see and debrief the plaintiff on a face to face basis. I am satisfied that such seeing and debriefing should have occurred on 5 December in the circumstances of the knowledge that Mr Langmead had and having regard to the instruction as well as
Dr Sime's view.

Another matter of concern is that whilst it is suggested by Mr Langmead that he had made an appointment to see the plaintiff on 7 and 9 December, no such interview ever occurred. Moreover, it emerges from the evidence that the defendant had operated under the mistaken belief, that Mr Langmead had or was in fact seeing the plaintiff. The defendant did not, in fact, find out that he had not seen him at all until about 19 December, some 15 days or thereabouts after the occurrence of the accident. Mr Langmead, seriously suggested in an initial report to the Railways that he had, in fact, had interviews, which would infer that he had conducted face to face interviews with the plaintiff at least on 7 December and 9 December. I am satisfied that did he not have face to face interviews on those days or on any other day and that there had been a misreporting by Mr Langmead as to what he had done. This misreporting, in turn, caused the Railways to institute some inquiries with Mr Langmead, which then caused Mr Langmead to further furnish a new report to the defendant.

I am satisfied in the circumstances that a breach of duty of care has been established on the part of the defendant arising from the omissions on the part of Mr Langmead to which I have made reference and which do not need to be repeated. I would make, however, one further observation, that it is particularly interesting that in a letter that was tendered before me from Mr
Langmead to the defendant, and which was not a copy of his original letter, Mr
Langmead appears to have accepted that there was a need to properly monitor the plaintiff's behaviour and state of mental and psychological health. In that very letter, that was sent dated 18 December 1995 Mr Langmead suggested as follows: "Because of the amount of time involved in the clean up and the level of distress at the time I will monitor his recovery at least by phone in the coming weeks." 
As to ongoing monitoring or any suggested ongoing monitoring after 9 December, it appears that such was not done. The next act of psychological intervention, as I understand the evidence, was not until around mid-January, when a Mr
Mangioni attended upon the plaintiff. Shortly thereafter a Miss Slade, psychologist, also became involved. The plaintiff received no debriefing and no counselling from Mr Langmead or, indeed, any other person in the interim period. Thus I am satisfied that the standard of the care which the Railways expected would be implemented in relation to debriefing and counselling following the incident was not a standard that was met in the circumstances by
Mr Langmead. On that basis a breach of duty has been established and I accept that breach of duty was a material contribution to the onset of the Post- traumatic Stress Disorder. Indeed, I am also satisfied that as at 5 December, signs of that particular condition were, in fact, emerging, had emerged, and were known to have emerged to Mr Langmead. The plaintiff has established this breach of duty of care and is entitled to a verdict.

I consider I have said enough with regard to this particular issue and I propose to make two brief observations as to the way the plaintiff puts his case. I have already indicated to Mr Toomey QC that I do not accept his submission that the plaintiff's case has been established by breaches of duty in either or both of two other respects. Mr Toomey submitted that the second basis of liability on which the plaintiff founded his case was the alleged failure of the defendant to provide pre-trauma training or counselling. In the circumstances I do not propose to spend really much time in dealing with this question. I am not satisfied that any breach of duty in such respect has been established in this case, on the evidence. I do not accept in reliance upon Dr
Sime's evidence that in respect of this basis there been a failure or breach of duty established. I do not accept in the circumstances of this case, that there has been established having regard to the principles in Shirt's case, or having regard to the principles in Abalos' case any breach of duty in respect of any failure on the part of the defendant to provide pre- trauma training or counselling. Further, I do not consider that in the circumstances of this case the need for pre-trauma training or counselling has been established.

On this point I have also had regard to the magnitude of risk, to where the plaintiff was employed, to his pre-injury background and also to the nature of the instructions to which I have earlier made reference. These are just some of the matters upon which I would conclude that there was no breach of duty.
In any event, I would conclude that even if there was a breach of duty to provide pre-trauma training or counselling, I would not be satisfied that having regard to the evidence that such would have prevented the plaintiff from sustaining in this case what was described by Dr Sime as being a one of the most severe, if not the most severe cases of Post-traumatic Stress
Disorder he had seen. I do not accept that there was any causal link between any purported breach and the onset of the Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder following the accident of 4 December 1992. I would not find such on the basis of Dr Bryant's report. Further, I would not find that having regard to the plaintiff's pre-injury employment or its instance of accidents, that in the circumstances of this case pre-injury, pre-trauma training or counselling was reasonably required. Indeed, I would on this point be disposed to accept the views of Miss Morrow, rather than those of Dr Bryant or Dr Sime, which I reject. But even accepting that there was a breach of the duty, I would not be satisfied in the circumstances that there was negligence on the part of the defendant in failing to provide pre-trauma training or counselling of the type postulated by Dr Sime or even by Dr Bryant. That disposes of the issue of reasonableness, and with one of the alternative basis of liability advanced by
Mr Toomey. I do not consider that there is anything in Shirt's case or
Abalos' case that requires me to accept the submission of Mr Toomey and
I reject it.

The third basis upon which the plaintiff's claim is put, is as follows: That the defendant was negligent in exposing the plaintiff to the horrific sight that he witnessed on the night of 4 December 1992, given that there was the foreseeable risk of injury. Mr Toomey argued that the defendant should have laid down procedures for its employees which would have prevented them from actually coming into contact with body parts, as in the instant case, including directing them to secure the area from a distance to leave the assessment of death or injury to ambulance officers or others with special training, or to leave the securing of the area to the police, or to postpone the assessment of the railway situation until after the removal of the bodies.

I do not consider that a breach of duty has been established having regard to the principles laid down in Shirt which I need not repeat. Nothing in
Abalos' case requires me to conclude that there was a breach of duty in one or more respects in relation to the third way in which Mr Toomey puts his case. I do not accept Dr Sime's evidence. I have seen him and I have heard his evidence. Nor do I accept the plaintiff's submission in reliance upon Dr
Sime's evidence that reasonable care required the defendant to have taken action in one or more of the respects relied upon or to prevent the plaintiff from also being exposed to seeing the remains.

In reaching that conclusion, I have regard to the plaintiff's background, and his employment position. I have regard to the magnitude of the risk, and to the competing obligations that were imposed upon the plaintiff, including the probability of the occurrence of the risk. I have regard to the inconvenience of taking alleviating action. I also have regard to other constricting responsibilities which the defendant had, including inter alia doing things at the scene of the accident as reflected in the instruction that I had earlier referred to in the emergency instructions, exhibit C.

In my view, there was no breach of duty on the part of the defendant in the circumstance of this case in exposing the plaintiff to the horrific sight. I do not believe that it has been established that any one or more of the steps suggested by Mr Toomey were reasonable or reasonably practical or reasonably required. Next, I would not accept that even assuming any one or more of those steps had been taken that such would have prevented the onset of the plaintiff's severe Post-traumatic Stress Disorder. Nor do I accept that in all the circumstances, there was negligence on the part of the defendant in failing to take any one or more of the steps so relied upon by Mr Toomey. I reject Dr Sime's evidence for all these reasons. I also reject the plaintiff's submission that there was any breach of duty or negligence on the part of the defendant in exposing the plaintiff to the sight to which he was exposed on the night in question.

That is the end of my judgment in relation to the issue of liability. I make no apology for its length. I have had days of evidence in a most complicated, difficult case. I am satisfied in the circumstances that the plaintiff has, however, established his case for damages in respect of the head of negligence relating to the post-accident trauma debriefing and counselling and that the plaintiff's injuries have been materially contributed to by such breach or failure. I am satisfied that there was negligence in the area of debriefing and counselling and that this negligence, for which it is accepted that the defendant is liable, entitles the plaintiff to a verdict for damages.

I now turn to the subject of damages. I have had the opportunity of extensive submissions being advanced in relation to this subject matter by both counsel for the plaintiff and counsel for the defendant. Those submissions include some submissions in written form. Before embarking upon my assessment of damages exercised, it is appropriate for me to make a number of observations.
In the first place, I am in a position to evaluate damages on the basis of a considerable amount of material and information, some of which was not available to one or more of the doctors who have been involved in the case. In one sense I have almost a complete mosaic.

The next observation that I would make is that I have also in the instant case had a benefit which some of the doctors have not had; namely, the benefit of seeing the plaintiff for long periods in the witness box. It will come as no surprise to counsel appearing in the case that I propose to take into account in my assessment and evaluation of the evidence touching upon the issue of damages views that I have formed upon my evaluation of the plaintiff's demeanour, based upon what I have seen and based upon what I have heard from him.

In the instant matter the plaintiff has spent a considerable period of time in the witness box, extending over a number of days. This is not a case where demeanour is determined by reference to but a glancing assessment based upon the short period of time which the plaintiff spent in the witness box. Indeed he has spent, according to the record, a period of 7 hours and 53 minutes in the witness box. I have had the opportunity of seeing him, I have had the opportunity of hearing him, and I have had the opportunity of evaluating him.
I propose in this case, and I have told counsel so in advance, to take into account the benefit that I have had of assessing the plaintiff's reliability and credibility.

That said, I also hasten to caution myself that such assessment and evaluation needs to be done against a background of what I consider to be a serious psychiatric condition of Post-traumatic Stress Disorder that the plaintiff has suffered in consequence of this accident. Hence, I make it abundantly clear at this point of time that my evaluation of demeanour and credibility is an evaluation against the background of the medical evidence which seems essentially to confirm that the plaintiff has suffered a substantial and significant Post-traumatic Stress Disorder, at least significantly so in the past, perhaps with other associated psychiatric or psychological conditions.
The Post-traumatic Stress Disorder has obviously been a serious one.
Nevertheless, I am also bound to say that even taking into account the fact that the plaintiff has had a severe and significant Post-traumatic Stress
Disorder, there are matters of concern that arise from his evidence and the way he has given that evidence.

The first point that I make is that there are a number of inconsistencies, in relation to what has happened to the plaintiff in the past. In some cases there has been an overstatement of past events. In other cases what he has said to the doctors has been an understatement of his position, particularly in relation to his position prior to December 1992. In some cases, I consider that there has been some embellishment in some of the things that the plaintiff has said to the doctors. I would also conclude that having seen and heard the plaintiff, from time to time he has made self-serving statements to the doctors and some of those self-serving statements I do not believe have been borne out by the evidence in this case. He has even given evidence in this case in relation to matters which I do not consider one should accept in their entirety.

The point that I make is that I have had the benefit of really being put into a situation where in some ways the complete picture in relation to this man has been presented to me, whereas in the case of some of the doctors, they have not obtained the full picture. Nevertheless, I also bring into account the fact that because of the plaintiff's severe Post-traumatic Stress Disorder it is equally true to say that caution must be exercised on my part, lest an injustice be done to the plaintiff in relation to my evaluation of him by reference to his demeanour in the witness box.

One must remember that in many respects the medical evidence is perhaps one way and it would be wrong for me to ignore such, but nevertheless, it is appropriate for me to say that medical opinions are there to assist me, not to bind me. To the extent that some of the medical opinions are perhaps based upon incomplete information or inaccurate information, there is no necessity for me to act upon them. To the extent that perhaps there are matters expressed in some of the medical reports which do not coincide with my own evaluation of the plaintiff based upon seeing him and hearing him for almost eight hours, then I am equally entitled to reject medical views or accept them in a qualified way.

The next matter that I should comment upon is that in a case of this nature the plethora of medical reports, both from psychologists and psychiatrists, really, instead of necessarily assisting in resolution of the plaintiff's case, has complicated the presentation of the plaintiff's case because it is clear that a review of the medical reports shows from time to time inconsistencies in complaints and allegations, either embellishment or, alternatively, inaccurate statements on the part of the plaintiff.

But again I take into account that some of these matters are in fact explicable and attributable to his condition and the existence of the severe
Post-traumatic Stress Disorder. Nevertheless, some of the matters are not.

Now, it is appropriate for me, therefore, to just point to some of these matters. In November of 1995 Dr Sime described the plaintiff as presenting as an "epitome of misery". He did not so present to me in June of 1996 as being a person who answered that description. In August of 1994, according to the
Riverina Health Services, he appeared to be very distressed and angry. He did not appear to be very distressed and angry, despite being under careful cross- examination over an extensive period of time by counsel for the defendant.

There is a claim by the plaintiff in the instant case that he has been socially isolated. I do not believe that that this fully represents the true story. The claim that he cannot stand, for example, being around people, a comment made by the plaintiff to Dr Kaplan in February of 1996 is inconsistent both with my impression of him, what I have seen of him, and his evidence about his activities in recent times, including going to clubs both in Wodonga and in Albury, as well as driving around the state. He did not present to me as being extremely distressed as was his appearance to Dr Munroe in February of 1996. In March of 1996, according to Dr Bryant, a psychologist, he presented as a very agitated man who displayed marked hostility. That is not how he presented to me. Nevertheless, all these things said, whilst they are to be taken into account and I do take them into account in terms of present and future assessment, nevertheless do not refute the fact that in the past the plaintiff has suffered a severe Post-traumatic Stress Disorder and he continues to suffer from that.

Again, it is appropriate for me, in the evaluation of damages to take into account the possibility of suicide, to take into account any vulnerability or pre-disposition that has arisen in relation to the evidence which has been ventilated during the course of submissions by counsel. It is also appropriate for me to have regard to the possibilities and to the probabilities. It is appropriate for me to have regard to the fact that when this litigation has concluded, there will be perhaps a different picture arising in relation to the future. Indeed, I believe that once the litigation is over, for reasons that have been mentioned by Dr Whitaker in a recent report, that there will be a different future for this man to the future that he has had in the past.

The reason why I have mentioned these general matters at this point of time is to indicate that I have taken all of these things into account, as I should do, in terms of the evaluation of the plaintiff's claim for damages. I have mentioned the issue of suicide at this point of time not only because it reflects a distinct possibility in the future, although it might be a lessened possibility once the litigation is resolved, but also to further explain why I said at the beginning of my judgment, there are good and valid grounds in this particular case for delivering an ex tempore judgment rather than reserving and then having to analyse out the large volume of evidence and to give a judgment in due course. I wish to highlight that fact because it seems to me that in the circumstances of this case not only is a judgment on liability required promptly, so is a judgment in relation to the assessment of damages also required promptly and particularly so in the light of Dr Whitaker's report of 7 March 1996.

Courts do not have to accept expert opinions simply because they are voiced by persons with expert qualifications, and doctors cannot self determine and impose their views because they are experts. I am entitled to have regard to the assistance provided by them. I am also entitled to have regard to my evaluation of the plaintiff in terms of determining to what extent some or all of the doctors' opinions are supported, or accurately portray either the present situation or the situation as regards the future.

All of these things said, I now turn back to consider the approach to damages.
The plaintiff was born on 5 October 1954. He joined the employ of the defendant in 1971. The plaintiff has claimed to the various doctors that before the accident occurred in December 1992, he was "a pretty easy going man" and went about his life and enjoyed his work. However, some of the evidence suggests that perhaps he was not quite the easy going man that he claimed to be. To the extent that he has given a history to the doctors about what his situation was like before 4 December 1992 I consider it has been a little coloured.

It is known from the psychologists report of Mr Mangioni that for a period of time prior to the accident that in relation to his dealings with his defacto that there had been apparently some problems and some difficulties. In mid
January 1993 it appears as though the then defacto wife gave a history that whilst the plaintiff's psychological state had deteriorated since the incident there had been a long history of problems with insecurity, alcohol use, irritability, aggressiveness. I am not sure that some of the psychiatrists or indeed all of psychiatrists have given due and full weight to that particular type of history, which I believe has been established on the evidence. I believe that the plaintiff has in respect of his past at least in terms of his dealings with his defacto wife endeavoured to play down the relationship and seek to contribute the whole of its deterioration or a substantial part thereof to the accident and its psychological and psychiatric consequences.

There is evidence that prior to 1992 the plaintiff was talking to his station master about problems that he was having with his defacto. There is evidence that has been given before me that there was an alleged assault, giving rise to a charge against the plaintiff in connection with his relationship with his defacto. He used the most obscene language to describe his relationship with his defacto in March 1992. I do not propose to repeat what was said, but it is appropriate to say that what he did say over the telephone in terms of describing the defacto gave rise to some disciplinary charges against him in
March 1992.

As regards the plaintiff being an easy going man, it is a matter I believe that has to be seen in the context, inter alia, of what I have just said.
Further, as regards his claim in relation to his employment situation, he had certainly a long distinguished employment record prior to the accident, a long period of service of 22 years, it is also true to say that there were some minor disciplinary matters particularly arising in the early part of 1992 and in October and November 1992. There were clearly financial problems as and between the plaintiff and his defacto giving rise to considerable difficulties these were matters upon which the doctor did not give full proper history. I note, for example, in February 1993 see Exhibit 2 that the plaintiff was making application for payment of his 1993 holidays and public holidays because of a parting of company in his defacto relationship, allegedly due to over spending or non paying of accounts by his defacto. He said in that letter he had lost his car to this person. He still had a bills coming in unpaid and he wanted help. That was in February 1993, being some three months after the subject accident. Clearly, in my view, some of these matters to which I have made reference were not the subject of history to the various psychiatrists or psychologists or alternatively had been understated, omitted or under- emphasised. In other areas he has over-emphasised matters.

Nevertheless, when one looks at the contemporaneous records including the materials from Dr Whitaker in June 1993 from Miss Slade in 1993, there can be little or no doubt that very early after the subject accident the signs and symptoms of a significant and serious Post-traumatic Stress Disorder was setting in and subsequently became well and truly established. In general terms I would act upon the evidence of Dr Whitaker in relation to the establishment of this Post-traumatic Stress Disorder. In general terms, where there is conflict between the views of Dr Whitaker and some of the other specialists - perhaps too many in this case have been brought in - I would prefer in general terms the views of Dr Whitaker. However, Dr Whitaker's views nevertheless have to be seen in the context of his not being fully privy to some of the information which I have received in a considerable body of evidence. I have also been in the position of virtually having a complete picture, based upon a considerable amount of material, from a lot of different sources.

The other matter that it is appropriate for me to mention is that prior to the accident the plaintiff did enjoy quite an active social life. Nevertheless, I am also satisfied that this has been seriously diminished in consequence of this accident. I am prepared to accept that the plaintiff at this point of time or at least in the past more significantly, has been to a significant extent socially handicapped in relation to his dealings with others. However,
I am not prepared to accept at this point of time his isolation from human beings, which he has put to the various doctors. I have had the benefit of hearing his evidence and cross-examination and of seeing and hearing him in the witness box. I think his isolation at the moment despite his significant and serious Post-traumatic Stress Disorder is not to the same extent which the plaintiff has claimed has been the situation in the past whilst not discounting what he has necessarily said as to the situation in the past or at least prior to the beginning of this year.

I am also satisfied that in consequence of the Post-traumatic Stress Disorder the plaintiff on several occasions has attempted suicide and has a suicidal ideology of the type that has been discussed by Dr Whitaker. I am further satisfied that the plaintiff does, in fact, have serious social handicaps and restrictions on lifestyle and that even when this litigation is put behind him there will be these major restrictions in terms of enjoyment of life and enjoyment of the amenities of life that will remain significantly lost to him in the future.

One has to be careful that injustice is not caused to the plaintiff because the injuries are not physical and perhaps capable of being seen. Damage to the mind on any view can be just as serious as damage to the body. The assessment of damages when there is damage to the body is perhaps a more simple task than when one is concerned with damage to the mind, or psyche of a human being.
There is no doubt that this man has suffered devastating consequences in the past in relation to a Post-traumatic Stress Disorder. There is no doubt that there will be significant problems that will confront this man in the future.
I have factored into the assessment of damages here the things that I have mentioned earlier and brought such into account in terms of evaluating damages in this case.

I also accept that the incident itself did cause a considerable further deterioration in the relationship between the plaintiff and his defacto, although it appears they do have perhaps a relationship now of some friendship, albeit not of a sexual nature. I also understand that he perhaps has been subject to feelings of such magnitude that he has felt that he could not pursue life any further, and has attempted suicide and has also consumed alcohol to a far greater extent than he has done previously. I also take into account that he has become more withdrawn and is more socially isolated. But,
I am not prepared to accept that it is to the extent that he has claimed to the respective doctors.

It is appropriate for me to say that very early in the piece the plaintiff became totally incapacitated and lost his job with the Railways. He has not worked since 20 April 1993. As regards the significance of his condition he was terminated in his employment in July 1993 and medically boarded out of the railway service. There is no disputing in the instant case that the plaintiff has been on payments of compensation and for total incapacity since 27 April , thus for a period in excess of three years. Even leaving aside the view that the evidence would support total incapacity - since then an issue that I will return to in due course - as I would understand the law, the payments of weekly compensation as and/or total incapacity on a voluntary basis by the defendant in a case such as the present can still constitute and be treated admissions in relation to the subject of total incapacity. So much does not appear to be, as I would understand it, really in dispute.

As regards to the future, I have regard to the fact that I have seen him and heard him. I think that there is as at this point of time some embellishment or exaggeration in his complaints. But that is not altogether surprising, bearing in mind he has had a serious Post-traumatic Stress Disorder. The sooner this case is finalised for this man the better.

There is the evidence which I accept that the plaintiff is going without medication, but there is I believe a need for ongoing treatment in the future, but not to the extent that has been claimed. I accept that the plaintiff perhaps does not want to go back onto medication. I do not accept that as and from now into the future the plaintiff will remain totally incapacitated for work. I do not accept the plaintiff's self assessment of himself in relation to his future capacity to earn. I also accept that he really does want to be free of weekly payments of compensation and get on with life. Or, to put it another way, based upon his history to Dr Whitaker, he wants to be able to move out and put roots down and start a new life away from the social pressures of the last three years, because he believes that that is his hope for life and sanity. There is much to be said for that view. I believe that despite all that has occurred and his serious Post-traumatic Stress Disorder that there is life ahead of him both in terms of economic life and other forms of life. The risk of suicide has to be taken into account in terms of evaluating the matter. It has also to be taken into account, if one is to assess the loss of earning capacity in the future.

I also take into account the matters referred to in numbers one to seven in Dr
Whitaker's report (at p 3), discounting, in my view, the claim that there is, in fact, the solitary lifestyle and the level that Dr Whitaker has observed, and discounting the very high level hostility, but accepting at the same time that the persisting stress from the involvement in litigation which will hopefully disappear in consequence of this particular judgment.

Finality will enable this man to start again. However, finality will not restore his total capacity to earn and I am satisfied that he will be left with a significant partial incapacity in the future. I am also satisfied that with this litigation finalised and after this judgment, the plaintiff will still be left with a significant Post-traumatic Stress Disorder with its attendant problems but these perhaps will not be of the same magnitude as they have been in the past. Although finality will perhaps bring about a new future for this man, he will continue to suffer from a serious Post-traumatic Stress
Disorder with all the problems and difficulties associated with it, and a capacity to earn.

In reaching these views, I have had regard to the fact that I consider there has been some inaccurate information given to the doctors, and that I have had the opportunity of evaluating the plaintiff as well against the background, however, and I remind myself, of his suffering from a severe Post-traumatic
Stress Disorder.

As I said at the beginning of this judgment, it has been agreed between the parties that I do not have to make calculations at the end to give effect to the pre-dispositions, the vulnerabilities, the questions that might arise from
Wilson versus Peisley <case>; <case>; [(1990) 169 CLR 638.] Nor is it necessary for me to do finite calculations in terms of the possibilities and probabilities arising from this evidence, including the possibilities and probabilities arising from any vulnerability due to pre- existing stresses that existed in this man and of the type discussed in some of the medical evidence. I have brought all these things into account in terms of my evaluation of the evidence and in relation to the heads of damages that
I propose to award and the total amount that I propose to award.

I believe that after this case is over there will be also a period of total incapacity in terms of an inability to earn, but that will not be a total incapacity which will continue other than into the immediate foreseeable future. I consider there will be a transition from total to partial capacity at some point of time. I bring these matters into account.

I also bring into account the fact that there will need to be ongoing consultations with the doctors but bearing in mind that with a new lifestyle I believe that the attendances required upon the health services will be reduced very dramatically. There is no particular doctor who has given evidence as to what regime of psychiatric care is required in the future. As regards the future, I give considerable weight to the need for ongoing treatment. I give considerable weight and have particular regard to the views on Dr Whitaker.

I am bound to say that I am impressed with a submission that at least during the course of the giving of evidence before me I did not obtain the impression that the plaintiff was either a person who was living in a state of complete isolation; in fact, I was left with the impression that he was articulate under stress, well-controlled and well-presented. Nevertheless, those matters need to be seen against the background of a man who has a significant Post- traumatic Stress Disorder. I do not accept the submission of the defendant that there has been a failure on the part of the plaintiff to mitigate his damages or that there has been a failure to comply with the provisions of s
L of the Act.

As regards the submission of the defendant that it is not appropriate that interest be awarded pursuant to <case> it is appropriate for me to observe that no such claim for interest has been made. I accept, however, the defendant's submissions in relation to what I believe to be a capacity to work in the future, although his capacity to work will be significantly reduced.

I have some reservations about acting upon the plaintiff's own self assessment that he would not be able to tolerate the discipline of working under any particular person and that such would provide an explanation for an inability to be able to work either in the labouring area or with others. I do not believe that in the future the situation will be one where the plaintiff is or will be unable to work with others. The plaintiff apparently no longer takes medication. There is nothing to suggest that such has been prescribed or recommended by Dr Whitaker.

I believe that I have said enough to indicate in these ex tempore reasons, which I believe have been required urgently, to now turn to the respective heads of damages and apply the reasons to such heads of damages.

I propose to allow by way of damages for what is called non-economic loss a percentage of a most extreme case represented by the sum of $130,000.

In relation to past economic loss I consider that, first of all, there is no basis for concluding that the defendant has failed to mitigate or indeed failed to mitigate in any respect. I propose to allow the sum of $115,308.57 as representing the past economic loss for the period and reflecting a past weekly loss of $680 net per fortnight from 27 April 1993 to 6 June 1996.

Giving effect to my views in relation to future loss of earning capacity inter alia reflecting my assessment of the plaintiff I propose to allow the sum of $200,000 as being the amount to be awarded for future economic loss. That gives effect to the reasons that I have indicated earlier and my assessment of the future for this man. It gives effect to my view that the future will not be one of total incapacity and to my view that there will be perhaps an initial period of total incapacity but after that a revived partial capacity to earn. The sum of $200,000 is accordingly awarded.

For Fox versus Wood I propose to allow the agreed sum of $20,000. For superannuation loss, I propose to award the sum of $15,000. This appears to be an agreed sum. Medical expenses in relation to the past pursuant to <case> of the Act are satisfied in the sum of $16,625.50 which is an agreed amount.

The past treatment perhaps provides an uncertain guide into the future as to what will be the cost of medical treatments in the future. The evidence in relation to that matter is somewhat vague and uncertain. Dr Taylor had seen the plaintiff in mid 1995 on two occasions. His evidence I believe provides an unreliable guide to the future needs of this plaintiff. Dr Whitaker is really silent as regards the future in terms of recurring need. It is agreed between the parties that the amount to be allowed for medical treatment in the future perhaps involves very much a matter of value judgment and so it does.

Giving effect to my reasons, I propose to allow the sum of $18,000 by way of damages to be awarded for future medical and other treatment. In arriving at that figure, I have applied and given effect not only to value judgment but also to the need to apply the statutory provisions of the Act. I note that s and <case> payments are agreed in the sum of $92,316. For all of these reasons, it seems to me that the appropriate verdict for the plaintiff will be $514,934.07, and the judgment for the plaintiff will be in the sum of $405,993.07. Defendant to pay the plaintiff's costs to be agreed or assessed.
Exhibits may be returned.

In this case I propose to grant a stay of proceedings in respect of one half the judgment for 28 days.
 * * * 
