

Regina versus S A Johnson; Regina versus J L Vidler [1996] NSWSC 327 (2 August 1996) 
REGINA versus Stephen Andrew JOHNSON REGINA versus James Leslie VIDLER /95 70200/95 
FRIDAY 2 August 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES CRIMINAL DIVISION 
ABADEE J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: I have before me two applications for separate trials in respect of offences to be charged on indictment against the applicant. Stephen Andrew Johnson and James Leslie Vidler are to be indicted upon several counts in a trial which is fixed for hearing in the Supreme Court at Lismore on 16 September 1996. The Crown proposes to indict on the one indictment Johnson and Vidler in respect of one count of attempted murder, one count of malicious wounding with intent, one count of assault with intent to rob with wounding and one count of robbery with wounding.

An application for a separate trial was initially presented by and on behalf of Mr Johnson. Subsequently Mr Vidler presented his own separate application.

It appears that Johnson, together with the co-accused Vidler, were charged on April 1994 with several counts. Each of the co-accused in their records of interview accused the other of committing the alleged offences.

The victim, one David Wright, has, according to his statement dated 2 May , been unable to identify his assailant. There were no, as I understand it, other witnesses to the actual attack itself. Each of the accused, Johnson and Vidler, in their statements to the police accused the other of committing the offences. One Karen McMillan, the girlfriend or former girlfriend of
Vidler, it is contemplated will give evidence that the a co-accused Vidler admitted to his having committed, along with Johnson, the alleged offences.

As I understand it, there are to be a number of Crown witnesses, all of whom come from the Lismore area. It is said that apart from the evidence given in each of the co-accused's statements and the evidence given in the statement of
Karen McMillan, the evidence of the Crown witnesses relates only to events before and after the alleged offences occurred and would require little or no cross-examination.

In the Crown statement filed in the matter it is said that the case to be advanced against both accused will not be a circumstantial one, albeit the
Crown is said not able to prove which accused stabbed the victim. The Crown contends that the one who did not was a principal in the second degree (and present aiding and abetting) and that in such circumstances the Crown will contend that such person should be liable as principal in the second degree.

Indeed, as I understand the submissions advanced on behalf of the Crown, the
Crown case is and will be that the victim was attacked by the two accused and that during the attack one or both of them stabbed him a number of times intending to kill him. That intention, it is said, is capable of being inferred from the nature of the weapon and the number of and position of the wounds.

The Crown accepts that it is unable to demonstrate which one or whether both wounded the victim. It says that each of the accused has admitted being present and each has said that the other used the knife to stab the victim.

The Crown, as I have said, has indicated that if the act of wounding the victim was done by only one of the accused, then it would be asserting that the other was guilty as being a principal in the second degree; that the accused either had the intention to kill or was aware that the man with the knife was using it and was doing so with such an intention to kill.

The Crown submits that in the instant case the evidence against each accused is substantially the same. It claims that two witnesses placed the two accused together at the scene of the crime shortly before its commission and that the evidence of the accused Vidler's involvement are his admissions to the police and to Karen McMillan. The Crown says that in relation to the evidence of
Karen McMillan, that basically will be to the effect that the accused, Vidler, told her broadly the same story that he had told the police. The evidence, it is said, of Johnson's involvement are his admissions to the police each accused blames the other for the act of wounding the victim.

It appears that the Crown case will be that on Saturday, 23 April Det Bassett and other police went to the home of the accused, Vidler. It was suggested to
Vidler that he might be able to assist police with their inquiries in relation to the assault and he replied: "Yeah, I can but he pulled a knife... when someone... pulls a knife I retaliate." 
He was cautioned. He told police that it was self defence. He denied stabbing the victim. He said that Stephen Johnson was with him but he did not think that Steve had stabbed the victim. He said that they left the victim at the side of the hotel and that someone else must have come along and stabbed him.

Later at the police station after Vidler was charged, Det Bassett received a message that Vidler wished to see him. He allegedly spoke to Bassett and said that the accused Johnson had grabbed the victim near some sign posts at the end of the bridge and had dragged him down to the hotel. The victim had pulled out a knife and Vidler had kicked it out of his hand. He said that the three of them had fought all the way to the barbecue area and that it was Johnson who had found the knife and stabbed the victim.

Later it appears that Det Shuttleworth and other police attended the accused
Stephen Johnson's home at Lismore. Initially he said that he could not remember the previous night. Then he told Det Shuttleworth about some of his movements on the previous night, denied having the knife but could not remember much else.

After being charged it appears that the accused, Johnson, allegedly told Det
Shuttleworth that he had not been telling the truth, that the victim had pulled the knife and Vidler had kicked it out of his hand, that they had both kicked the victim and that Vidler had the knife and stabbed the victim under the arm. Johnson then alleged he dragged the victim down the back.

According to Ms Karen McMillan, she said that Vidler had told her of having kicked the victim in the head and body; of going off to find some beers that had been stashed; that when he returned he saw Johnson straddled over the victim stabbing him.

On behalf of the applicant, Johnson, it is submitted that the principles in relation to the ordering of separate trials as discussed in the decision of
Regina versus Middas (unreported, 27 March 1991) and applied by the Court of
Criminal Appeal in Regina versus Baartman (unreported, 6 October 1994) when applied to the facts of the case warrant, at least in the case of Johnson, a separate trial being ordered. Of course, if a separate trial is ordered in relation to Johnson it would necessarily follow that there would be a separate trial in the case of Vidler.

It is appropriate that I should advert to one other matter at this point of time. It is said from the Bar table that both Vidler and Johnson contemplate making what are said to be dock statements at their trials. Whether that, of course, occurs is another matter. It is also said from the Bar table on behalf of Vidler that it is contemplated that any dock statement made by Vidler would involve an allegation inter alia that it was Johnson who did the stabbing. I mention those matters in passing.

The question that arises in this instant case is whether the principals, and there are three adverted to by Hunt J in Middas, warrant me ordering, as a matter of discretion, the separate trial in the case of Johnson.

It should be said at this point of time that during the course of submissions
I indicated that I was, to say the least, unimpressed with the application brought on behalf of Vidler. However if I ultimately were to conclude that
Johnson's application was to be successful, it would necessarily follow that the result sought by Vidler would be achieved in any event. However, it seems to me in this case that the real question for consideration is whether in the circumstances of this matter Johnson's application should succeed.

Addressing each of the three principles adverted to in Middas' case Mr
Crawford-Fish on behalf of the accused, Johnson, has submitted a number of matters. He argued that each ground considered in Middas has been met.

First of all he submits that the Crown case against the accused Johnson is significantly different and weaker to that admissible against the accused
Vidler. This is a matter, of course, that has been contested by the Crown. In support of the argument to which I have just adverted, Mr Crawford-Fish points out that the Crown case against Vidler includes a statement made by Det
Bassett in which he says Vidler admits to committing the alleged offences with
Johnson and that the Crown case against Vidler also includes the sworn evidence of Karen McMillan in which she also says that Vidler admits to committing the alleged offences.

On the other hand it is said that the Crown case against Johnson is weaker than that against the co-accused Vidler because it did not include any interview with Johnson containing clear admissions by him. It was submitted that he simply said, according to Det Shuttleworth's statement, that he remembered only kicking the victim and that there was no other admissible evidence against Johnson, particularly in relation to the charge of attempted murder. Then it is submitted that the evidence against Vidler contains highly prejudicial material, although not admissible against Johnson.

Mr Crawford-Fish again in relation to the comparative strength and weaknesses of the cases, points to the fact that Det Bassett said in his statement that
Vidler had accused Johnson of kicking the victim, of having the knife and being covered in blood. Clearly, many of these matters relied upon by Mr
Crawford-Fish would not be admissible against Johnson.

Then it is submitted that there is a real risk that the weaker Crown case against Johnson will be made immeasurably stronger by reason of the prejudicial material. Mr Crawford-Fish points to the argument that the jury, when considering whether to draw an inference to support the Crown case, from
Johnson's statement, in particular his not remembering the night, may well be influenced, even subconsciously, to draw such an inference from the inadmissible statements by the co-accused Vidler.

This question of perhaps the jury subconsciously doing something is a matter adverted to by Deane J in his judgment in the case of Webb versus The Queen <case>; [181 CLR 41](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=181%20CLR%2041 "View LawCiteRecord" ) at 80, particularly in the context that popular notions of the need for consistent verdicts may tend to subvert the requirement of proof beyond reasonable ground.

He submits that there is a real risk that there are areas in a joint trial approach which would result in a positive injustice to the applicant Johnson.
He then submits that such prejudice outweighs the public interest in the efficient dispatch of the trial, the saving of costs and avoidance of any inconvenience to witnesses by having to attend a number of trials.

It seems to me that on the material put before me the two trials running back to back would both be completed in the ordinary course of events in the total period of two weeks. In other words, as I understand the way the submissions have been put, separate trials would be unlikely to extend, at least to any significant degree, the time that would need to be devoted to the hearing of the matter if the matter was to proceed by way of a joint trial.

Mr Crawford-Fish submits that the inconvenience to witnesses and the cost of what he says are relatively short trials does not outweigh the risk of prejudice to the applicant that would arise in there being one joint trial.

My mind has fluctuated during the course of hearing submissions in relation to whether there should be a joint trial or separate trials of these two matters.
However, I consider in the circumstances, at the end of the day I should conclude that Mr Crawford-Fish has made good his application, essentially for the reason advanced by him. I do understand well the submission of the Crown that the evidence against each of the accused is substantially the same, but I do feel at this point of time that the Crown case against Mr Vidler is a somewhat stronger case than the Crown case as and against the accused Mr
Johnson. It seems to me then, applying the principles in Middas, that I should order a separate trial in respect of the trial of the accused Mr Johnson.

The formal order of the Court therefore is that in respect of the application by Mr Crawford-Fish, the accused Johnson should be granted a separate trial to his co-accused James Leslie Vidler.

I should proceed, in dealing with the motion brought by Vidler, to formally indicate that essentially for reasons given I do not consider that a case has been made out by Vidler for a separate trial, having regard to the applicability of the principles in the cases to which I have referred. and that the application for a separate trial should be formally dismissed. I make an order that the exhibits be returned.
 * * * 
