

Kang versus Kwan and 2 Ors [2001] NSWSC 624 (13 July 2001) 
Last Updated: 11 August 2001 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: Kang versus Kwan & 2 Ors <case> revised - 27/07/2001  
CURRENT JURISDICTION: Equity  
FILE NUMBER(S): 3510/99  
HEARING DATE{S): 13/07/01  
JUDGMENT DATE: 13/07/2001  
PARTIES: 
Wei Ling Kang (Plaintiff) 
Christopher Anthony Kwan (First Defendant) 
Eileen Woowin (Second Defendant) 
Kate Woowin (Third Defendant)  
JUDGMENT OF: Santow J  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
M A Robinson (Plaintiff) 
M Einfield, QC (First Defendant)  
SOLICITORS: 
Legal Aid Commission (Plaintiff) 
Verekers (First Defendant)  
CATCHWORDS: 
PROPERTY -- Caveat -- Caveatable interest -- No proper description of an available caveatable interest -- Possibility of amending caveat.  
ACTS CITED:  [Real Property Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/) s74K; s74L  
DECISION: 
Plaintiff's Notice of Motion dismissed with costs.  
JUDGMENT:  
REVISED -- 27 July, 2001 
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
IN EQUITY  
SANTOW J  
No. 3510/99 
Wei Ling Kang 
Plaintiff 
Christopher Anthony Kwan 
First Defendant 
Eileen Woowin 
Second Defendant 
Kate Woowin 
Third Defendant  
JUDGMENT -- ex tempore  July 2001  
INTRODUCTION  Before me is an application by Notice of Motion by the Plaintiff to extend the operation of a caveat in relation to what I will call the "Castle Cove property" belonging to the First Defendant.  It arises in the context of litigation presently part heard before me. The
First Defendant presses upon me that it is relevant that that litigation is brought by a legally assisted Plaintiff; that among the discretionary matters
I ought to consider, if otherwise the First Defendant fails in demonstrating no caveatable interest, that such Notice of Motion will give rise to no separate action of the kind allowing for a fresh capacity to permit of a cost order against the Plaintiff. This is because, if the Plaintiff suffers a cost order in the main proceedings, it would use up the $15,000 cost recovery limit for legally assisted parties.  The issues start with whether the Plaintiff has a caveatable interest of the kind necessary to ground a caveat, that is to say, an equitable interest in land. Related to that issue is whether the caveat correctly identifies such a caveatable interest. That leaves open the possibility that the Court might permit amendment of the caveat where there is under s74L of the [Real
Property Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/) a merely technical deficiency in the description of the interest claimed.  In that regard, I should also note s74K of the [Real Property
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/), not relied upon by the Plaintiff, in his Originating Process or written submissions. In
Beca Developments Pty Ltd versus Idameneo (No. 92) Pty Ltd [(1990) 21 FamLR ]
at 471-2 Clarke JA eschewed an excessively technical approach, following the introduction of ss74K and 74L. Subsequently in The Marriage of Stevens [(1991) 15 FamLR 51] at 52-3 Cohen J expressed the view that the power to extend may permit an extension wherever the caveator's claim may have substance; moreover the Court "probably" has power to amend the caveat "to permit it to claim any caveatable interest which the Court is satisfied the caveator holds", though it not be that originally delineated in the caveat.  That decision was at odds with an earlier decision of McLelland J in Depsun
Pty Ltd versus Tahore Holdings Pty Ltd (1990) ANZConvRep 334 where it was doubted that there was power to allow amendment of the estate claimed in the caveat.  All of this however falls by the wayside when it is appreciated that the only amendment the Plaintiff seeks is a more apposite description of the estate or interest claimed, so as to add to "orders made" the words "including agreement made". This is so as to encompass a supposed agreement said to have been acknowledged by both parties either explicitly or implicitly. That agreement was said to have been of an at least sufficiently arguable entitlement to an interest in the nature of an equitable lien over a fund there identified derived from the sale of other property. This was said somehow to have transmogrified into an acknowledgment that there was some kind of interest in the Castle Cove property itself. It will be apparent from the orders that what the Judge at the end "noted" falls far short of any acknowledgment by the First Defendant of any equitable interest in the Castle
Cove property.  I quote below what was noted by the Judge:  "The agreement between the Plaintiff and First Defendant that:  the Orders and agreements embodied herein are made in resolution of the
Plaintiff's claim (which the First Defendant disputes) to an entitlement to orders in the nature of Mareva injunctions or orders and/or asset preservation orders against the First Defendant in and in connection with these proceedings,  the Plaintiff acknowledges that, as and from 5 pm today, the First
Defendant shall be at liberty to apply to and for his own purposes or as he may direct the monies (the "Fund") (or any part thereof) representing or forming part of the monies paid to him at the direction of the Defendant Kate
Woowin in July 1999, the subject of Orders made by Herron DCJ in August 1999 and by Simos J on 28 October 1999,  neither the acknowledgment in (b) nor any other provision hereof shall, or shall be taken to, prejudice the Plaintiff's right to contend that he acquired an entitlement to an interest in the nature of an equitable lien over the Fund which entitlement the First Defendant denies), or an entitlement enforceable against the First Defendant in person in equity to the extent that the
Plaintiff may establish an entitlement to such a lien,  the orders and agreements embodied in these Short Minutes are made upon the basis that the First Defendant represents and warrants to the Plaintiff that he is presently entitled at law and in equity to a 55/100 share in the
Property and that his interest in the Property is unencumbered.  the Plaintiff consents to a copy of these Short Minutes, and the orders made by reference to these Short Minutes, being communicated to Hang Seng Bank
Limited with a view to moneys in the account numbered 401-01-2273 with that company being released to the First Defendant or as he may direct;"  It will be readily appreciated that what is there agreed could not, even taken at its highest, amount to any agreement by the First Defendant of even an arguable interest in the Castle Cove property, albeit that if the
Plaintiff's current proceedings are successful such an interest might then be made out. What is there referred to relates to a fund of money, not to the
Castle Cove property, albeit connected to litigation concerning that property.  The difficulty for the Plaintiff is that the amendment to the caveat which he really needs would be one which was cross-referenced to paragraph 29 and perhaps 50 and also paragraph 55, of the Amended Statement of Claim filed 10
November 2000 from which I quote:  "(a) paragraph 29 (under the heading "The Castlecrag Property Subject to An
Equitable Charge")  '29. Accordingly, Mr Kang is entitled in equity to a charge, in an amount equal to the sum of $89,100.00 (pleaded in paragraph 6(a)(I) hereof) together with such interest as may be allowed by this Court, on the interest of
Christopher in the land known as 21 Cammeray Road, Castle Cove ("the
Substituted Property") which (as recorded in orders and notations made by
Simos J on 3 November 1999) represents the proceeds of the sale of the
Castlecrag Property paid to or at the direction of Christopher.'  paragraph 50 (under the heading "Alienations of Property Voidable")  '50. If (as Mr Kang seeks in these proceedings) the Mortgage and (to the extent it might be found to underlie the Mortgage) the Loan Agreement are set aside:  
Christopher will liable to account to Mr Kang, or as the Court may direct, for so much of the proceeds of the sale of the Castlecrag Property as were paid to him or at his direction (as pleaded and particularized in paragraph ) as might be necessary to satisfy the entitlements of Mr Kang under the
District Court Judgment; and  
Christopher will hold on trust for Mr Kang, or as the Court may direct, so much of the Substituted Property as represents for the purpose of these proceedings (as recorded in orders and notations made by Simos J on 3 November ) the proceeds of the sale of the Castlecrag Property paid to him, or at his direction, as may be necessary to satisfy the entitlements of Mr Kang under the District Court Judgment.'  paragraph 55 (the Relief Claimed)  'A DECLARATION that he is entitled to an equitable charge on the Substituted
Property for the sum of $89,100.00 (pleaded in paragraph 6(a)(I) hereof) together with such interest as may be allowed by this Court.'  But that was never the amendment sought. In proceedings of this kind it is inappropriate for the Court to deal with a hypothetical possibility that the caveat might be either so amended or a new one substituted.  
CONCLUSION  The Plaintiff has failed at the threshold in establishing a caveatable interest in the subject property such that I do not need to deal with discretionary matters. It will be clear that I have not pre-empted any aspect of the Plaintiff's case based upon its Amended Statement of Claim.  Should the Plaintiff choose to file a fresh caveat which appropriately identifies the relevant paragraphs of the Statement of Claim, the issues of caveatable interest and discretionary issues will again arise. Without pre- empting the latter, the First Defendant can be taken to be aware of how seriously the Court would regard any breach of the existing Mareva orders which themselves preclude disposal of the Castle Cove property though being incapable from that fact alone of grounding a caveatable interest; see Meagher
Gummow and Lehane "Equity Doctrines and Remedies" (Butterworths, 1992) at -10. I would not wish to join the Gadarene Swine referred to by the learned authors by adding to the scope of Mareva injunctions by deeming them to give rise to an equitable interest in their property subject matter. Nor has either party invited me to do so.  
COSTS AND ORDERS  I dismiss the Plaintiff's Notice of Motion with costs.  
LAST UPDATED: 27/07/2001 * * * 
