

Ashington Holdings Pty Ltd versus Wipema Services Pty Ltd (No. 2) Matter No /98 [1998] NSWSC 414 (4 September 1998) 
Last Updated: 7 October 1998 
ASHINGTON HOLDINGS PTY LTD versus WIPEMA SERVICES PTY LTD (NO. 2) /98 September 1998 
Young J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is the second stage of specific performance proceedings between the landlord of a floor of a city building and its tenant. 
On 7 February 1992, the plaintiff's predecessor in title and the defendant entered into Lease E907098V (the former lease) over land described as Volume Folio 143 now FI 1/125121 part only being Level 7, 16 O'Connell Street,
Sydney. The lease was for six years from 1 March 1992 to 28 February 1998.

The lease contained a clause permitting the lessee to renew which in my reasons for judgment on 23 April 1998 I held that the tenant had exercised, even though the tenant was now reluctant to take a new lease. I granted the landlord specific performance. Under the option clause, the lessor was to grant a new lease "of the demised premises ... on the following conditions:- 
The covenants conditions and restrictions of the Lease for the said further term shall be the same as in this Lease with the exception that ..." 
The following significant events happened after the exercise of the option: November 1996 a Strata Plan 55932 was registered in respect of the subject property with the consent of the tenant (the consent which is annexure "I" to the affidavit of S D Andrews is undated).
 February 1998 the summons in the present proceedings was filed.
 April 1998 judgment as to liability.
 May 1998 furnishing of new lease by landlord to tenant for execution.

In my reasons for judgment of 23 April 1998, I said that the landlord was entitled to specific performance as a result of the tenant's exercise of the option, but that I could foresee a problem for the landlord in submitting a lease that would comply with its obligations under the option to renew clause.
Mr Mark Ashhurst of counsel for the plaintiff, said that that would be no problem so the matter was stood over to see whether that was in fact correct.
This tranche of the proceedings involves determining whether in all the circumstances the landlord has complied with its obligations.

The case was argued before me on a number of different juristic bases.
Although each head of argument raised the same factual question, it was put that I needed to consider the substantive question in the light of the following issues:- 
A. Does the new lease comply with clause 20 of the former lease at least sufficiently and essentially? 
B. The principle of mutuality.

C. Frustration.

D. The principles as to when something is void for uncertainty.

E. Impossibility of performance.

F. Repudiation.

G. Various discretionary defences.

I have also got to consider the cross claim filed on 30 March 1998.

I am dealing with the new lease that has been submitted by the landlord on the basis that it is the best lease that it could ever proffer so that there is no point in giving any leave to amend the form submitted unless, of course, there is just some very minor matter which can easily be cured. The matter is really before me on the basis that this is the final round of the proceedings.

The new lease submitted is verbally identical with the former lease with two exceptions, (a) those parts of the former lease which clause 20 authorised to be omitted from the new lease; and (b) the description of the demised premises has changed from being part of Certificate of Title that covered the whole site to Lot [8 SP 55932.] 
Physically, the area used by the tenant is the same. However, there are two provisos to this. The first is that the boundaries of the lot are the internal walls of Level 7 rather than the whole of Level 7 of the building, and the rights of the owners' corporation do affect the use of some part of the leased area. In this connection I should also note that it is an admitted fact for the present proceedings "that all pipes, wires, cables or ducts providing water, sewerage, electricity, telephone and other services to Lot [8 SP ] (other than air conditioning) enter that lot from common property of the strata scheme." 
Mr Ashhurst's essential proposition is that so long as the verbiage of the new lease is the same as the former lease, the landlord has complied with its obligations under the option to renew clause and it is immaterial that the operation of those clauses may be different because of the strata titles legislation or otherwise.

Mr Ashhurst relies on the decision of the High Court in Firth versus Halloran <case>; [(1926) 38 CLR 261] to support that proposition. Two initial things should be said about Firth's case, the first is that in so far as it deals with the doctrine of frustration qua leases it has been overruled by the later High Court decision in The
Progressive Mailing House Pty Ltd versus Tabali Pty Ltd <case>; [(1985) 157 CLR 17.] The second is that the majority of the Judges in the High
Court merely adopt the decision of the Full Court of the Supreme Court of NSW in the case in which Harvey, CJ in Eq gave the judgment of the Court reported as Halloran versus Firth <case>; [(1926) 26 SR 183.] 
The essential facts in Firth's case were that there was a lease for mining purposes in the Wollongong area made in 1913. In 1918, the NSW Government amended the law so as to vest coal in the NSW Government. Despite the resistance of the lessor at a mining warden's hearing, the warden recommended and the Government later carried out that recommendation to grant the coal mining rights to a third party. The tenant then stopped paying the full rent and the court had to decide whether he was justified in so doing. The court held that he was not because the legislation of 1918 had not affected the relationships of the parties to the extent that there was frustration or otherwise. Harvey, CJ in Eq to a great degree thought that the fact that compensation was given under the legislation to both lessor and lessee was a significant factor.

I do not consider, with respect, that Firth's case really takes the present case very far. The facts and circumstances of that case were quite different to those of the present case.

One of the stumbling blocks in the way of Mr Ashhurst's submissions is the decision of F Russell, J in Hollies Stores Ltd versus Timmis [[1921] 2 Ch ], to which I referred in my earlier reasons. In that case, there was an option to renew with the new lease to contain "clauses so far as possible identical with the terms hereof" including a covenant by three-named guarantors to guarantee the rent reserved. One of these guarantors died and a replacement of equal worth was offered. Notwithstanding the offer the learned Judge held that as one of the three guarantors had died, the option had become incapable of performance so the landlord could not be compelled to grant a different lease.

Mr Ashhurst tries to distinguish the Hollies case on the basis that the proposed lease was substantially different because one of the guarantors who were named in the lease was different. This is, of course, a point of distinction, but I am not convinced that it is a vital distinction.

On the other side, Mr M Skinner says that what one must look for is how the new lease operates in substance. It is clearly insufficient, he puts, for the proposed lease to use exactly the same words or a "literal production of the words of a covenant" or "mere repetition of the same words" as contained in the original lease. The quotations come from the judgment of Holland, J in
Mark Mayne Pty Ltd versus Suburban Centres Pty Ltd [[1976] 2 NSWLR 67], 71. That case in many respects was the reverse to the present case, but Holland, J had to consider whether a renewed lease was one "containing the like covenants" as the present lease. His Honour said that the court's duty was to determine the true intention of the parties from their words and conduct and it was quite false to say that the parties intended that the renewed lease should contain a literal reproduction of the words of the old lease but rather that their substance should be exactly similar. That same attitude was taken by Kearney,
J in Noyes versus Klein (1984) 3 BPR 9216, 9232. One of the questions before
Kearney, J was whether a pizza shop was of a like nature to the business of a take-away food shop. His Honour said at 9232 that to answer this question one was required to look at similarity in substance. See also Showa Shoji
Australia Pty Ltd versus Oceanic Life Ltd [(1994) 34 NSWLR 548], 570.

In my view the approach of the defendant is to be preferred. The landlord's obligation under clause 20 is to furnish a lease which in substance is "the same" so far as covenants, conditions and restrictions are concerned.

It is then necessary to look to see how far the fact that the 7th floor is now a strata title unit affects the lease.

The first affectation is that the new lease is not over the same land. As has already been pointed out, the initial demise was over land in a particular certificate of title even though the lease was restricted to part of that land being the 7th floor. That certificate of title covered land which in the anglicised version of the old expression, went from hell below to heaven above. Although the lease was only of part of that land, it not only covered the strata of air space between the top of level 6 and the bottom of level 8 of the building, but also extended to give rights to put cables etc through the ground and other parts of the building up to level 7. I examined this sort of concept in Telstra Corporation Ltd versus Capetan Pty Ltd (1996) 7 BPR ,744. Most commercial tenants have leases which impliedly authorise them to be upon some other part of the building than that contained in the strict area of the demise, at least for the purposes of laying pipes and wires for the various services which are essential to modern commercial life. This is over and beyond the right to use lifts etc for access which are usually granted by licence in the lease document itself.

Mr Skinner submits that the premises in the new lease are different from those in the former lease in two basic respects, (a) the nature of the estate granted; and (b) the boundaries and physical space of each.

As to the nature of the estate, Mr Skinner submits that the subject matter of the demise of the former lease was an interest of the relevant parcel of land, namely, the land in Certificate of Title Volume 1882 Folio 143 of which the building formed part.

In Item 3 of the Reference Schedule in the lease "land" was referred to as that in the Certificate of Title I have mentioned. In the proposed new lease it is referred to as Lot [8 SP 55932.] 
The effect of registering the strata plan was to create a stratum parcel under [s 8A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ssda1973344/s8a.html) of the [Strata Schemes (Freehold Development) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ssda1973344/).

There is surprisingly little legal analysis in the text books or reported cases as to what happens when land is affected by the registration of a strata plan.

In my view, the proper analysis is that to speak of "land" is to mislead oneself. What is popularly "land" is in legal analysis a right against the
Crown being an estate in fee simple held in the Crown in free and common socage. The socage rent was redeemed somewhere in the 19th century by a quit rent. An estate in fee simple was a congerie of rights with respect to the property which passed so each was inheritable and free from conditions.

The Crown grants the rights over land by issuing a Crown Grant. This grant does not dispose of the Crown's absolute olloidial property but merely grants certain rights. On transfer of those rights they become vested in the transferee. A straightforward transfer operates under <case> of the [Real
Property Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/) to vest all the rights, powers and privileges of the holder to the transferee.
However, the process nowadays is for the Registrar General to issue a new certificate of title or the equivalent and there is authority for the proposition that every time the Registrar General does that, a new title is created as Barwick, CJ said in Breskvar versus Wall (1971) 126 CLR 376, 385-6, "That which the certificate of title describes is not the title which the registered proprietor formerly had, or which but for registration would have had. The title it certifies is not historical or derivative. It is the title which registration itself has vested in the proprietor." 
It follows that when a strata plan is registered the congerie of rights that constituted the grant of a fee simple over the whole parcel is now resubdivided so that various rights are created in different groups of cubic meterages of air space. The sum total of the whole of those rights will equal the sum total of the congerie of rights in the original certificate of title, but they will be completely redistributed. Alternatively, the old rights in land have been cancelled and new rights whose totality is the same quantum are created. It matters little for present purposes which it is.

Because of the redistribution of rights, or because of other legislation, the rights of a freeholder in a strata will be different to the rights of a freeholder who was say a tenant in common of the whole property with a contractual right to use a particular part of the building. There will with the strata owner be no right to have the building partitioned or sold under [s
G](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s66g.html) of the [Conveyancing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/), a right that would be held by a tenant-in-common. Furthermore, instead of the whole building being valued and each tenant-in-common being liable for the whole of the rates subject to a right of contribution, each individual parcel will be separately rated.

Accordingly, although "the land" as described in the 3rd item of the Reference
Schedule in the former lease and that in the new lease look the same, juristically they consist of quite separate congeries of rights.

There is very little reference to the land in the rest of the lease. The only occurrence appears to be in clause 11.2 which is a covenant by the lessor to pay the rates, taxes and assessments charged upon the land. Originally this was the obligation to pay rates etc on the whole site, it is now restricted to paying for the rates etc on Lot 8 and the liability for rates on the common property may flow back to the tenant by virtue of levies imposed on the landlord which are passed on to the tenant.

The next matter is clause 9 of the Reference Schedule which says that the percentage for adjustments is 8.09%. This figure is used in the text of the lease to deal with the percentage of certain outgoings over the whole building which should be borne by this tenant. The strata plan shows that the proportion of the unit entitlement to the total unit entitlement would mean that 7.2% is the appropriate figure for the share of outgoings of Lot 8. The correspondence shows that had the landlord felt itself able to submit a lease in a different form it would have asked for 100% of the increased outgoings on
Lot 8. This would have been realistic. 8.09% now has no significance; indeed, the general maintenance of the building is to be met by the owners corporation under the Strata Schemes Management Act 1991 and not by the landlord of Lot 8.

It is, of course, open for people to enter into agreements no matter how nonsensical they may be in a commercial sense and it could be said that if the tenant has agreed to pay 8.09% of increased outgoings, then it matters not whether that has no relation to the landlord's costs. However, this is not in accordance with the way in which this sort of problem is approached; see eg the decision of Giles, J in Showa Shoji Australia Pty Ltd versus Oceanic Life Ltd supra at p 570.

Mr Skinner then says that one looks at [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ssma1996242/s44.html) of the [Strata Schemes Management Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ssma1996242/). This section makes it clear that the by-laws for a strata scheme bind the owners and lessees of a lot, and furthermore, by subsection (2) "There is an implied covenant by the lessee in a lease of a lot or common property to comply with the by-laws for the strata scheme." Mr Skinner thus says there is a very significant additional implied term in the new lease as compared to the former lease. Mr Ashhurst merely says that implied terms are always part and parcel of leases so that the fact that there is an additional implied term is neither here nor there. However, to my mind this is a very significant matter and increases the burden on the tenant.

This is made clearer when one looks through the various clauses of the lease.
I will not overburden these reasons with detail. Full details are set out in the defendant's written submissions of 20 July 1998, but I will mention the highlights.
Clause 6.1 provides that the lessee is to pay a proportion of the cleaning charges. The basis for determination will now be different because the lessor has responsibility only for the lots owned by it, yet the proportion is fixed at 8.09%.
The lessor is to use its best endeavours to provide a cleaning service for the building. It can no longer do so because the owners corporation has responsibility for the common property.
Under clause 10 the lessee is not to do various things outside the demised premises without the consent of the landlord. However, now the owners corporation may also restrict these activities.
The covenant for quiet enjoyment is affected by the rights of the owners corporation and by-laws that might be made.
The lessor's promise to keep the lifts working can now not be enforced because this is under the control of the owners corporation; likewise with air-conditioning.
Twenty-four hour access to the building which is important to solicitor/lessees is no longer within the lessor's power.

I consider that each of these matters is significant.

A large part of Mr Skinner's argument focuses upon the rights of the owners corporation under the strata titles legislation. He says that whereas under the former lease there was only the owner and the tenant involved, now there are three parties, the lessor, the owners corporation and the tenant and the tenant's ability to do things which may be permitted under the lease, or indeed, vital rights to the tenant under the lease, may now be restricted by by-laws made by the owners corporation over which neither party has control.
Again, I consider this is a valid point.

Finally, clause 23 of the former lease is put as now being unworkable. The term "outgoings of the Building" is defined as meaning "The total sum of all outgoings, costs and expenses of the Lessor properly or reasonably assessed or assessable charged or chargeable paid or payable or otherwise incurred in respect of the Building ... including ... the curtilage of the Building and all levels thereof ...".

Under the Strata Titles Scheme, a quite different regime is now in place with rates assessable to separate owners under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ssda1973344/s92.html) of the [Strata Schemes (Freehold Development) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ssda1973344/).

There is real doubt as to whether the levies made by the owners corporation on the lessor are "outgoings". In Lang versus Asemo Pty Ltd <case>; [[1989] VR 773], 779, Gobbo, J with whom Murphy and J H Phillips JJ agreed, said that "Body corporate contributions are linked to ownership and would not normally be matters for which a tenant of the owner of a unit could normally be made liable to the body corporate, whatever the position between the owner and its tenant." However, in Leisure Resort Holdings Pty Ltd versus Leisure
Resort Group Pty Ltd (1994) NSW Titles Cases 80-030, the Full Court of
Queensland, affirming a decision of Ryan, J (reported in the same series at -025), held that the word "outgoings" in a lease did include strata levies.
However, the authority of that case is very much affected by the fact that the clause in question actually defined outgoings as including levies to the body corporate. The point should await decision where it is raised otherwise than in a peripheral way. Suffice for it to be said at present that the matter is arguable.

In my view, looking at all those matters that I have just discussed as a whole, the new lease proffered by the landlord cannot be said to be one which is in accordance with its promise under clause 20 of the former lease. As on the assumptions I have made it can do no better, it follows that the decree of specific performance cannot be progressed and that there is an impossibility of performance.

An additional point made by Mr Skinner was that the timing of the relevant events was significant. I thought that there was something in this point at the time, but have now come to the view that it does not matter. The contract formed by the exercise of the option took place before the strata plan was registered. The obligation of the landlord was to comply with the obligations that came into being as at the exercise of the option. This was to give a lease in the same form as before. It could have done so before the strata plan was registered, but for the reasons I have just given, could not thereafter.
The tenant, of course, consented to the strata plan being registered. Whenever a question of consent is raised, one must always ask consent to what? So if one consents to the risks of playing a game, one also consents to recognise risks in the activity in question including a hit below the belt in boxing or a no-ball in cricket; see Rootes versus Shelton  <case>; [(1967) 116 CLR 383.] But there are limits so that in People versus Lenti [253 NYS ]
, a student who consented to be initiated in a student initiation ceremony did not consent to such violence towards him that he spent several weeks in hospital. In the instant case, I cannot find that merely by consenting to the registration of the strata plan the tenant consented to radical alterations in its rights to a renewed lease.

Because I have found that the landlord has not and cannot carry out its obligations, it seems to me quite unnecessary to pursue any of the other grounds that were raised as to why the landlord could not succeed. Mr
Ashhurst, in a brilliant piece of intellectual diversion, put that the defendant's real submissions were that there had been an anticipatory breach of contract by the landlord and I should treat the case accordingly. He then sought to demolish any case that the tenant might happen to produce along those lines. I need say nothing more about this past the tribute I have already given.

I should add that it will not be every case where a strata plan is registered after the initial lease that it will be impossible for the option to be performed. When the lessor seeks to argue along these lines, its own act in registering the plan may operate to defeat that argument. In any event, each lease needs to be considered on its own facts and circumstances.

It remains for me to deal with what should happen as a result of my finding.

I think it follows that I consider that there was a binding contract to enter into a new lease between the parties, but that that contract has become impossible to perform. Accordingly, it follows that the summons should be dismissed; I should make declaration 3 in the cross claim and the exhibits should be retained.

Because there may be some very interesting arguments about costs which the parties may wish to present, the precise formulation of the orders and the order that should be made as to costs should stand over to a convenient date.
I will fix 29 September 1998 at 9.30 am for this purpose, but should counsel make arrangements with my Associate before that day, it may be possible to move the fixture to some date more convenient to them.
 * * * 
