

Regina versus Rosalia Brillo [1997] NSWSC 192 (14 May 1997) 
REGINA v. Rosalia BRILLO /96 
Wednesday 14 May 1997 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
SMART J, BRUCE J 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: Rosalia Brillo has sought leave to appeal against the severity of a sentence comprising a minimum term of eighteen months penal servitude and an additional term of two years imposed on each of five counts of making a false instrument and five counts of using a false instrument taking into account 73 offences of making a false instrument and 75 counts of using a false instrument. All sentences were to be served concurrently.

There were 158 offences in total extending over a period from 18 August 1994 to 14 September 1995. The applicant defrauded her employer of about $188,075.
It was a family company operating in the construction industry.

At the date of sentencing none of the money had been repaid. The applicant started her employment with the company in September 1993. Her duties were primarily of a clerical nature. During her employment she was given great responsibility. The additional duties included, as from about August 1994, the preparation of cheques to pay subcontractors.

She would compile the payment claims and the amounts to be paid, submit them to the production manager for approval and upon approval write out the cheques and have one of the company's authorised signatories sign the cheques. The applicant did not have authority to sign the cheques.

Between 18 August 1994 and 14 September 1995 the applicant had altered 80 cheques often striking out the name of the payee and inserting her own name and initialling the alteration by writing the initials of the signatory. She paid the company's cheques as altered into her own account at the Advance Bank except one cheque which was paid into her boyfriend's account.

The applicant resigned from the company's employ as from 15 September 1995. In mid-November 1995 members of the family discovered part of what had happened.
The company consulted its accountant and the police were contacted. When the police interviewed the applicant on 28 November 1995 she made full and frank admissions.

Thereafter she cooperated with the police and fully admitted her involvement in the offences. She pleaded guilty at a very early stage in accordance with her previously announced intention.

The applicant has no previous convictions. She was born on 23 October 1973 and was thus twenty to twenty-one when the offences were committed. She would have noted the amounts of money moving through this family construction company.

She comes from a close-knit Italian family and had a stable upbringing. She obtained her School Certificate in 1989 and since that time has been in constant employment as a cashier and clerk.

She completed a one-year full time course in office administration and bookkeeping and a six-month full time course in banking operations, both at
Bankstown TAFE.

The applicant told the Probation and Parole officer that she became greedy.
During the defrauding period she told her boyfriend and her family that she received frequent bonus cheques from her employer and had had profitable poker machine winnings. She told the probation officer that she spent the money on clothes, furniture, a motor vehicle, holidays, miscellaneous items, gambling and paid credit card accounts and legal fees. She claimed that the money illegally taken from her former employer had all gone.

The officer has written that she has articulated her remorse over her actions.
She had discussed steps to be taken to repay the money to the company. Those steps included paying part of her salary from future employment and the proceeds of the sale of her car.

The probation officer made this assessment: "The period of time over which Miss Brillo committed the offences accentuates the seriousness of her actions given her repeated and calculated intention to defraud her employer for personal gain. Her acknowledged greed appears to have clouded any sense of responsibility at that time in the position to which she was entrusted. The only redeeming factor is in her current remorse and the fact that she admits full responsibility, without trivialising or attempting to make excuses for her behaviour. It is noted, however, that in the latter period of the adjournment, Miss Brillo appears to have confronted the issue of gambling and is committed to fulfilling the suggested treatment plan. Although she has displayed signs of distress at the possibility of incarceration, Miss
Brillo's mature and sensible demeanour was evidenced by her stated intention to formulate a financial plan to compensate her former employer." 
Mr L Bowe, an addiction counsellor, saw the applicant on one occasion prior to sentence. In his report he sets out the history of the applicant's gambling as supplied by her. She was said to have finally realised that her gambling was out of control but she needed sustained treatment in the future and such treatment was outlined. She had agreed to embark on that treatment. Mr Bowe stated that he could not predict her willingness to pursue any of the suggested help and support.

The judge thought that gambling was one of the factors which was relevant to the applicant's conduct. The judge held that becoming involved in serious crimes to fund a gambling problem affords no basis for leniency.

The applicant submitted that the judge erred in this statement. The Crown submitted that although it was open to a judge to treat the applicant's gambling as a matter affording leniency, he was not bound to do so.

It is not entirely clear what approach his Honour was taking but he appeared to take the view that gambling could not afford leniency. He does not seem to have taken the approach that while it was a matter capable of affording leniency he did not think that it should excite leniency in the present case.
If the judge meant that addiction to gambling can never be taken into account as affording leniency that does not accord with the discussion of the problem in this court: R v. O'Neill, unreported, CCA, 24 July 1996 and R v.
Psaroudis, unreported, 1 April 1996. General deterrence remains important if there has been an addiction to gambling. The Court has regard to the rehabilitative significance of any treatment for that addiction, its prospects of success and the need for extended supervision: 
R v. Purnell, unreported, CCA, 29 September 1994. As the judge fixed a substantial additional term to facilitate rehabilitation it may be that the judge was drawing a distinction between leniency as such and leniency which results in a longer additional term and a shorter minimum term. The cases on which his Honour relied dealt with the matter briefly. The difference may be semantic and not substantive.

As the applicant did not give evidence there was no opportunity to adequately assess how big a part gambling played. On the evidence adduced the judge was unable to attribute what proportion of the criminality was due to gambling and what proportion had other causes. The evidence in this case fell short of that which is usually adduced in cases of a serious addiction to gambling.

The judge was not bound to accept the view as to remorse put forward by the probation officer and the addiction counsellor. While she was capable of evincing remorse as the judge noted, he felt hampered in assessing her remorse by her not giving evidence. He observed: "I am not confident to determine the real extent of the contrition and remorse for her wrongdoing ... as distinct from the personal concern she has for her own predicament." 
This was a view which was open to the judge. The judge thought it was unlikely that the applicant would commit any similar offence in the future but he could not be sure.

I reject the submission that the judge was bound to accept fully the statement of remorse which she had made to people such as the probation officer and the addiction counsellor.

The applicant submitted to the judge that there was a virtual inevitability of detection as all cheques were paid, with one exception, into her account. The applicant said the judge erred when he commented in response: "I do not think it can be said that because a person does not defraud a company in a sophisticated manner the criminality is any less even though there is, when looked at objectively, a greater chance that detection will take place." 
That statement is capable of more than one meaning. The offender may not be familiar with sophisticated methods of deception. The method used by her may be the best one or the only one that occurred to her. The offender may not have given a lot of thought to detection and how to avoid it. Her attention may have been concentrated on obtaining the money. If an offender uses a sophisticated method of deception to make detection more difficult or if he or she seeks to cover his or her tracks and to confuse, that is often regarded as an aggravating feature. The important task is to concentrate on what was done and the criminality of the particular offender. If an offender alters her employer's cheques making them payable to herself and pays them into her own account and spends the money, that is bad enough. There is little point in reflecting on the sophistication of the methods used in those circumstances.

The applicant submitted that the judge had erred in not taking into account the real effect of curing the gambling in his consideration of rehabilitation.
The judge did say that he thought that it was unlikely that the applicant would reoffend but he could not be sure. That indicates a view by the judge that rehabilitation, whilst not certain, was likely to happen. The judge could not have taken that matter further.

The subjective features of the applicant are strong and much can be said on her behalf. However, the offences are very serious. On this appeal we have received further material including a letter from Centre Care Catholic Family
Services stating the attendances of the applicant, with the permission of the gaol authorities, at varying counselling sessions for gambling addiction.

There is also a letter from TAFE as to the applicant studying the Small
Business Enterprise Certificate course at Granville TAFE and doing well. There is a favourable reference from a CSI corporate officer and a lengthy favourable personal reference.

I have given anxious consideration to this application bearing in mind the strong subjective features. However, the offences are very serious. They continued for just over a year and a family company was defrauded of $188,075.
The frauds commenced shortly after she was asked to assist with the payments to subcontractors and writing the cheques.

Both the overall sentence and the minimum term are correct, although I have some reservations as to part of the reasons expressed by the sentencing judge.
The judge could not reasonably have imposed a lesser sentence. The result at which the judge arrived was correct.

Leave to appeal should be granted but the appeal should be dismissed.

BRUCE J: I agree.

SMART J: The orders are as I have proposed.
 * * * 
