

Carbone versus James Hardie Industries Limited Matter No 20045/96 [1998] NSWSC (25 September 1998) 
Last Updated: 17 December 1998 
CARBONE versus JAMES HARDIE INDUSTRIES LIMITED /96 September 1998 
Rolfe J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
Name of Case: CARBONE versus JAMES HARDIE INDUSTRIES LIMITED 
Proceedings: 20045/96 
Date of Hearing: 23 September 1998 
Date of Judgment: 25 September 1998 
Counsel for Plaintiff: Mr J O Anderson 
Solicitors for Plaintiff: Steve Masselos & Co 
Counsel for Defendant: Mr H N Kelly 
Solicitors for Defendant: A O Ellison & Co 
I N D E X 
PAGE 
Introduction 1 
The Circumstances Giving Rise To The Accident 2 
Negligence 3 
Contributory Negligence 4 
The Plaintiff's Injuries 5 
The Plaintiff's Loss Of Future Earning Capacity 9 
Past Wage Loss And Fox versus Wood Component 12 
Non-Economic Loss 12 
Lost Superannuation 13 
Griffiths versus Kerkemeyer 14 
Past Out-of-Pocket Expenses 15 
Other Future Costs 15 
Conclusions 17 
CARBONE versus JAMES HARDIE INDUSTRIES LIMITED 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
Introduction 
The plaintiff, for whom Mr J.O. Anderson of Counsel appeared, was born on 25
April 1969. He left Bidwell High School at about the end of 1984, when he was aged 14 years 9 months, and thereafter he worked in various labouring positions before commencing employment with the defendant, for which Mr H.N.
Kelly of Counsel appeared, at its Rosehill premises on 25 May 1990. He worked in various labouring positions in an area, which was principally concerned with separating good and damaged product. He obtained a certificate to drive a forklift vehicle and, by 17 March 1994, had reached the position of a leading hand. Part of his work involved the operation of the forklift to move good and damaged product from a machine known as a stack breaker. He worked long hours and it was not in issue that his weekly net wage was, as at 17 March 1994, $625. He married on 16 February 1991 and there is one child, a son born on 11
November 1997.

The Circumstances Giving Rise To The Accident 
On 17 March 1994 the plaintiff was instructed to clean up oil, which was on the concrete floor of the area in which he was required to work and which had escaped from the stack breaker. The stack breaker had been the cause of oil spillages and leaks onto that floor for some period, and the plaintiff had complained to his superior about it. The superior had said he would refer the matter to fitters, but, as at 17 March 1994, whatever was causing the oil spillages and leakages had not been repaired. The defendant required the cleaning up operation to be carried out by placing an absorbent material on the oil and then scraping it, once it was impregnated with oil, from the floor and placing it in an appropriate disposal receptacle. The plaintiff had undertaken this work, which necessarily involved his stepping on the oily floor. Some oil had also been spread on the floor by the forklift being driven through the spilt oil before it was cleaned up.

When the plaintiff completed this task he went to the forklift with a view to climbing into the cabin and using it. There were two steps before one stepped onto the floor of the cabin. He said he put his left foot on the second step and his right foot on the top step, which was the floor of the cabin, and, at that point, his right foot slipped. He fell forward, hit his head on the seat of the forklift and jarred his head backwards. He slid down from the forklift and landed on his feet on the concrete floor.

Subsequently he took photographs of the forklift, which have been incorporated in the report of Dr M.S. Oxenburgh of 19 February 1997, Exhibit A. That shows that the steps, and particularly the top step or cabin floor on which the plaintiff slipped, to be in a poor state of repair, the edge of the top step being obviously free of any duco and quite slippery. The plaintiff was wearing steel-capped boots with treaded soles. The evidence of Dr Oxenburgh, which was confined to his written report and which was not challenged in any way, made clear the dangers of being required to work on a slippery floor, and to mount the forklift which was in the condition to which I have referred.

Negligence 
The plaintiff's case on negligence, which can be put very shortly because Mr
Kelly, whilst not conceding that the defendant was negligent, made no submissions in support of the proposition that it was not, was that the defendant was guilty of negligence by requiring him to work on a floor on which oil had been spilt, thus making it more probable than not that oil would adhere to the soles of his work boots, and also in failing to provide a safe step with sufficient friction to prevent his slipping whether or not he had oil on the soles of his boots. In my opinion the plaintiff has established that the defendant was guilty of negligence in both respects. The conclusions of Dr Oxenburgh on each of these matters was not challenged and, in any event, a consideration of the evidence, including the photographs of the forklift, show that the plaintiff was required to work in a situation which would, almost of necessity, lead to circumstances in which he may well slip. There can be no doubt that if the defendant had acted reasonably this would have been obvious to it. Two of its duties at common law are to provide a safe place of work and safe equipment and, for each of the reasons to which I have referred, I am satisfied it failed to do so.

Contributory Negligence 
Mr Kelly submitted that the plaintiff had been guilty of contributory negligence, although he conceded that any contributory negligence was of a minor nature and perhaps only in the order of "fifteen to twenty five per cent". The basis on which this allegation was made was the evidence of the plaintiff that having worked on cleaning up the spilt oil he failed, before attempting to climb onto the forklift, to check the soles of his boots to see whether there was oil on them. The plaintiff said he did not do so because it was not a matter that crossed his mind: Tp.22. He said that even if he had thought about the matter he probably would not have checked, and he had never done so before.

The defendant has not satisfied me, the onus being on it, that the plaintiff was guilty of contributory negligence. He was required to work in the circumstances to which I have referred and his attempt to climb into the cabin of the forklift after carrying out the cleaning up operation and without checking the soles of his work boots seems to me, at most, to have been a normal act in the course of his employment and, if it is to be characterised at all in any critical way, that should be simply as a momentary inadvertence on his part, rather than as a failure to take care for his own safety. It must be remembered that all the dangerous circumstances in which he was required to work were created by or the responsibility of the defendant and the submission that the plaintiff should, on the facts of this case, have been checking the soles of his boots to see if there was any oil on them has, if I may say so with respect, an element of unreality about it.

The defendant's submissions in this regard face another obstacle. There was no evidence that the slipping was caused by oil being on the soles of his boots, or by a combination of that and the slippery surface of the forklift. The evidence did not rise above the fact that the plaintiff slipped on that surface, which on any view was in such a state that even without the presence of oil a slippage could have occurred. For these reasons I reject the claim based on contributory negligence.

The Plaintiff's Injuries 
The plaintiff slipped forward, struck his head on the seat and slid to the floor. He landed on his feet and immediately noticed that his head was hurting. Thereafter he developed pain in his neck, which radiated into both arms. CT scans showed some disc bulge at the C3/4 level and a midline disc protrusion at the C5/6 level. MRI scans demonstrated a posterior rupture at
C5/6 with a small posterior disc protrusion. The plaintiff suffered a disc injury at that level and this has led to the problems from which he has suffered ever since. I do not propose to deal with those medical problems in any greater detail than necessary, because they are set out in the numerous medical reports which were tendered without objection and became Exhibit H. I have read them all. The defendant tendered no medical reports, did not require any of the doctors for cross-examination, and did not suggest to the plaintiff that he was not suffering essentially in the way about which he gave evidence.
The plaintiff gave evidence that insofar as he gave histories to or made complaints to doctors, these were factually accurate. This evidence was given without objection and he was not challenged on it. However, in not dealing with the complaints and injuries in any greater detail, I am not to be taken as in any way seeking to minimise or trivialise the extent of the injuries the plaintiff suffered. They were, and remain, very serious and have had a quite devastating effect upon him. The defendant conceded that.

The various medical treatments he has received are set forth in the
Chronology, Exhibit B. He underwent an anterior dissectomy/fusion under surgery on 17 November 1994, and a nerve block under surgery in mid-August
The plaintiff had a further bilateral nerve block on 15 August 1997. He was re-admitted to hospital on 20 February 1998 and 30 July 1998 for treatment, and he will have to have a further procedure, which will involve his being hospitalised. It was conceded, and indeed the evidence established, that he was seen by two doctors on behalf of the defendant, but that no reports of those doctors were served or relied on by it. It was submitted, on the plaintiff's behalf, that I could infer that those reports would not have assisted the defendant. That is probably so, but all the evidence before me demonstrated the very serious nature of his injuries and the consequences of them.

The plaintiff gave evidence of the pain he had suffered and was continuing to suffer, including headaches and the inability to move his neck freely. He is on a large drug regime and, save for some light duties he performed with the defendant, he has not worked since the date of the accident. Mr Kelly did not suggest that the plaintiff had been able to undertake any other work up to the date of the hearing and, indeed, he conceded that he would not be fit to return to any type of employment for some two to three years in the future. He further conceded that even then his ability to work would be reduced substantially. In my view the medical evidence establishes that the plaintiff will never return to gainful employment. I shall refer to it in a moment.

In addition to the pain the plaintiff stated, without objection, that he had changed emotionally and was a totally different man. He said, Tp.17:- "Well, I used to think of myself as a nice bloke. I cared about a lot of things and now I don't care about nothing or nobody. I don't care about myself, I care about my son. My marriage is more or less sometimes broken, almost broken right up because of the difficulty. We did not sleep together for years in the same bed. It is just - it wasn't me and a lot of people were saying it wasn't me. I didn't care what people were saying." 
Shortly after he continued:- "I just don't care. There is nothing. I can't, I can't see a future for myself. I have a little boy thats ten months old but I can't do nothing with any more. I hold him on my lap when he sits there of a night time when he watches television on the lounge and I can't play with him. My wife plays with him. He goes to his mother all the time. What is there to live for if you can't even play with your own son? That's life. Sorry. I apologise." 
He gave some further evidence about the marital problems, although it is to be noted that his son was born on 11 November 1997. However, the plaintiff's evidence was not challenged and, in material respects, it was corroborated by his wife, whose evidence was not challenged.

The plaintiff impressed me as a completely truthful witness, who made no attempt to overstate his case and, when cross-examined about seeking to do something in the future, he said, Tp.25:- "I sit in my chair every day and I think exactly the same question to myself, and when you keep thinking of that and nothing pops in, you just get angry." 
The plaintiff said, and I accept him entirely, that if he was able and if the medical advice favoured this approach he would return to work. This would be his preferred course, but the medical evidence satisfies me that he will not do so.

The plaintiff gave evidence, which I again accept, that he is now unable to do anything around the home, save the lightest of tasks, and that he has great difficulty in driving a motor vehicle both because of the drugs he is taking and because of the difficulty in turning his head and neck whilst doing so.

The Plaintiff's Loss Of Future Earning Capacity 
The uncontradicted medical evidence concerning the likelihood of the plaintiff's returning to work is overwhelming. In his report of 2 June 1998 Dr
Bentivoglio said:- "I cannot see this gentleman's symptoms altering significantly in the foreseeable future. It is likely he will always have some degree of symptoms present in his neck region. He will need to avoid activities which are arduous in nature. I cannot see this gentleman being fit enough to readily return to the workforce in the foreseeable future. Arrangements have been made to see this gentleman again on an occasional basis in the future." 
Mr Kelly seized upon the doctor's statement that there would not be a return to work "in the foreseeable future" as meaning that at some time, presumably in the unforeseeable future, he would be able to return to work. I do not read the report in that way. In my opinion Dr Bentivoglio was simply stating that he did not consider that the plaintiff would become sufficiently fit to return to work which, reasonably enough, he qualified in the way he did.

In his report of 1 November 1997 Dr Chaudhary stated:- "In my opinion he remains unfit to work and will continue to remain unfit to pre-injury level as his conditions are becoming chronic. He needs to continue present treatment and another assessment in six months will be necessary to report on his progress and response to treatment." 
I should note that Mr Kelly did not submit that the plaintiff would be able to return to his pre-accident employment. Rather, and very frankly if I may say so, he submitted that the plaintiff would not be able to hold down a full time job, and he said he agreed that he could only do the most limited of tasks for a short period in an environment where he was able to work at his own pace and in his own way in a process type occupation.

In his report of 20 September 1998 his general practitioner, Dr Deighton, who has been treating him since the accident, said:- "He is in my medical opinion, totally and permanently incapacitated with respect to gainful employment, and is unable to perform even the simplest home duties without seriously aggravating his condition. He requires regular presentations (averaging fortnightly) for medical review and medication .." 
Dr Deighton also referred to the plaintiff's becoming "increasingly depressed, angry and disinterested as a direct consequence of his inability to `do anything other than sit around'".

It is also to be noted that the plaintiff is to have another surgical procedure, which he has not had thus far because the defendant was not prepared to meet the cost of it. Part of his claim is for its cost . However, it was not submitted on behalf of the defendant that a consequence of that procedure would be to lead to any result different from the submission which
Mr Kelly made and which I have recorded.

The plaintiff has satisfied me that his prospects of ever engaging in gainful employment in the future are so remote that he should be compensated on the basis that he will not. Accordingly, I do not consider that there is any need to discount for any chance: Malec versus J.C. Hutton Pty Limited <case>; [(1990) 169 CLR 638.] He has, accordingly, suffered a total loss of future earning capacity.

The plaintiff was employed for almost four years by the defendant. His evidence was that he worked very long hours and was prepared to undertake all the work which was available to him. This was not sought to be contradicted.
His evidence was that he would have continued to work for as long as he was able. This was not challenged and there is no reason to disbelieve the plaintiff in this regard.

Mr Kelly submitted that I should allow the plaintiff $625 per week for loss of earning capacity for the next three years, and thereafter from $400 to $450 per week. These latter figures reflect the submissions Mr Kelly made and to which I have referred, but they were not based on any evidence and, in particular, any evidence of the ability of the plaintiff to engage in gainful employment in the future. I am not disposed to accede to them in so far as they require a reduction to be made for the last thirty three years. I am satisfied that the plaintiff is entitled to be compensated for thirty six years, which would take him to age 65, at the rate of $625 per week. It is agreed that calculated on the 5% Tables, which the parties accepted as being the appropriate ones, this would provide a base figure of $553,000.

The next question to be addressed is the discount to be made for the vicissitudes. Mr Anderson submitted it should be the reasonably conventional figure of fifteen per cent. Mr Kelly submitted it should be from twenty to twenty five per cent because of the length of time involved. The conventional figure used in this discounting process is fifteen per cent, even over a long period: Bresatz versus Przibilla <case>; [(1962) 108 CLR 541.] The evidence does not suggest to me that there is any reason why that figure should not be applied in the present case, notwithstanding the length of the period. The discounting figure is intended to take into account the good and the bad. In my opinion the plaintiff is entitled to recover eighty five per cent of the figure to which I have just referred by way of loss of future earning capacity, namely $470,050.

Past Wage Loss and Fox versus Wood Component 
The parties agreed that the plaintiff's past wage loss is $124,395, and that the Fox versus Wood component is $10,209.77.

Non-Economic Loss 
The next matter, which requires consideration, is non-economic loss. The parties agreed that the relevant starting point, from which I must make an assessment as to how this case relates to the worst case, is $214,650. Mr
Anderson submitted that this case was within the range of seventy to eighty per cent of such a case. Mr Kelly submitted it was within the range of fifty to sixty per cent. Unaided by those submissions I had come to the view at the conclusion of the evidence, although the submissions somewhat comforted me in that view, that the appropriate figure was sixty five per cent. The seriousness of the plaintiff's injuries and their consequences justify this figure. The amount for non-economic loss will, accordingly, be $139,522.50.

Lost Superannuation 
The plaintiff has made a claim in respect of lost superannuation in the sum of $66,680. That is the figure provided by the report of Mr Carmody, a certified practising accountant, which is Exhibit G. Mr Carmody was not required for cross-examination, but the submission was made that I should not allow the amount for lost investment earnings on employer contributions, because it was too speculative an amount to be awarded. In the absence of any cross- examination of Mr Carmody and in the absence of any evidence from the defendant as to the proper amount or the proper approach to the ascertainment of the amount contradictory of the evidence of Mr Carmody, I consider that there is no reason not to accept his evidence. There will therefore be included in the judgment the lost superannuation of $66,680. No submission was made that any other deduction should be made. However, I consider that the fifteen per cent for vicissitudes must logically apply to this figure reducing it to $56,678.

Griffiths versus Kerkemeyer 
The plaintiff made a claim pursuant to the principles expounded in Griffiths v Kerkemeyer. Mr Kelly conceded that the plaintiff had established some entitlement to such a claim. The defendant admitted that it has been paying the plaintiff for four hours per week and that any claim should be based on that figure or "something less". The evidence satisfies me that Mrs Carbone, whose evidence I also accept, carries out various tasks for the plaintiff and, consistently with the authorities, this constitutes a loss the plaintiff has suffered and for which he is entitled to be compensated. It was submitted on behalf of the plaintiff that he should be compensated for ten to fourteen hours per week at the rate of $16 per hour. It was not in issue that the rate of $16 per hour was appropriate. The plaintiff placed reliance upon the report of AP Care dated 13 June 1997, Exhibit E.

Considering the evidence as a whole I am of the view that the appropriate allowance, bearing in mind that I will be making certain other allowances, is for one hour per day or seven hours per week. The plaintiff claimed this amount for forty eight years being his life expectancy in accordance with the actuarial tables. Mr Kelly did not challenge the life expectancy figure. The agreed multiplier, based on the 5% Tables is 966.6, giving a base figure of $108,259. The plaintiff has submitted that that should be discounted by fifteen per cent. The defendant submitted that there should be a greater discount. In my opinion the appropriate discount is fifteen per cent and the component for the Griffiths versus Kerkemeyer portion of the claim is accordingly $92,020.

Past Out-of-Pocket Expenses 
Out-of-pocket expenses paid by the defendant were agreed at $97,846.63.

Past lawnmowing expenses were agreed at $1,605 and in relation to that figure there was no challenge. A claim was made for future lawnmowing expenses at the rate of $12 per week for forty eight years, which amounts, after a discount of fifteen percent, to $13,650. Mr Anderson conceded a discount of fifteen per cent for this item, on which concession I propose to act. Mr Kelly submitted that this should be reduced by a greater amount for the vicissitudes. However in my view the discount of fifteen per cent is correct for this.

Other Future Costs 
A claim for future pharmaceutical expenses at the rate of $36 per week for forty eight years was claimed, which amounts to a present sum of $34,800. The plaintiff made no allowance for vicissitudes. The determination of the probable life expectancy means that the vicissitudes of life do not enter into the calculation: Sharman versus Evans <case>; [(1977) 138 CLR 563] at p.587. None-the-less I do not think that precludes or makes inappropriate some discount, particularly over a long period for the possibility that circumstances may change. The discount I consider appropriate is five per cent. In my opinion such an allowance should be made reducing that figure, which was not otherwise challenged, to $33,060.

A claim for future medical treatment at the rate of $45 per week for forty eight years was made. In my opinion the evidence supports a claim for $30 per week giving a base figure of $28,998, which should also be reduced by five per cent providing a figure of $27,548.

The plaintiff requires future surgery, the total cost of which is stated at p.43 of Exhibit H of being "in the vicinity of $17,000 to $18,000". I propose to allow for this matter $18,000. It was not suggested that any discounting factor should be applied to it.

The plaintiff claimed $40 to $50 for taxi fares to enable him to attend medical examinations and otherwise to be transported. He also claimed an amount for depreciation, maintenance and running of a motor vehicle, notwithstanding that the family has always had a motor vehicle. It was agreed that only one of these amounts could be claimed and, in my view, the claim for the motor vehicle should be rejected. The plaintiff always had a motor vehicle and, in my opinion, the accident has not required him to obtain a motor vehicle other than the type he now has. I am of the opinion that the claim for taxi fares should be reduced to $25 per week. That provides a sufficient discount. The amount for this head of claim is $24,165.

The plaintiff also claimed for depreciation and replacement of a water bed at $4 per week. There is no evidence that the water bed is any more or less expensive than any other type of bed and I reject this element of the claim.

Conclusions 
The various figures to which I have referred total $1,108,749.90. It is now desirable to review that as an overall figure. When one has regard to the age of the plaintiff, the seriousness of the injuries he has suffered, the consequences of those injuries and, particularly, the past economic loss and loss of future earning capacity, I consider that the total amount is appropriate. It is agreed that the defendant is entitled to be paid from this amount $249,623.19, being the amounts it has paid to the plaintiff by way of workers compensation and pursuant to s.76(E) of the [Supreme Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/). That reduces the amount to which, in my opinion, the plaintiff is entitled to judgment of $859,126.80. The plaintiff agreed that he was not entitled to any interest on any part of this judgment.

The parties requested that I should reserve the question of costs until after
I had delivered my reasons as there may be an application for some special order for costs.

I order judgment for the plaintiff in the sum of $859,126.80. Unless I am satisfied that any other order for costs should be made, I propose to order the defendant to pay the plaintiff's costs on a party and party basis.
 * * * 
