

Serkowski versus Serkowski [2013] NSWSC 776 (17 June 2013) 
Last Updated: 18 June 2013 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Case Title: 
Serkowski versus Serkowski  
Medium Neutral Citation: <case>  
Hearing Date(s): June 2013  
Decision Date: June 2013  
Before: 
Ball J  
Decision:
Proceeding dismissed. 
Order extending the operation of caveats AH41340R and AH41344H is revoked. 
Plaintiff to pay the defendant's costs of the proceeding.  
Catchwords: 
EQUITY AND TRUSTS - claim for entitlement to property - whether property held on an express or constructive trust - operation of [Conveyancing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) [s
C](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s23c.html) - no issue of principle  
JUDGMENT
In this proceeding the plaintiff, who represents himself and who is the defendant's son, seeks declarations that the defendant holds two properties on trust for the plaintiff and the plaintiff's sister. The proceedings were commenced after the plaintiff lodged caveats over the two properties and the defendant served lapsing notices in respect of those caveats.

Factual background
In about 1977 the defendant, who I will refer to as Grace, and her husband, who I will refer to as Jozef, purchased a property in Punchbowl (No 19) as joint tenants, for the sum of $34,500 with a $25,000 mortgage from Westpac. The property became the matrimonial and family home. Grace and Jozef have two children: the plaintiff, who I will refer to as Rodney, and a daughter, who I will refer to as Jacqueline.
In about 1982, the mortgage was repaid in full and the property has since remained unencumbered.
In May 1997, Jozef bought the property next door (No 15) and at the same time transferred his interest in No 19 to Grace. At the time, Rodney was 14 years old and Jacqueline was 11. In his affidavit, Jozef says he transferred No 19 to Grace in order to avoid having to pay land tax and capital gains tax. Jozef says, and it is not disputed, that the two properties were used together to provide additional living space for the whole family.
There is an issue about what prompted Jozef to buy No 15 - whether he was concerned to stop it from being redeveloped or whether he intended eventually to redevelop No 19 and No 15 himself. Nothing, however, turns on the resolution of that issue.
In June 1998, Jozef and Grace bought the property on the other side of No 19 (No 21) as joint tenants. The property was purchased for $300,000. The purchase price was funded by a loan with a mortgage from Aussie Home Loans, which has since been fully repaid. The property was acquired as an investment and since its acquisition has been rented out to tenants.
Over the years, Grace and Jozef have also bought a number of other investment properties. 
In 2005 and 2006, Grace and Jozef conveyed to each of Rodney and Jacqueline a residential property, each of which had been bought as an investment. The value of each property at the time that it was conveyed was approximately $330,000. Both Rodney and Jacqueline have retained their properties and Rodney currently rents his property out for the sum of $350 per week. He estimates that the property is currently worth approximately $400,000. 
At the time he acquired his property, Rodney was entitled to the first home buyer's grant of $10,000. He paid that amount to his parents towards the purchase price of the property. Rodney also says that over a two-year period he paid Grace a further $60,000 to $70,000 in cash towards the purchase price of the property. I do not accept that evidence. It is not supported by any contemporaneous records. Rodney's evidence on the point was vague and somewhat evasive. He did not give a satisfactory explanation for the source of the funds he says he paid to his mother. He was living at home at the time. He had just finished studying. He did not have a job, although he did work for his father. Rodney gave evidence that not even his father knew of the payments, which seems unlikely if they were made. No explanation was given for why he stopped making the payments if the expectation really was that he would pay the purchase price over time. There is no evidence that Jacqueline made similar payments in respect of the property that was transferred to her, although it seems clear that Grace and Jozef were keen to treat their two children equally. The conclusion I reach, then, is that in 2005 Grace and Jozef transferred a property to Rodney which was worth approximately $330,000 for the sum of $10,000, which had been paid to Rodney as a first home buyer's grant. Effectively, then, the property was a gift.
The marriage between Grace and Jozef has broken down and they have recently divorced. There is currently a proceeding in the Federal Circuit Court concerning the division of their property, which is listed for hearing later this year. Since the separation, Grace has resided in No 19 with Jacqueline. Jozef resides in No 15. Rodney lived with him for a time, although Jozef gave evidence that Rodney now lives elsewhere.
Rodney says that he did not know of the proceeding in the Federal Circuit Court until after he lodged the caveats that have given rise to this proceeding. That seems unlikely. However, whether he knew of the family law proceeding or not, he certainly knew that the relationship between his parents had broken down and he must have anticipated that there would need to be some property settlement following that breakdown.
There are some difficulties with the way in which this proceeding is constituted. Rodney seeks a declaration that No 19 and No 21 are held on trust. However, Jozef, who is a joint owner of No 21, has not been joined as a party to the proceeding. Rodney seeks no declaration in respect of No 15. The reason for that is that Jozef apparently concedes that he holds both No 15 and his interest in No 21 on trust for Rodney and Jacqueline. Rodney says that No 19 and No 21 are held on trust for both himself and Jacqueline. However, Jacqueline also is not a party to the proceeding. Both Jozef and Jacqueline have, however, given evidence in the proceeding and if any orders are to be made there is no reason why they could not be joined for the purpose of making those orders.

The Claim
It is not easy to understand precisely how Rodney puts his claim. However, it seems to be put in two ways. First, he says that at the time No 15 was bought, Grace and Jozef made an oral declaration that they held it and No 19 on trust for Rodney and Jacqueline. A similar declaration is said to have been made by both of them at the time No 21 was bought. Second, Rodney says that he did work on the properties and other investment properties owned by his parents on the faith of representations made by Jozef and Grace that Nos 15, 19 and 21 would be his and Jacqueline's and that as a result they hold on interest in those properties on trust for him.

The evidence
In support of his claims, Rodney relies on affidavit evidence from Jozef and a number of family friends. There are difficulties with the form of much of that evidence. However, in circumstances where Rodney was self-represented, I admitted a substantial amount of that evidence, although I excluded a number of paragraphs that were clearly hearsay. The fact that Rodney was self-represented cannot alter the fact that he bears the onus of satisfying the court of the facts that form the basis of his claim.
It is not necessary to set out all the evidence on which Rodney relies. It is, however, helpful to refer to some of that evidence which is indicative of the type of evidence on which he relies. For example, Jozef gave the following evidence:
Prior to the purchase of [No 15] I discussed the purchase with Grace, and we agreed that this was a good idea, and that the two properties were to be held in trust for the children. I wanted the children to live nearby, and comfortably. She agreed, and we proceeded with that arrangement.
 ...
In about 1998 we purchased [No 21]. I was happy because each child would be able to one day build their own houses so close together.
We told the children the property will never be sold to anyone else, they will decide later how the property will be developed or used, as long as these properties stayed in the family.
Mr Zebrowski, who has known Jozef and Grace for many years, gave evidence in these terms:
The conversation [with Jozef and Grace] often led to statements by Jozef or Grace in words to the effect that "These three properties are for the children. The children will build here, not us. They are promised to them, and they have to look after them.
Similarly, Mr Dolata, who is a friend of both Jozef and Grace, gave evidence in these terms:
In previous conversations, prior to the purchase of the property, both
Jozef and Grace had told us of their plans to buy the property next door [No ] for their children, and that the two properties together would be then held on trust for them, and that they would not be sold or otherwise disposed of, unless it was to the children.

Consideration
In my opinion, there are two insuperable difficulties with the first way in which Rodney puts his case.
First, the terms of the oral declaration of trust on which he relies are too vague to be enforceable. The way the case is pleaded and some of the relief claimed by Rodney suggest that Grace and Jozef made a simple declaration of trust in favour of their children in respect of the three properties. So, for example, paragraph 2 of the statement of claim pleads: 
The defendant, in about 1997, became the sole proprietor of [No 19] following an express oral agreement between the defendant, her husband Jozef Serkowski and the plaintiff that the ... properties were to be held on trust for the plaintiff.

Similarly, paragraph 4 of the relief claimed in the statement of claim seeks and order: 
That the properties [No 21] and [No 19] are conveyed to the plaintiff.
Although paragraph 2 of the statement of claim speaks of an agreement, it is difficult to see how there could have been an agreement. Rodney was 14 at the time. No apparent consideration was given for the transfer. Rodney accepts that whatever happened, Jacqueline, who was 11 at the time, was a party to the arrangement; and the evidence given by the witnesses is more consistent with a declaration of a trust. Even so, why Grace and Jozef would have decided to make a declaration of trust of No 15 and No 19 at the time No 15 was bought when Rodney was aged 14 and Jacqueline was aged 11 and then have done nothing to give effect to that declaration was never explained.
In any event, it is clear from the evidence given by Rodney that he does not claim that the properties are held solely on trust for him and Jacqueline. He accepts that Grace and Jozef have a right to live on the properties for as long as they choose. He even appears to accept that they have a right to sell the properties, although his submission appeared to be that the sale would have to occur to him (or possibly to him and Jacqueline) and that the sale price would have to take into account the equitable interest he (and presumably Jacqueline) holds. What that equitable interest is remains unclear. Having regard to these matters, it is not possible to identify with any certainty the terms on which the properties are said to be held on trust.
Second, [s 23C](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s23c.html) of the [Conveyancing Act 1919](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) provides: 
Instruments required to be in writing: 
Subject to the provisions of this Act with respect to the creation of interests in land by parol: no interest in land can be created or disposed of except by writing signed by the person creating or conveying the same, or by the person's agent thereunto lawfully authorised in writing, or by will, or by operation of law, a declaration of trust respecting any land or any interest therein must be manifested and proved by some writing signed by some person who is able to declare such trust or by the person's will, a disposition of an equitable interest or trust subsisting at the time of the disposition, must be in writing signed by the person disposing of the same or by the person's will, or by the person's agent thereunto lawfully authorised in writing.

This section does not affect the creation or operation of resulting, implied, or constructive trusts.
In the present case, there is no writing signed by Grace evidencing the declaration of trust. That, in my opinion, is fatal to the first way in which Rodney puts his claim.
Rodney relies on the decision of the High Court in Guimelli versus Guimelli <case>; [(1999) 196 CLR 101] for the second way in which he puts his case. He says that he was promised a half interest in Nos 15, 19 and 21 if he did work on them and on the other investment properties owned by his parents. He did that work and in those circumstances he says it would be unconscionable for his parents to deny him the interest he claims. Consequently, Rodney submits that his parents hold Nos 15, 19 and 21 on a constructive trust for him and Jacqueline.
There are two reasons why this way in which Rodney puts his case must fail.
First, I do not accept that a representation was made in the terms alleged by Rodney. Rodney appears to accept that whatever representation was made to him was made to Jacqueline, since he accepts that Jacqueline is entitled to the same interest as him in the properties. There is no suggestion, however, that Jacqueline did or was expected to do any work on the properties or the other investment properties owned by Grace and Jozef. Jacqueline denies that any representation was made to her concerning the properties, and I accept that evidence. Although Jacqueline has sided with her mother following the breakdown in the relationship of her parents, the evidence she gave was against her own interest; and she came across as a frank and honest witness in the witness box.
I have referred earlier to evidence given by Jozef to the effect that he and Grace made statements to the effect that the properties would be Rodney's and Jacqueline's and to the evidence of Mr Zebrowski and Mr Dolata and other friends that statements to that effect were made to them. However, in my opinion, little weight can be placed on that evidence. I say that for several reasons.
First, the evidence is expressed at such a level of generality that I think it carries little weight.
Second, the evidence must be seen in context. There has clearly been a breakdown in the family relationship. Rodney has sided with his father and concedes that his relationship with his mother has effectively broken down. It is apparent that neither Rodney nor his father wish to see what were the family homes sold, at least outside of the family. Nonetheless, they appreciate that that is a possible outcome of the Federal Circuit Court proceeding. Both Rodney and Jozef have strong motives for tailoring their evidence in this proceeding in order to avoid that result. The other witnesses who gave evidence for Rodney were all close friends of his father. It appears their affidavits were drafted for them by Rodney. Those factors further undermine the weight to be given to the evidence given in Rodney's case.
Third, Grace denies that she ever made representations concerning the properties to her children. She gave frank and clear answers in the witness box and, in my opinion, her evidence was plausible.
Fourth, even assuming that Grace or Jozef said words to the effect of those attributed to them, in my opinion, what they said went no further than what many parents might say to their children - namely, that they hoped and expected that the assets accumulated by the parents would pass to the children. Statements to that effect were entirely consistent with the fact that, by her current will, Grace has left her estate to be divided equally between her two children.
The second reason why Rodney's claim based on a constructive trust must fail is that I do not accept that he acted to his detriment on the faith of any representations made to him concerning the properties.
Rodney gives evidence that he did substantial work on Nos 15, 19 and 21 as well as other investment properties owned by his parents. Again, however, the evidence given by him is expressed at a level of generality and in terms which are so vague that it is difficult to place much weight on it.
More significantly, however, it is necessary to consider the surrounding circumstances. Jozef has a number of skills in the building trade and has made a living, at least in part, renovating houses. Rodney has assisted him in that business; and, indeed, that is his only source of employment. Rodney rendered a number of invoices to his parents for the work that he did on family properties. He denies that those invoices were paid. However, I do not accept that evidence. Grace has produced a number of internet banking receipts showing the transfer of sums to Rodney's bank account. In my opinion, the only reasonable inference is that the amounts were transferred in payment of the accounts that Rodney had rendered.
It may well be the case that Rodney did not render invoices for all the work that he did. But, even accepting that that is the case, the work he did must be looked at in context. He had been supported by his parents throughout his school years and while he attended university for a number of years. His parents paid his university fees so he did not need to take out a HECS loan. Up until recently at least, he lived at home rent free. His parents effectively gave him a valuable house which he rents out. It would be natural in those circumstances for Rodney to have helped his father work on properties that his parents owned. I do not accept that he did so on the faith of some vague representation that he would acquire some sort of interest in Nos 15, 19 and 21 which would prevent those properties from being sold. What he did was something any child in similar circumstances might do for his or her parents having regard to the close relationship they enjoyed and the generosity with which they had been treated.

Orders
For those reasons, the proceedings should be dismissed. The orders extending the operation of caveats AH41340R and AH41344H should be revoked. The plaintiff should pay the defendant's costs of the proceeding.
 * * * 
