

Tracen Pty Ltd versus Ballan Holdings Pty Ltd Matter No 2860/98 [1998] NSWSC (31 August 1998) 
Last Updated: 6 October 1998 `TRACEN PTY LTD versus BALLAN HOLDINGS PTY LTD` `2860/98` `31 August 1998` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The present proceedings are between a landlord and tenant of a motel at Bomaderry. The matter was fixed in the expedition list, but unfortunately its state of readiness is not such that I can deal with all of the issues that arise between the parties. Indeed, I can only deal with a question of construction and then stand the matter over to 9 September 1998 when hopefully I can complete it. It may be, however, that that question of construction will go a long way to enable the parties to deal with all the remaining issues themselves. 
It would seem that the defendant used to own and operate the motel, but sold the business in 1991 to the plaintiff. However, the defendant remained the owner of the freehold. The lease that was granted to the plaintiff E781996 bore date 21 November 1991 and was for three years, with an option of renewal.
Clauses 4 and 5 deal with the rent. Clause 4, which has three subclauses, deals with the minimum annual rent, and cl 5, which has six subclauses, deals with the increase of the minimum annual rent.

The lease provided for an option to renew it for four years. The option was exercised. The relating lease is exhibit PX02, which was registered as
Y and on the face of it is a lease for four years from 26 November 1995 to 25 November 1999. The defendant says that this is an error and it should be from November 1994 to November 1998. The provisions of cll 4 and 5 of the second lease are exactly the same as the first lease.

In the first lease the minimum annual rent is set out at $120,000 per year payable in advance by twelve instalments of $10,000 each. In other words $10,000 per calendar month. In the renewed lease the minimum annual rent is stated at $129,760 per year, payable by twelve monthly instalments of $10,813.13.

The main debate between the parties is on the operation of cl 5.2. I will set out in the schedule to these reasons cll 5.1 through to 5.6 and will not encumber the text of the judgment with those clauses.

The key point is what is meant by "the anniversary of the Commencement Date of this Lease" in cl 5.2.

Mr Glennon, for the landlord, Ballan Holdings Pty Ltd, puts that the word "anniversary" usually connotes a recurrent event happening on a particular day each year and has appealed to dictionary definitions to that effect. Mr Meek, for the tenant, says that one has to read the words I have quoted in their context and pay particular attention to the way in which the drafter has used expressions such as "second anniversary" and "every second anniversary" in other parts of cl 5 to see what the drafter meant in cl 5.2.

It is clear that the word "anniversary" does usually mean recurring event and, indeed, the dictionaries tell us that the word derives from medieval ecclesiastical use relating to masses said on the anniversary of people's death. The word still has the recurrent flavour, but that is not the only flavour it has.

The context may show that a particular anniversary is meant by the words, so that if, for instance, one finds in an insurance policy that something is to happen on the tenth anniversary of someone joining a pension plan, then that word shows that a particular date is mentioned, rather than some recurring event; see Duchow versus New York State Teamsters Conference Pension and
Retirement Fund <case>; [691 F 2d 74] (New York Court of Appeal).

The definite article is used to qualify the word "anniversary" in cl 5.2. That usually connotes one particular anniversary rather than a recurring date. The clause then goes on to define "the anniversary" as "the Percentage Rent
Anniversary" by using the words "which anniversary is hereinafter called".
Again those words seem to denote a particular anniversary rather than every anniversary.

Next the drafter has very carefully used expressions such as "every second anniversary", when the drafter means once every second year following the date of the first rent increase. Why then should he or she have been so loose in cl .2, one might ask rhetorically.

All the these factors tend to suggest that the anniversary in cl 5.2 means the date one year after the grant of the lease.

If any confirmation were needed then the way in which the lease works out on the various interpretations is very significant. On Mr Meek's interpretation each 26 November the rent may rise, either by four percent or in accordance with a market review, and a very logical pattern emerges.

On the other hand, on Mr Glennon's submissions, there is a rather uneven increase of four percent or eight percent, which does not seem to have any commercial rhyme or reason about it.

Accordingly, in my view, the contention for which the tenant argues is the proper construction of the lease. I do not think it is necessary to do anything more at the moment than merely pronounce this view. It may be that the tenant is entitled to a declaration as to the meaning of cl 5.2, but that can wait until 9 September.

When one considers the figures one will have to deal with the question as to whether the lease is from 1994 to 1998 or from 1995 to 1999. At the moment the balance of the evidence favours 1995 to 1999 and that is also in accordance with a letter of demand written by the then solicitor for the landlord on 11
March 1998. I will leave the point open for a week, but would indicate that that is where I think, without giving a final view on the matter, the evidence tends at this stage.

The tenant is entitled to a declaration that the existing notice to quit, a copy of which is annexure K to affidavit PA01, is ineffective to terminate the lease. Otherwise, I stand the matter over to my list at 10am on 9 September and I will reserve costs to date.
 * * * 
