

Regina versus Anthony Clarence Robards [1996] NSWSC 291 (23 July 1996) 
REGINA versus ANTHONY CLARENCE ROBARDS /96 
Tuesday 23 July 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
Mahoney P, Grove J, Ireland J 
RESULT: Leave to appeal refused.

CATCHWORDS: SENTENCE - TRUST ACCOUNT DEFALCATIONS BY REAL ESTATE AGENT - IMPRISONMENT TO BE SERVED BY WAY OF PERIODIC DETENTION - NO ERROR BY SENTENCING JUDGE - LEAVE TO APPEAL REFUSED 
JUDGMENT 
MAHONEY P: The Court is in a position to give judgment and I will ask Grove J to give the first judgment.

GROVE J: This is an application for leave to appeal against the severity of sentence imposed by his Honour Judge Solomon sitting in the District Court at Lismore. On that occasion the applicant adhered to pleas of guilty previously given to a magistrate upon seven counts of fraudulent misappropriation contrary to <case> of the Crimes Act. On counts 1 to 6 the applicant was sentenced to imprisonment for twenty four months to be served by way of periodic detention and on the 7th count sentence was deferred upon the condition that the applicant enter into a recognizance himself in the sum of $1,000 to be of good behaviour for five years and further conditioned upon his paying compensation of $6,876.23 to the Real Estate Services Council within twelve months from the date of his discharge from present bankruptcy.

The applicant was born on 8 September 1941. He had lived his life in the Taree area and at the time of the offences he was the proprietor of a real estate agency trading as "The Professionals". He was a prominent and respected local businessman. The offences arose out of defalcations from a trust account which was under his sole control. With two of his brothers the applicant had entered into real estate development. A project commenced in about 1988 got into financial difficulties particularly when a financier withdrew its support. The misappropriated funds were used in an attempt to keep the applicant's business going. Matters came to light when the applicant, having appreciated his position, contacted the Real Estate Council and invited inspection and audit of his accounts.

As a result of shame and to avoid humiliation he left the Taree area. His brothers have also been made bankrupt and they are trying to prevent foreclosure upon the home of their eighty five year old mother who still resides in the Taree area. It is not clear whether her home was offered as some security for the venture but, in any event, it is mortgaged to a financial institution. The applicant has gone to reside in the Gold Coast area where he has employment with a mortgage finance company. His employer is aware of the offences. He and his wife are separated but anticipate that they will reconcile. They have two sons aged ten and six years. The wife and sons have also moved to Queensland. The boys are unaware of why they were moved from
Taree which is obviously the family base. As well as his mother, the applicant has three brothers and a sister residing in that town.

It is not suggested on behalf of the applicant that the learned sentencing judge made any error in finding of fact nor that he overlooked any objective or subjective circumstances which ought to have been taken into account.
Subject to the matter of the applicant's alleged condition of health to which
I will later turn, the thrust of the case presented on his behalf is that the circumstances were such that no custodial sentence at all should have been imposed. Such a submission is in my view quite untenable. To so propose involves the proposition that the imposition of a custodial sentence - particularly one to be served by way of periodic detention - is outside the range of the sound exercise of judicial discretion for the offences. Such a proposition is not only unsupported by authority, it has in fact been said in this Court that the ordinary consequence of a verdict of guilty of misusing money by a person who receives it in a position of trust will be custodial sentence: R versus Moran, unreported CCA 12 February 1991.

The sentence imposed upon the applicant as structured by the sentencing judge gives abundant recognition to the strong subjective circumstances put forward by the applicant.

I indicated that I would turn to the question of the applicant's health. An affidavit was presented to the Court exhibiting medical reports obtained since the date of sentence. The applicant has had recent testing for hypertension.
He has reported symptoms of chest pain to his physicians. His hypertension is evidently of some standing and when he saw a consultant cardiologist in
Brisbane earlier this month he reported that he was already taking Plendil and
Renitec common blood pressure control drugs. The cardiologist suggested that he add Tenormin to his current therapy. That drug is similarly very common. A stress test was said to be equivocal but it can be said that it did not demonstrate any cardiac insufficiency.

It is submitted that the applicant suffers particular hardship by reason of his having to make a four hour journey from where he has elected to reside in
Queensland to Grafton where he is required to report for periodic detention.
One matter highlighted in a medical report is the risk said to be attendant upon this journey because of the applicant's condition. The incidents of making this trip - time of departure, rest breaks and so forth - are entirely within his own control. In relation to this submission it is legitimate for the Court to keep within view the administration of sentences served by way of periodic detention as revealed in R versus Hallocoglu [1992 29 NSWLR 67.] 
Whether that administrative regime is taken into account or not I do not regard the material brought forward as demonstrating any reason why this Court should intervene to upset the assessment of the judge which is untainted by any error.

I regard this application as entirely without merit and I propose that leave to appeal be refused.

MAHONEY P: I agree with what has been said by Grove J. I would add three things. Firstly, I do not think that the real estate profession should be left in any doubt as to the seriousness of an offence of this kind. The deliberate taking of money and the using of it when the money should be put into a trust account and immediately put into a trust account is something which will not be allowed. There should be no doubt for the future, if there has been for the past, that to do this is a serious matter.

The second thing I would say is that because of the seriousness with which the law regards actions of this kind, a custodial sentence is a not unexpected result of such an action. I am conscious of the difficulties which may confront business people and of the fallibility of human nature. For myself, I am not unappreciative of the difficulties which may have faced the applicant because of his financial involvements. But the fact is that he was in a position of trust - I use the term somewhat inaccurately - in relation to this matter and he and those in such a position must recognize the consequences of the breach of such a trust.

Thirdly, the Court is, I believe, appreciative of the efforts which have been made by him and those associated with him to repair the effects of what he has done and has taken into account, as Grove J has said, such effects of his physical condition as may be relevant. But the sentence imposed, though a custodial one, was in my opinion at the lower end of the range which could be expected for an offence of this kind.

A periodic detention sentence is one which may have been appropriate in the particular case. It is not to be inferred from this that a full custodial sentence of penal servitude is not appropriate in such a case.

Taking into account the mitigating circumstances, I do not see any error in this case. Nor do I think that the attractive proposition put by Mr Bellanto in relation to the last four months or so of community service should be accepted. To accept that might well be misunderstood. But, putting that aside,
I do not think that sufficient reason has been given for the granting of leave to appeal.

IRELAND J: I agree with Grove J and with what has fallen from the President.

MAHONEY P: The order of the Court is that the application, therefore, is dismissed.
 * * * 
