

Arena versus Nader and Ors Matter No Ed 4277/97 [1997] NSWSC 468 (10 October )
 
Arena versus Nader & Ors 
ED 4277/97 October 1997 
Priestley JA, Meagher JA, Handley JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: EQUITY DIVISION - HODGSON J 
MATTER TRANSFERRED TO COURT OF APPEAL 
FILE NO/S: ED 4277/97 
DELIVERED: 10 OCTOBER 1997 
HEARING DATE: 3, 7, 8 OCTOBER 1997 
PARTIES: ARENA versus NADER & ORS 
JUDGMENT OF: PRIESTLEY JA, MEAGHER JA, HANDLEY JA 
COUNSEL (ARENA) R.J.BURBIDGE QC/P.T.TAYLOR/S.J.GAGELER 
M.F.ADAMS QC (submitting) 
L.S.KATZ (SOLICITOR-GENERAL)/M.J.LEEMING 
J.M.MCCARTHY QC/P.M.SKINNER (seeking to intervene) 
M.J. NEIL QC/ A.BROWNE (seeking to intervene) (WOOD J) B.WALKER QC/R.LANCASTER (seeking to intervene) 
SOLICITORS: (ARENA) MCCABES 
I.V.KNIGHT, STATE CROWN SOLICITOR (WOOD J) GREAVES, WANNAN & WILLIAMS 
ALLEN ALLEN & HEMSLEY 
CATCHWORDS 
SPECIAL COMMISSIONS OF INQUIRY ACT 1997 - SPECIAL COMMISSION OF INQUIRY
ESTABLISHED UNDER IT TO INQUIRE AND REPORT ON CLAIMS MADE IN PARLIAMENT BY
MEMBER OF THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL - MEMBER CHALLENGES VALIDITY OF ACT AND
EFFECT OF LETTERS PATENT ESTABLISHING THE SPECIAL COMMISSION - WHETHER ACT IN
BREACH OF COMMONWEALTH [CONSTITUTION](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) -
MEMBER'S VARIOUS ARGUMENTS ALL FAIL.

EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: SUMMONS DISMISSED WITH COSTS 
NO OF PAGES: 21 
ARENA versus NADER & ANOR 
THE COURT: 
Introduction 
This case is an outcome of events which have had a lot of publicity. The issues for the court are somewhat different from those which have attracted the publicity.

Putting the matter in general terms for the purpose of introduction, what happened was that in September this year a member of the State Parliament said in Parliament that a number of men had secretly made arrangements to prevent names becoming public which might be the subject of inquiry at a Royal
Commission. The member who said these things was protected from any legal consequences by parliamentary privilege.

A week later Parliament passed an Act which made changes to the position concerning parliamentary privilege. The new law allowed a House of Parliament to waive parliamentary privilege in connection with inquiries of a particular kind. The new law also let a House of Parliament start an inquiry of this special kind if the Executive Government approved.

The new law however, although it would allow this special kind of inquiry to examine statements made in Parliament under parliamentary privilege, nevertheless did not waive the parliamentary privilege of a member who had made such statements, but authorised that member to give evidence to an inquiry if the member chose to do so.

That is, on the face of things, the new law did not affect the parliamentary privilege protecting a member who had made statements in Parliament subsequently inquired into under the new law, unless the member volunteered to give evidence to the inquiry.

Immediately after the new law came into force an inquiry was set up to inquire into and report on the claims made by the memberin mid September. Apparently not content with the way in which the new law seemingly preserved her parliamentary privilege, she began proceedings in the Supreme Court asking the court to declare that the Act introducing the new law was invalid, and making other claims about the ineffectiveness of the establishment of the inquiry.

The sequence of events in more detail.

On 17 September 1997 the Honourable Franca Arena made a speech in the
Legislative Council of New South Wales concerning the Royal Commission into the New South Wales Police Service. In her speech she read out a newspaper article published on 19 March 1996. This article said that prominent people would be exposed "in the police royal commission's pedophile inquiry starting tomorrow". In another part it said that "Premier Bob Carr ... has invited
Opposition leader Peter Collins to a private meeting in his office on Thursday at 4 pm to discuss the royal commission".

After reading out the article, she continued: "Did that not give us a lot of hope that things would change? But what happened? The next day Bob Carr's office denied that such a meeting was ever going to take place, but it is fair to assume that a meeting did indeed take place when the furore had died down. There was also another meeting which took place here at Parliament House late the following Sunday between Bob Carr; the
General Secretary of the Australian Labour Party, John Della Bosca; party president, Terry Sheahan; and other important figures in the ALP. Are these people going to deny the meeting took place? 
I had confirmation by security officers and others unable to talk about it publicly who could testify to it but are in fear of losing their jobs. I believe it was all to organise damage control. Following the meeting with
Peter Collins and the late meeting at Parliament House, the Premier met with
Justice Wood. What happened at the meeting between Justice Wood and Carr I do not know. No information was leaked, but I am bold enough to presume that an agreement was reached to ensure that people in high places would not be named as it would have been too traumatic for the community to realise how many of its so-called upstanding citizens were involved in criminal activities".

On 24 September 1997 the Special Commissions of Inquiry Amendment Act 1997 (the 1997 Act) was assented to. It inserted into the [Special Commissions of
Inquiry Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/scoia1983341/) (the Act) a new Pt 4A comprising ss 33A to 33H.

Section 4 of the 1983 Act is as follows: "(1) The Governor may, by letters patent under the Public Seal of the State, being letters expressed to be made or issued under the authority of this Act, issue a commission to a person specified in the commission - authorising or requiring the person to inquire into and report to the
Governor on any matter specified in the commission; and establishing a Special Commission of Inquiry for that purpose.

A Commission may not be issued to a person who is not a Judge or Queen's
Counsel, but (subject to revocation, alteration or variation by the Governor) continues in force notwithstanding that the person ceases to be a Judge or
Queen's Counsel after it is issued.

The provisions of this Act apply to and in respect of a commission issued under this Act.

The [Royal Commissions Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rca1923224/), does not apply to or in respect of a commission issued under this Act or any inquiry held in relation to it." 
Section 7 of the 1983 Act permits a Commissioner to hold hearings in connection with the Special Commission. By <case> the Commissioner may restrict the publication of evidence. Section 9(3) confined the Commissioner to receiving only evidence likely to be admitted in relevant criminal proceedings. However, Schedule 1 of the 1997 Act changed this to evidence "likely to be admissible ... in civil proceedings". It also added subsection and (5) to <case>, as follows: "(4) Despite subsection (3), the Commissioner is required, when preparing a report in connection with the subject-matter of the commission, to disregard (in the context of dealing under section 10 with offences that may or may not have been committed) evidence that, in the opinion of the Commissioner, would not be likely to be admissible in evidence in relevant criminal proceedings.

For the purposes of this section, in determining whether evidence is admissible, regard is not to be had to parliamentary privilege to the extent that privilege is waived by or under this Act or otherwise." 
Section 33B(1), inserted by the 1997 Act provides: "A House of Parliament may, by resolution, authorise the Governor to issue a commission under section 4 authorising or requiring a person to inquire into and report to the Governor and the House on such matter relating to parliamentary proceedings within or before the House or one of its committees as is specified in the resolution." 
The expression "parliamentary proceedings" is defined in <case> to mean "any debates or proceedings in Parliament" and to include "all words spoken and acts done in the course of, or for the purpose of or incidental to, the transacting of the business of either House of Parliament ...".

Section 33C is not presently relevant.

Section 33D(1) provides relevantly for present purposes: "A House of Parliament that passes a resolution under <case> ... may, by the same or any later resolution, declare that parliamentary privilege is waived in connection with the Special Commission to such extent as is specified in the declaration.".

The expression "parliamentary privilege" is defined in <case> to mean "parliamentary privilege however arising, whether by statute or otherwise".

Section 33D(2) provides that a declaration under <case> is "effective to waive parliamentary privilege to the extent specified in the resolution concerned".

Section 33D(3) relevantly provides: "However, a declaration by a House of Parliament under this section waiving parliamentary privilege: does not operate to waive parliamentary privilege to the extent that it can be asserted by a member of either House of Parliament in relation to anything said or done by the member in parliamentary proceedings within or before a House of Parliament ...; but operates to authorise the member to give evidence before the Special
Commission if the member chooses to do so, unless the declaration provides otherwise." 
Section 33E requires the Commissioner to report to the relevant House as well as to the Governor.

Section 33F provides that a resolution of a House of Parliament does not have effect for the purposes of Pt 4A unless passed by at least two thirds of the members of the House present and voting.

Section 33G provides that Part 4A "has effect despite any other Act, any
Imperial Act or any other law" (subs 1) and that the "Part extends to parliamentary proceedings occurring before [its] commencement" (subs 5).

On 25 September 1997 the following motion was passed in the Legislative
Council: "1. That this House resolves under <case> of the [1983 Act] to authorise the
Governor to issue a commission under section 4 of the Act authorising or requiring a Commissioner appointed pursuant to the Act, to inquire into and report to the Governor and this House on the following matters relating to parliamentary proceedings within or before this House as specified below: 
Claims made by Mrs Arena in the Legislative Council on 17 September 1997 to the effect that: a meeting took place between the Premier, Mr Bob Carr, and the Leader of the Opposition, Mr Peter Collins, to plan the suppression of names of individuals allegedly being investigated by the Royal Commission into the NSW
Police Service; the Premier and Justice Wood met and that `an agreement was reached to ensure that people in high places would not be named'; and a meeting took place between Premier Bob Carr, John Della Bosca and Terry
Sheahan at Parliament House to plan the suppression of the names of individuals allegedly being investigated by the Royal Commission in the NSW
Police Service; and 
Whether Mrs Arena had any evidence to support these claims which she made under parliamentary privilege.
That this House further resolves to declare under section 33D of the Act that parliamentary privilege is waived in relation to any parliamentary proceedings relevant to the conduct of the Special Commission of Inquiry, and in particular in relation to the speech given by Mrs Arena in the Legislative
Council on 17 September 1997 commencing at 5.27 pm, to the extent necessary to allow the conduct of the inquiry and the report thereon." 
By Letters Patent dated 26 September 1997 expressed to be made and issued under the 1983 Act, His Excellency the Governor authorised and required the
Honourable John Anthony Nader RFD, QC, to inquire into and report on matters stated in the same terms as in the resolution but omitting the words qualifying the matters in the resolution, namely "relating to parliamentary proceedings within or before this House as specified below:". The report was to be delivered on or before 24 October 1997.

Pursuant to <case> of the 1983 Act the Letters Patent declared that "sections , 23 and 24 shall apply to and in respect of the Special Commission the subject of these our Letters Patent". These provisions grant to a Special
Commission the power to issue a warrant for the apprehension of a witness who fails to answer a summons, to remove the grounds for a witness to refuse to answer questions or produce documents, and to have the powers of the Supreme
Court in relation to attendance and answers of witnesses, production of documents and punishment for contempt. Section 23 is qualified in one respect by <case>.

On 29 September 1997 the Commissioner issued a summons to Mrs Arena under <case> of the 1983 Act requiring her to attend on 3 October 1997 "to give evidence and to produce any books, documents, writings or electronically stored information in [her] custody or control which relate to" matters which were the subject of her speech in Parliament. Section 22 of the 1983 Act provides that upon failure to attend in answer to such a summons the Commissioner may issue a warrant for the apprehension of the person served.

Mrs Arena as plaintiff commenced proceedings by summons in the Equity Division of the Supreme Court on 2 October 1997 against the Commissioner as first defendant and the State of New South Wales as second defendant.

On 3 October 1997 at 9.30 am the first defendant held a short public hearing in which he indicated that he proposed to proceed on 7 October 1997. Counsel assisting the first defendant said that he proposed to call the plaintiff as the first witness.

On 3 October 1997 Hodgson CJ in Eq made an order restraining the first defendant from conducting the inquiry up to and including 7 October 1997 and made a further order removing the proceedings into the Court of Appeal under
Pt 12 r 2 of the Supreme Court Rules. Later that day the Court of Appeal granted expedition of the proceedings and stood them over to 10.15 am on 7
October 1997.

The hearing.

When the case came on for hearing on 7 October 1997 counsel appeared for the plaintiff and the second defendant. The court had been told on 3 October 1997 by counsel assisting the first defendant at the inquiry that the first defendant would submit to such orders as the court might make. The Solicitor-
General appeared for the second defendant. Mr McCarthy QC and Mr Skinner sought to appear for the Premier, Bob Carr, Mr Neil QC and Ms Bowne for the
Leader of the Opposition, Mr Collins and Mr Walker SC and Mr Lancaster for
Justice Wood. Ms Wentworth applied for leave to be heard on behalf of general members of the public of New South Wales.

The court was told that Hodgson CJ in Eq had permitted some of these applicants some kind of representation before him. It was not clear to the court precisely what it was that Hodgson CJ in Eq had permitted. At that point a transcript of what had happened on 3 October before him was not available.

Counsel for the Premier said he supported the position of the second defendant generally and, subject to what happened in the course of the hearing, would probably not wish to make any submissions additional to those of the
Solicitor-General. It was however sought to maintain the position of the
Premier as it had been before Hodgson CJ in Eq.

After some discussion about the most convenient method of proceeding the court decided to postpone the making of any orders concerning the non-party applicants or granting any leave to any of them to participate, until what was going to happen during the day became clearer.

The plaintiff then put all the materials upon which she wished to rely before the court and after some minor argument it was agreed between counsel for the plaintiff and the second defendant that all evidentiary material that either party wished to have before the court had been tendered and that there were no disputes of fact for the court to decide. It thus became possible for the court to proceed immediately with the hearing of the summons. Although Hodgson
CJ in Eq in making the order for removal had stated certain questions which appeared to arise for decision, the parties agreed that as the entire proceedings were now before the court the court should deal with the proceedings both finally and without being restricted to the questions which had been formulated. The argument was conducted on this basis.

During the day the transcript of proceedings before Hodgson CJ in Eq on 3
October 1997 became available. From this it appeared that the following had happened in regard to the applications made for the Premier, for the Leader of the Opposition and for Justice Wood. Mr Walker SC, counsel for Justice Wood had been given leave to adduce evidence and make submissions, directed principally to questions of balance of convenience that had arisen in regard to the plaintiff's application for an interlocutory injunction. The judge did not state more closely the effect of what he had permitted and made no formal order defining the status of Mr Walker's client in the proceedings. Next, Mr
Neil QC for Mr Collins sought either to intervene or to be made a party, again apparently for the purpose of dealing with balance of convenience matters relevant to the question of the interlocutory injunction. Mr McCarthy QC for the Premier sought either to intervene or be joined but only to address on the discretionary issue. The judge simply gave Mr McCarthy and Mr Neil ten minutes each to address, without further indication of their formal status.

This court, after hearing Mr Burbidge QC for the plaintiff, and the Solicitor-
General for the second defendant, decided to permit the counsel for the
Premier and the Leader of the Opposition to make brief oral submissions, (they said the time given was sufficient for their purposes). Counsel for Justice
Wood did not pursue his application. The court considered that Ms Wentworth had not shown an interest in the proceedings of a kind justifying the granting to her of permission to take any part in them.

Plaintiff's arguments.

The plaintiff undertook the burden of showing invalidity of a statute of the
New South Wales Parliament. Courts are bound to give careful consideration to contentions of this kind. The plaintiff relied on a number of arguments which were debated before us in considerable detail and with citation of a good deal of appropriate authority. The court heard the case as a matter of urgency on the basis that it was appropriate to bear in mind the intention of the
Legislative Council to have the report delivered no later than 24 October
For the same reason we are of the view that judgment should be delivered as speedily as possible. In dealing with the arguments that were put before the court, therefore, we do not set them out in all the intricacy with which they were presented, but seek to deal with the substance of each argument compendiously.

We discuss the arguments in the order in which they were presented by the plaintiff.

Institutional integrity. This argument took up a theme in Gummow J's reasons in Kable versus DPP <case>; [(1966) 138 ALR 577.] Gummow J observed that the States are an essential part of the federal system established by the Australian [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) and that their institutional integrity and that of their Supreme Courts cannot constitutionally be undermined: see at pp 641-644. It was argued for the plaintiff that similarly the institutional integrity of the State Parliament must be maintained, or to put it in another way, any impairment of its institutional integrity would be invalid as a breach of the Commonwealth [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/).

The analogy upon which the plaintiff relies between the State Supreme Courts and State Parliaments is doubtful. The doubt increases where Parliament itself has taken the step by legislation which is said to undermine its own integrity. However, assuming in the plaintiff's favour that the analogy is workable, it does not seem to us that the alteration brought about by the 1997
Act effects an impairment of the institution of Parliament in the sense in which Gummow J used the word.

Freedom of political discussion. It was submitted that the 1997 Act had the effect of contravening the implied guarantee of freedom of political discussion. This submission led to discussion of Lange versus Australian
Broadcasting Corporation <case>; <case>; [(1997) 71 ALJR 837], cases in which the High Court considered constitutionally implied freedoms. Counsel for the plaintiff sought to demonstrate the existence of an implied guarantee of freedom of political discussion, but whether the plaintiff did this or not, it does not in any event seem to us that freedom of political discussion is impaired by the 1997 Act. It has given each House of Parliament the power to waive parliamentary privilege in one sense but even when a House does waive parliamentary privilege in that sense the waiver declaration "does not operate to waive parliamentary privilege to the extent that it can be asserted by a member ... in relation to anything said or done by the member in parliamentary proceedings". This seems to us quite plainly to mean that the immunity of a member conferred by parliamentary privilege remains untouched by the 1997 Act. What the Act does is to increase the power of each House of Parliament in the way each House may deal with its parliamentary privilege. A House can waive parliamentary privilege generally and can authorise a member to give evidence before a Special Commission set up under the 1983 Act without being in breach of parliamentary privilege. A member continues, however, to be free to say anything in the member's House with complete immunity (apart of course from the sanctions the House itself may impose) in the same way as before.

Against this it may be said that although a member still has freedom of speech in the member's House, the 1997 Act introduces a new deterrent to the exercise of the right because it creates the possibility, not previously available, that what a member says in Parliament may become the subject of an executive inquiry and criticism of a quasi authoritative kind.

We think there are at least three answers to such an argument. First, as already mentioned, the member remains free to say anything in Parliament with complete immunity from any legal consequences outside the House. Second, the fact is that a member may always be criticised in the House. A Member of
Parliament speaking in Parliament is protected in respect of anything said in
Parliament, but another aspect of such speaking is its (almost invariably) public nature and instant availability for criticism inside and outside
Parliament, notably by the media. Third, the courts should assume that Special
Commissions will only be appointed in appropriate circumstances, that
Commissioners will act responsibly, and that any criticism from a Commissioner would be of a responsible kind. The possibility of responsible criticism, no matter what its source, cannot in our opinion be regarded as any impediment to free speech.

Retrospectivity. This argument depended on <case> of the Commonwealth [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) which says: "The [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) of each State of the Commonwealth shall, subject to this [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/), continue as at the establishment of the Commonwealth, or as at the admission or establishment of the State, as the case may be, until altered in accordance with the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) of the State." 
For the plaintiff it was submitted that an enlargement of the powers of each
House of Parliament to deal with matters of parliamentary privilege was a change to the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) of
New South Wales within its meaning in [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s106.html) and that because that section required that the State's [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) "continue as at the establishment of the Commonwealth ... until altered in accordance with the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) of the State", no retrospective constitutional changes could be made. Even if the legislative power of parliament extended to the making of constitutional changes, such changes could only be prospective.

For the second defendant a number of answers were put forward to this contention. It is only necessary to deal with one of these. At the time of federation the Parliament of New South Wales had legislative power to enact retrospective laws. Since the Colony had power to pass retrospective legislation altering its [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) immediately before it became a State that power was also part of its [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) which was continued by [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s106.html) 
Referendum argument. Section 7A(1) of the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/)
Act 1902 provides that: "The Legislative Council shall not be abolished or dissolved, nor shall, its powers be altered; section 11A, Division 2 of Part 3 (sections 22G, 22H, 22I and 22J excepted), the Sixth Schedule or this section be expressly or impliedly repealed or amended; any provision with respect to the persons capable of being elected or of sitting and voting as Members of either House of Parliament be enacted; or any provision with respect to the circumstances in which the seat of a
Member of either House or Parliament becomes vacant be enacted, except in the manner provided by this section." 
Section 7A then proceeds to describe "the manner provided", which is by referendum.

The submission for the plaintiff was that the enactment of the 1997 Act enlarged the powers of the Legislative Council, that this enlargement amounted to "its powers" being "altered" and thus could not become law unless passed in accordance with the referendum procedure.

The second defendant made two principal answers to this argument. The first went to the meaning of "powers" in par (a) of <case> and the second to the meaning of "altered" in the same paragraph.

As to "powers" it was submitted that the word in its context was directed to the powers of the Legislative Council in its law making function as one of the three parts of the Legislature. (We note that the Legislature is defined in [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s3.html) of the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/)
Act 1902 as meaning the Crown with the advice and consent of the two Houses.
We also note that the Legislative Council's powers also include the power of disallowance under the [Interpretation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ia191/).) 
We agree with this submission. Although we think the 1997 Act clearly enlarges the scope of what a House of Parliament may do in dealing with questions of parliamentary privilege, we do not think that this produces any enlargement or alteration of the powers of either House for the purpose of <case>. In our view the powers spoken of in <case>(a) are the powers of the Legislative Council as part of the Legislature and which relate to the Legislature's law making function.

The second principal argument was that the meaning of "altered" should be approached in the light of the history of <case>. Section 7A(1) itself clearly shows the purpose of its enactment in 1929: to prevent the abolition or dissolution of the Legislative Council except by the procedure laid down in the section. What the section ruled out was the possibility of the Council abolishing itself by the votes of its members. Hence the primary words of subs that the Council was not to be "abolished or dissolved ... except in the manner provided ...". Paragraph (a) to (d) of subs (1) introduced safeguards to prevent any whittling away of the functions of the Legislative Council as a member of the Legislature.

In this general context it seems to us that par (a) of <case> should be given a purposive construction as one part of the legislative scheme directed to preventing the lessening of the Legislative Council's powers except in the manner provided by the section and that it is speaking of an alteration of powers by their diminution or limitation. In our opinion the 1997 Act is not directed to any such end nor does it bring about an alteration of the powers of the Legislative Council in the sense in which alteration is used in par .

The 1997 Act was therefore not subject to the referendum requirements.

Ineffectiveness of <case>. It was submitted for the plaintiff that although a resolution under <case> and a declaration under subs (1) of <case> waived parliamentary privilege in connection with a Special Commission, nevertheless subs (3) of that section had the effect of cancelling this waiver, unless the member chose to give evidence to the Special Commission pursuant to subs 3(b).

In support of this argument it was said that the parliamentary privilege of a member is (a) quite distinct from that of the parliamentary privilege of a
House looked at as an institution and (b) that this separate privilege of the member extended not only to protect the member from proceedings outside the
House based on conduct inside the House but enabled the member to prevent any inquiry into what had been said in the House.

The second defendant referred us to the recent Full Court decision of the
Supreme Court of Western Australia Re the Royal Commission into the Use of
Executive Power; The Queen versus Parry, Saxon and Smith (unreported, 1 May 1997,
Malcolm CJ, Franklyn and Murray JJ). In the course of his reasons in that case, Malcolm CJ, with whom the other judges agreed, said: "It is correct, as Mr Smith submitted, that the privileges, immunities and powers may be exercised by individual members of the Parliament. The specific privileges conferred by Article 9 of the Bill of Rights are conferred upon the institution of Parliament as a whole and not on the individual members. In my opinion, while it seems to be the case that individual members may invoke the privilege, it is wrong to imply that it is a personal privilege, but rather it is an attribute of their office and of the Parliament as a whole to allow them to perform freely the functions expected of them by the electors: Sankey v
Whitlam <case>; [(1978) 142 CLR 1] at 35-38 per Gibbs ACJ; Church of Scientology of California v
Johnson Smith [[1972] QB 522] at 528 per Browne J; Hallett, Royal Commissions and Boards of
Inquiry (1982) at 267-268; and Erskine May, Parliamentary Practice (20th Edn ) at 72." 
The authorities cited by Malcolm CJ, and other authorities to which this court was referred in the course of argument, seem to us to support this statement of the nature of parliamentary privilege.

Adopting this approach, it seems to us that the parliamentary privilege spoken of in <case> is that of the House as an institution, and that spoken of in s
D(3)(a) is the privilege that a member is entitled to invoke as an attribute of office. We see nothing incongruous in a House of Parliament being able to waive the former privilege, and thus permitting an external inquiry into statements made inside the House while at the same time the statute operates not to waive a member's privilege.

Was the waiver declaration ineffective? It was submitted that the
Legislative Council's resolution of 25 September 1997 set out at pp 6 and 7 above was ineffective because it failed to specify the extent of the waiver of parliamentary privilege. The submission for the plaintiff was that par 2. of the resolution left to the commissioner the task of deciding the extent to which it was necessary for parliamentary privilege to be waived in the conduct of the Special Commission of Inquiry; this task could not be delegated by the
Legislative Council in this way; it had to be carried out by the Legislative
Council itself in its resolution and declaration. Any force this submission may have comes from concentrating narrowly on the words of par 2. of the resolution. We think the question needs to be answered after consideration of the resolution as a whole.

Paragraph 1. makes clear what it is the commissioner is to inquire into and report on. In the course of the inquiry the Commissioner would, in the absence of the declaration in par 2., encounter questions of parliamentary privilege.
It seems to us that par 2. makes it clear that in any situation where parliamentary privilege could interfere with the Commissioner's inquiry it is waived by the declaration. (This is of course subject to the operation of s
D(3) as earlier discussed.) In other words, we consider that the par 2.
declaration waives parliamentary privilege whenever, but for the declaration, it would have interfered with, hampered, or restricted the Commissioner in the inquiry. (As before, this is subject to the operation of <case>.) 
This argument therefore fails.

The argument on <case> of the 1983 Act. The Letters Patent did not follow the words of <case>(b) because nowhere did they state in terms that a Special
Commission of Inquiry was established. The submission is that this means that no Special Commission of Inquiry was established. We think it sufficient to say that the Letters Patent read as a whole plainly establish a Special
Commission of Inquiry for the purposes stated.

Conclusion.

In our opinion none of the plaintiff's challenges to the 1997 Act or the
Special Commission of Inquiry have been made out and the plaintiff's summons should therefore be dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
