

Tasmania Mines Ltd versus Canadian Superior Oil Ltd [1996] NSWSC 448 (23
September 1996) 
TASMANIA MINES LIMITED versus CANADIAN SUPERIOR OIL LIMITED /93 ED 1968/85 SEPTEMBER 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
MAHONEY ACJ, CLARKE JA, SIMOS AJ 
CATCHWORDS:Construction of deed - joint venture mining development - whether obligations to contribute certain amounts were "liabilities incurred at completion date" 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED:RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED:DISMISSED 
In 1983 the appellant, Tasmania Mines Limited (Tasminex) and McIntyre Mines
Limited (McIntyre) entered into a deed under which Tasminex granted to McIntyre the right to earn an interest in certain mining tenements.
Under the deed, McIntyre agreed to implement and complete a "pre-development" program and, following its completion, advise Tasminex whether or not it elected to proceed to development. If McIntyre elected to proceed, it was to then provide a detailed production plan and financing schedule, the latter of which set out the pro rata contributions of each party to the joint venture.

Following the settlement of a further dispute, the parent of McIntyre, and another overseas company, agreed to sell Tasminex all the issued shares held in their respective wholly owned Australian subsidiaries. Clause 6 of the agreement provided that the vendors would satisfy all liabilities of any nature incurred by the subsidiaries prior to the completion date. At the completion date, Tasminex had not yet made an election as to the share it would take in the development. The contributions to be made by McIntyre and
Tasminex to the development had therefore not been finalised or paid. Tasminex argued unsuccessfully at trial, and again on appeal, that the failure of
McIntyre to pay its contributions meant liabilities which it had incurred remained outstanding with the consequence that the parent company was obliged to satisfy them in accordance with cl 6.

Held: 
The correct approach is to identify and characterise the obligations of the parties to the deed to make the contributions. The highest the case can be put against McIntyre is that Schedule C of the financing plan contains figures which the parties would become liable to pay once Tasminex made its election.
The responsibility to make contributions in accordance with Schedule C did not therefore constitute "liabilities incurred at completion date" within the meaning of cl 6.

Having regard to the provisions of the deed, and observing that McIntyre was responsible for the development, that McIntyre was entitled to modify its development plan and financing schedule, and that contributions went to meet expenses incurred in the development, it cannot be accepted that the responsibility to make contributions in accordance with the financing plan constituted "liabilities incurred at the completion date" within the meaning of cl 6.

Orders 
Appeal dismissed with costs.
 
JUDGMENT 
MAHONEY ACJ: I agree with the judgment of Clarke JA.
 
CLARKE JA: This appeal represents the latest chapter in a series of conflicts between Tasmania Mines Limited (Tasminex) on the one side, and McIntyre Mines (Australia) Limited (McIntyre) and McIntyre Mines Limited (the parent) on the other. The factual background to the present dispute is quite complex but I shall endeavour to reduce the complexities in introducing the sole question with which I am involved. 
On 6 May 1983 McIntyre and Tasminex settled an earlier dispute between them and entered into a deed under which Tasminex granted to McIntyre the right to earn an interest in mining tenements located in the Kara area of Tasmania.
This deed has been described as the Kara Deed.

Under the Kara Deed Tasminex agreed it would hold the tenements for the exclusive benefit of both companies and it also agreed that the interest of each party would be 50 per cent. McIntyre, for its part, agreed to implement and complete a `pre-development programme' and, following the completion of that programme, McIntyre was required to advise Tasminex whether or not it elected to proceed to development. If it elected to proceed to development it was required to provide a detailed production plan and financing schedule for the development. McIntyre did elect to proceed to development and on 17 July provided a detailed production plan and financing schedule, the latter of which required the participants in the project to contribute to the joint venture their pro rata share of funds as follows: August 1984  $180,000.00  October 1984  $201,000.00  January 1985  $1,910,000.00  
A total of $2,291,000.00.

Very soon after this another dispute arose between Tasminex and McIntyre which led to further proceedings in the Supreme Court of Tasmania which were eventually compromised on terms recorded in terms of settlement entered into on 12 October 1984. In those terms the parties recorded the prospect of a sale by McIntyre of its interest in the Kara tenements. That sale did not take place, but on 27 November 1984 the parent and another overseas company agreed to sell to Tasminex all the issued shares held or to be held by them in their respective wholly owned Australian subsidiaries. (The agreement has been described as the letter agreement.) Although there were two vendors, for the sake of simplicity I will refer only to McIntyre Mines Limited.

At the time of this agreement McIntyre and the other subsidiary each owed their parent companies considerable sums of money and in order to remove these liabilities the parent companies agreed that the subsidiaries should issue to the parents sufficient shares to discharge those liabilities (which shares were then sold to Tasminex).

The critical clause in the agreement is cl 6 which read: "The vendors shall satisfy all and any liabilities of any nature whatsoever incurred by CSM and MMA (McIntyre) prior to the Completion Date." 
Completion took place on 27 March 1995. At that time neither McIntyre nor
Tasminex had paid contributions to the joint venture as provided for in the financing schedule. Tasminex took the view that the failure of McIntyre to pay its contributions meant that liabilities which it had incurred remained outstanding with the consequence that its parent company was obliged under cl to satisfy them and consequently to pay Tasminex the amounts which should have been contributed.

The trial judge, Brownie J, found against the appellant. His Honour said: "I do not think it is right to describe this obligation as (a) `liability' which had been `incurred', as at the date of completion of the letter agreement, and as these words are used in that agreement." 
Mr Emmett QC, senior counsel for Tasminex, submitted that McIntyre was obliged to pay those moneys prior to the date of completion and consequently it was correct to describe that obligation as involving a liability which had been incurred by McIntyre.

The primary task is to determine whether the parties should be taken to have intended that the contributions to be paid by the participants were liabilities which had been incurred at the completion date.

Mr Sullivan QC, senior counsel for the parent, submitted that the case made by
Tasminex was commercially nonsensical. The reason for this statement was that the parent was accepting $3,000,000 for its shares and yet, if Tasminex was correct, the parent was immediately liable to refund $2,291,000 to Tasminex.
This, Mr Sullivan submitted, was fanciful.

Clearly enough, the court is required to construe the words used in the context that they appear in a commercial agreement. For that reason the court should strain to avoid a construction which makes commercial nonsense (Hide & Skin Trading Pty Ltd versus Oceanic Meat Traders Ltd [(1990-91) 20 NSWLR ).] Nonetheless, in my opinion, the correct approach in this case is to identify and characterise the obligations of the parties to the Kara
Deed to make the contributions.

Under that Deed, if McIntyre elected to proceed to development, Tasminex was required to advise McIntyre by a stated time whether it elected to take a 50 per cent share in the tenements, whether it would take a lesser share or whether it could contribute nothing to the development. In the event it elected in favour of either of the first two options it was obliged to contribute pro rata to the costs of development. In the event it opted to contribute nothing it was entitled to a 20 per cent share in the tenements.

In the light of the disputes, and in part because of later agreements between the parties, Tasminex did not make its election to take up a 50 per cent share until after the completion date (27 March 1995).

It follows that the contribution which was to be made by Tasminex, and consequently McIntyre, had not been decided as at the completion date.

Nonetheless, McIntyre produced its production plan and financing schedule, the latter of which provided for payment of the funds I have mentioned "subject to change depending on inflation and any changes required in the production plan".

This proviso reflects clause 8.4 of the Kara Deed which provided: "As Manager of Development McIntyre shall be responsible for effecting the
Development in substantial conformity with the production plan and financing schedule referred to in clause 6.3 PROVIDED HOWEVER THAT McIntyre may make any alterations or modifications to the production plan and the financing schedule reasonably required in the interests of both parties." 
One other provision of the Kara Deed should be mentioned. It is the introduction to Schedule B which reads: "Costs and expenses incurred in Development and Mining Operations shall be apportioned between the parties in accordance with their respective Interests in the Tenements but in the event that Tasminex elects pursuant to 7.1 III (ie to contribute nothing) those costs and expenses incurred in relation to
Development shall be entirely the responsibility of McIntyre." 
The production plan provided (cl 8.1.1) that all costs on the project after a nominated date were to be joint venture costs. The financing schedule provided, inter alia: "Project participants will contribute their pro-rata share of funds to the joint-venture based on the total project requirements as outlined in Schedule
A, and the working capital requirement of Schedule B. These funds will be advanced to the joint venture account according to Schedule C. McIntyre, as project manager will then disburse the funds, substantially in conformity with
Schedules A and B." 
The table I earlier mentioned appears in Schedule C.

Both the production plan and financing schedule relevantly assume that the pro-rata shares will be known prior to any obligation to make the Schedule C contributions arising. More pertinently, there is no provision for payments to be made by one or other party in the event that Tasminex had not made its election by any one of the dates in Schedule C.

Having regard to these provisions, and observing that McIntyre was responsible for the development (cl 8.4), that McIntyre was entitled to modify its development plan and financing schedule and that contributions went to meet expenses incurred in the development I am unable to accept that the responsibility to make contributions in accordance with Schedule C of the financing plan constituted "liabilities incurred at the completion date" within the meaning of cl 6.

In my opinion the highest that the case can be put against McIntyre (and its parent) is that Schedule C contains figures which the parties would become liable to pay once Tasminex made its election. That is my preferred view but I am not at all confident that the parties would have intended that Schedule C should be anything more than an agreed formula for constituting a fund from which future liabilites, in the nature of development costs, could be met.
Upon this view also, an obligation to contribute to the fund would not constitute a "liability incurred" within the meaning of clause 6, even if that obligation had arisen before the completion date.

In my opinion Brownie J was correct. The appeal should be dismissed with costs.

SIMOS AJA: I agree with Clarke JA.
 * * * 
