

Regina versus John Francis Burke [1996] NSWSC 575 (27 November 1996) 
REGINA versus John Francis BURKE /96 
Wednesday 27 November 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, IRELAND J 
SENTENCING - DEFRAUDING THE REVENUE 
The appellant pleaded guilty to attempting to defraud the revenue. He understated his income in an income tax return by about $1 million. The tax payable was about $490,000. The appellant's conduct was partly attributed to alcoholism. The appellant was sentenced to imprisonment for one year and four months, with an order to be released on recognizance after serving nine months - HELD - The sentence was not excessive.

O R D E R S Leave to appeal against sentence granted.
 Appeal dismissed.
 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: This is an application for leave to appeal against a sentence imposed by Armitage DCJ in the District Court. At the outset of the hearing I indicated that I had made a direction pursuant to s6AA of the Criminal Appeal Act that this matter be heard by a court consisting of two judges, myself and Ireland J.

The applicant, who is a man aged fifty-nine with no relevant previous convictions, pleaded guilty to a charge that he on or about 22 September 1992 attempted to defraud the Commonwealth in that he fraudulently failed to declare any income in his income tax return for the year ended 30 June 1991.

The circumstances of the offence were undoubtedly highly unusual. On 22
September 1992 the applicant was under pressure from the income tax authorities to file his income tax return for the year ended 30 June 1991. As he well knew, he was at the time under investigation by the income tax authorities. In those circumstances he instructed his accountant, who prepared an income tax return showing no material income for the year ended 30 June .

In truth, the applicant's assessable income for the year ended 30 June 1991 was by all accounts in excess of $1 million. The applicant had received more than $1.5 million from the Water Board during the year ended June 1991 for certain services which he personally or through sub-contractors performed for the Water Board. The evidence indicates he was entitled to allowable deductions to the extent of about $500,000, mainly in respect of payments to sub-contractors. At all events, as I have indicated, at that time he was under investigation by the Taxation Department and he understated his income by about $1 million.

There is some dispute between the applicant and the Taxation Department as to the financial consequences of certain payments he has since made to that
Department, but a resolution of that dispute is immaterial to the present application.

By his plea of guilty the applicant acknowledged a deliberate attempt to defraud the Commonwealth in what was, on any view of the matter, a very large sum of the order of about $490,000, which is the tax that would have been payable on the amount by which his income was understated.

Armitage DCJ sentenced the applicant to imprisonment for a term of one year and four months. His Honour made a recognisance release order that the applicant be released after serving nine months of that sentence.

On the face of it that may seem a lenient sentence, bearing in mind the seriousness of the offence to which the applicant pleaded guilty, and the fact that the maximum penalty was imprisonment for ten years. It is evident, however, that Armitage DCJ took into account subjective circumstances which his Honour considered warranted a degree of leniency.

The applicant has had the misfortune for a long time to suffer from alcoholism. That condition seems to have destroyed his marriage. It has certainly led to a separation from his wife in about 1994. The sentencing judge had before him an affidavit from the applicant and from the applicant's wife dealing with his personal history over a period of many years. Those affidavits showed that the applicant was suffering from alcoholism for a very long time, although to some extent the consequences of that seem to have waxed and waned.

Armitage DCJ referred in his remarks on sentence to some of the evidence in that respect. I think it is necessary to refer to two other portions of the evidence of the applicant's wife which, perhaps, contain some explanation of his extraordinary conduct. Mrs Burke's affidavit contains the following, amongst other, statements: "He has an uncontrollable urge to gamble with life. He finds it a challenge and, on succeeding, gets satisfaction. It places him on a high. By that I don't mean betting at the TAB, but taking chances in life." 
She also said in her affidavit: "His anger and hatred for authority and rules became extreme." 
Without question, as I have said, this is an unusual case, and without question the pitiable condition to which his alcoholism ultimately brought him makes the applicant deserving of sympathy.

In my view, however, he was extended an appropriate measure of leniency by the learned sentencing judge.

It has been strongly argued by senior counsel for the applicant that this is a case which did not warrant a period, even so brief a period, of nine months in full time custody, and that his Honour should have imposed a sentence of imprisonment to be served by way of periodic detention. It was pointed out correctly that this was a single act of criminality. Reference was made to the bizarre behaviour of the applicant which led to this act of criminality.
Reference was also made to the substantial payments that had been made to the taxation authorities by the applicant, his age, his medical condition, and to the good works that he has performed in the community, particularly for the
Autistic Association of New South Wales.

In relation to the applicant's medical condition, it is true that by reason of that circumstance and his age, imprisonment undoubtedly bears and will bear heavily upon him. Reference was also made to the fact that there appears to have been a significant delay between the time the government authorities became aware of these offences and the time of commencement of prosecution against the applicant.

Bearing all these factors in mind, however, in my view the sentence that was imposed by the learned sentencing judge was fair. I do not consider that his
Honour's reasons were affected by material error of fact or law. It is a sad thing to see a man of the applicant's age and background brought to the situation in which he presently finds himself, but I am of the view that the appeal must fail.

The applicant should have leave to appeal against the sentence imposed upon him but the appeal should be dismissed.

IRELAND J: I agree.

GLEESON CJ: The order of the court is as I have proposed.
 * * * 
