

Hunter Region SLSA Helicopter Rescue Service Limited versus Attorney-General of
New South Wales [2013] NSWSC 1749 (29 November 2013) 
Last Updated: 2 December 2013 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Case Title: 
Hunter Region SLSA Helicopter Rescue Service Limited versus Attorney-General of New
South Wales  
Medium Neutral Citation: <case>  
Hearing Date(s): 
Wednesday, 20 November 2013  
Decision Date: November 2013  
Jurisdiction: 
Equity Division  
Before: 
White J  
Decision: 
Refer to paragraph [44] of judgment.  
Catchwords: 
EQUITY - trusts and trustees - charitable trust - variation of trust terms - application to expand permitted geographical scope of helicopter services - application in anticipation of Government intention to allow only tenders from entities serving larger area - difference between cy-près and administrative schemes - whether [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cta1993201/s9.html) of the [Charitable Trusts Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cta1993201/) extends to application for scheme in anticipation of original purposes ceasing to provide a suitable and effective method of using trust property  
JUDGMENT
HIS HONOUR: This is an application to vary a scheme by which the plaintiff holds its assets on a charitable trust established by terms of settlement dated 30 January 1992 as subsequently varied and approved by an order made by this Court on 17 January 2000. 
The plaintiff was incorporated as a company limited by guarantee on 2 November 1984. The company was originally called Newcastle Branch SLA Helicopter Rescue Service Limited. It took over the assets and activities of an unincorporated association known as the Newcastle Branch of Surf Life Saving Australia ("Newcastle Branch SLSA"). That association had provided volunteer helicopter surf rescue and coastal observation services around Newcastle from about 1975. From around 1980 it had also provided helicopter emergency medical services for the Ambulance Service of NSW. The Memorandum of Association of the plaintiff originally specified as its first object the establishment, maintenance and operation of a helicopter service for all aspects of search, rescue, medical aid, training missions and standby and other activities incidental thereto. At that time there was no geographical limitation as to the area in which those services could be provided. 
On 9 September 1988, the plaintiff changed its name to its current name, Hunter Region SLSA Helicopter Rescue Service Limited. 
In about 1983 the plaintiff established a permanent heli-base at Broadmeadow in Newcastle. It owned and operated a Bell Tour 6L "Long Range Helicopter" which had been purchased partly with a loan from Westpac and partly as a result of a public fundraising appeal. In about August 1990 it acquired another helicopter (a Dauphin helicopter) funded from a loan from Westpac and fundraising from within the Hunter community by an appeal called the "Angel One Helicopter Appeal". At about that time it sold its existing helicopter to Northern Region SLSA Helicopter Rescue Service Pty Limited ("Northern"), a company that was a subsidiary of Surf Life Saving Australia Limited ("SLSA"). Another subsidiary of SLSA was Southern Region SLSA Helicopter Rescue Service Pty Limited ("Southern"). The plaintiff was not a subsidiary of SLSA, but was affiliated with it. The plaintiff sold its Bell helicopter to Northern and provided financial support in the form of guarantees and security over its assets to support loans for the purchase of other helicopters for Northern and Southern. 
In 1991 a group of Newcastle citizens complained to the Attorney-General that funds that had been raised from the Hunter Region, including funds raised through the Angel One Helicopter appeal, should not be used for the benefit of a helicopter service based outside the Hunter region. They complained that the plaintiff's major assets had been used as security for the purchase of two helicopters in 1990 by Southern and Northern for use in the Sydney region and the far north coast around Lismore. 
On 19 September 1991 the Attorney-General instituted proceedings against the plaintiff and against SLSA and another related company. The Attorney-General sought a declaration that the plaintiff's helicopter was held on a charitable trust for the benefit of residents in the Central Coast, Hunter, New England, Manning and mid-North Coast regions by way of the provision of a helicopter rescue service. A declaration was also sought that various moneys received from the public were held on a charitable trust for the benefit of the residents of those regions by way of the provision of a helicopter rescue service. Terms of settlement were reached that were noted by a Registrar. The terms of settlement provided that there should be an audit of the plaintiff to consider and examine any transfer of funds from the plaintiff to SLSA or SLSA Helicopters Pty Ltd in 1991. Further terms of settlement included the following: "The Trust
The assets of the Hunter Region company, as appearing from the audit at
January 1, 1992, including but not limited to the Westpac Lifesaver Helicopter and the balance of the following bank accounts held at the Westpac Banking
Corporation, Civic Centre Newcastle Branch: Nos 501490, 501554, 501925, , 692178, 501861, 501888; be declared to be held on trust for the provision of a helicopter service in the Hunter Region to be expressed in the memorandum of association of the company as follows: 
It is acknowledged and declared by the company that: members of the public resident within the areas of the Hunter Region, the
Central Coast, the New England, Manning and mid North Coast areas of New South
Wales ('the Area') contribute funds from time to time for the conduct and maintenance of a helicopter service in that Area. The Company holds such moneys upon trust for the provision of such a service; all those assets presently held by the Company and acquired or to be acquired by the Company are held upon the trusts referred to in (i) above and shall be applied accordingly.

The Department of Health contract
It be acknowledged in the memorandum of association that: the Hunter Region company may enter into contracts consistent with the trust with any person or body, including Surf Life Saving Australia Limited,
SLSA Helicopters Pty Limited and any Crown or State instrumentality for the use for reward or otherwise of any of the assets of the company including the helicopter for the provision of a co-ordinated helicopter service in conjunction with other helicopter services operating in the State of New South
Wales; the contract presently in force between Surf Life Saving Australia
Limited and the New South Wales Department of Health does not constitute or entail a breach of trust on the part of the Hunter Region company."
Clauses 12-15 of the terms of settlement related to changes to be made to the membership and directors of the plaintiff.
Although the helicopter services provided by the plaintiff or the unincorporated association that preceded it, were initially for beach patrols, the services expanded to include links with police districts and the NSW Ambulance Service ("the Ambulance Service") to access remote locations and to transport injured persons quickly to nearby hospitals for appropriate treatment. By 1991, at least 90 per cent of the missions were provided to the Ambulance Service and fewer than two per cent were for beach patrols or emergencies. 
Under successive contracts between the plaintiff and the Health Administration Corporation, the plaintiff provides ambulance services to the Director General of Health or the Health Administration Corporation responsible for forming ambulance service functions set out in [s 67B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/hsa1997161/s67b.html) of the [Health Services Act 1997](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/hsa1997161/) for which the plaintiff receives a monthly standing charge and a flying out charge for the services provided. It is a condition of the contract that the plaintiff must ensure its helicopters are ready and available to fly missions for the Ambulance Service so that it no longer conducts "self-tasked" beach patrols, surf rescues or other such missions, although if its assistance is requested other than through the Ambulance Service, it can respond to the request with the consent of the Ambulance Service.
From the mid to late 1990s the plaintiff was increasingly being tasked by the Ambulance Service to provide missions from Newcastle into the New England and North-West region of the State. These included transfers of patients from the Tamworth Base Hospital to Newcastle's John Hunter Hospital or other referral hospitals in Sydney and also responding to motor vehicle and rural accidents and searches for missing persons in the New England and North-West region. In 1999 a report of a taskforce commissioned by the New South Wales Minister for Health recommended that five-year contracts be provided for services including regions for the Hunter and North-West New South Wales.
On 15 May 2000 the plaintiff commenced proceedings for the purpose of varying the 1991 terms of settlement to extend the area of the permitted operations of the plaintiff under the terms of the charitable trust into the North-West region of the State. On 22 May 2000 Hamilton J delivered judgment whereby he approved of the scheme contained in the terms of settlement that had been noted by the Registrar in 1992 and also approved amendments to the scheme (Hunter Region SLSA Helicopter Rescue Service Limited versus Attorney-General for NSW <case> Orders were made on 17 June 2000, relevantly as follows: "The Court: ) Approves a Scheme in the terms embodied in the document entitled Terms of
Settlement annexed hereto and marked with the letter 'A'.
 ...
 ) Notes the Plaintiffs' undertaking to the Defendant that upon the establishment of the Plaintiffs' new helibase at Tamworth, it will maintain the level of service that it currently provides to the public in the following of the areas mentioned in [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/hsa1997161/index.html#p5) of the Terms of Settlement which are annexure A to these Orders.

Hunter Region 
The Central Coast; 
The New England; 
Manning; and 
Mid North Coast areas."
The annexure "A" headed "Terms of Settlement" included amendments to the original terms of settlement as follows: "The Trust The assets of the Hunter Region company, as appearing from the audit at
January 1, 1992, including but not limited to the Westpac Lifesaver Helicopter and the balance of the following bank accounts held at the Westpac Banking
Corporation, Civic Centre Newcastle Branch: Nos 501490, 501554, 501925, , 692178, 501861, 501888; be declared to be held on trust for provision of the helicopter service in the Hunter Region to be expressed in the memorandum of association of the company as follows: 
It is acknowledged and declared by the company that: members of the public resident within the areas of the Hunter Region, the
Central Coast, the New England, the North West, Manning and mid North Coast areas of New South Wales ('the Area') contribute funds from time to time for the conduct and maintenance of a helicopter service in that Area. The Company holds such moneys upon trust for the provision of such a service; moneys raised by the Hunter Region company from members of the public in the New England and North west areas will be used solely for its helicopter service based at Tamworth or otherwise to fund its operations which directly service those areas; moneys raised by the Hunter Region company from the members of the public in the Hunter Region, the Central Coast, Manning and mid North Coast areas will be used solely for its helicopter service based at Newcastle to service those areas; and all those assets presently held by the Company and acquired or to be acquired by the Company are held upon the trusts referred to in (i) above and shall be applied accordingly."
It is curious that the amendments to the 1992 terms of settlement did not amend the reference in the opening paragraph of clause 5 that the trust was for the provision of the helicopter service in the Hunter region. The clear intent of the orders was that the services would be provided to the wider New England and North West areas.
Following the making of those orders the plaintiff established a heli-base at Tamworth. The plaintiff keeps management accounting records whereby it accounts for income and revenue, assets and liabilities of the New England and North-West region separately from its operations in the other regions so as to ensure that sub-paras (ii) and (iii) of clause 5 set out above are complied with.
The latest contract between the plaintiff and the health administration corporation commenced from 1 January 2008. It was for a term of five years and was due to expire on 31 December 2012. It has been extended to 13 May 2014.
On 5 November 2012 the New South Wales Ministry of Health published a report prepared by Ernst & Young entitled "Review of NSW Aero Medical (Rotary Wing) Retrieval Services - Final Report". The report recommended changes to the Ambulance Service's procurement processes for helicopter emergency medical services. It proposed that the helicopter retrieval fleet be standardised over the period of new contracts that should be for longer terms and that helicopter contracts be issued for only two regions in New South Wales: one region being the Northern Region with bases at Lismore, Tamworth and Newcastle; and the other being the Southern Region having bases at Sydney, Wollongong and Orange. The far north coast is not currently a region to which the plaintiff can provide services pursuant to the existing terms of the trust.
The Ernst & Young report included the following: "... It is apparent that a NGOs play an important service delivery role ...
and have therefore developed the necessary operational expertise and capabilities to be able to operate in a mixed market in direct competition in some cases with commercial service providers. Unlike commercial operators,
NGOs are however usually able to secure a level of philanthropic or community- based funding support to supplement any funding they may receive from
Government which they are able to put towards the cost of service provision or funding new infrastructure, vehicles and equipment. This mixed funding model has the advantage of reducing the overall cost to governments, whilst also creating a direct connection to local communities and businesses. ... 
Having a mixed provider market ... creates the potential for bids from consortia involving both commercial and NGO service providers under which the commercial operator could supply some of the required bundle services (for example, the helicopters and associated engineering and maintenance support) and an NGO operator could provide the balance of services (for example, medical crewing) in addition to community based funding support."
Ernst & Young recommended reducing the number of regions that would be used as part of the future procurement process to procure a "prime provider of services". To encourage competition the same prime contractors could not be contracted to service both regions. 
Ernst & Young raised the possibility of collaboration between charity providers or between charity providers and commercial operators but said that further investigation would be needed to see if that was realistic. 
Helicopter emergency medical services are provided to the north coast area from Lismore by Northern.
On 8 November 2013 the Ministry of Health conducted an industry briefing session to discuss the tender process that would be undertaken in 2014. It advised that it intended to enter into contracts with a single operator for the northern contract region and a single operator for the southern contract region. Those operators could be supported by subcontracts with NGOs, or other NGOs, or with commercial parties. The Ministry of Health would make contract payments to the contracting operator for operating costs, maintenance, capital costs and financing costs and the primary contractor would be responsible for the provision of aircraft, the air operator certificate, undertaking tasked missions, training of aviation and clinical crew, procedures and manuals, insurance, maintenance, pilots, crewmen and engineering staff and bases. The northern region would be required to have aircraft at Newcastle, Lismore and Tamworth. 
The Ministry of Health also advised that it would be a requirement that where required, aircraft could be tasked from one region to the other region in order to provide coverage. 
On 14 November 2013 the plaintiff entered into an agreement with Northern. The agreement recited that the parties had agreed to enter into a consortium to assist the plaintiff to tender for the provision of helicopter emergency medical services in the northern region. The parties agreed to work together for the preparation and lodgment by the plaintiff of a tender and, if successful, for the provision of helicopter emergency medical services in the northern region. They agreed to negotiate in good faith to enter into contracts including a lease by the plaintiff of the Lismore base and of Northern's two Dauphin helicopters. The plaintiff agreed to offer employment contracts to almost all of Northern's employees, subject to the plaintiff's commencing the provision of helicopter emergency medical services in the northern region.
The plaintiff's application to alter the terms of the trust to allow it to operate throughout the proposed northern region, including the north coast and to allow it to tender for the provision of such services to the Ambulance Service has obvious merit. The plaintiff submitted that the present application involves no change to the spirit of the trust, but only to the geographic area in which it provides helicopter emergency medical services. Under the proposed alterations to the trust deed, funds raised from the community in one particular geographical area would be used for providing services in that particular area. Having reorganised its financial and accounting systems to facilitate an accounting on a divisional basis between the Newcastle division and the Tamworth division, the plaintiff could readily ensure that funds raised from the Hunter, New England or North-West, and Far North Coast communities would not be used to cross-subsidise operations in the other regions. 
The plaintiff submitted that the purposes of the trust involving particular geographic limits have ceased to provide a suitable and effective method of using the trust property since it is clear that the NSW Ministry of Health will next year award only two contracts for the provision of such services across the state being in a northern region and a southern region. If the plaintiff is not permitted to extend its area of operations, it will not be able to submit a compliant tender. This would have a devastating effect on the plaintiff's operations. If it does not win the tender for the northern region, then it will no longer be able to employ the funds that have been contributed to it for the purposes for which they were intended. It receives very little tasking from other organisations such as the police, the fire brigade or the State Emergency Services or surf lifesaving. In 2012-13, flying missions other than for the Ambulance Service totalled 13 out of a total of 1,272 missions or approximately one per cent of all its missions. Its income from its current contract with the Health Administration Corporation accounts for about 40 per cent of its operating budget. If its area of permitted operations is extended, the directors of the plaintiff consider that it would be well placed to secure the contract for the northern region as it has a proven track record of providing helicopter emergency services from Newcastle and Tamworth and has the organisational and operational capability to service the whole northern region.
If there is power to alter the objects of the trust by expanding the plaintiff's area of operations it is plainly appropriate to do so. It would not be possible for the plaintiff to make a tender for a new contract for the northern region without an alteration to the terms of the trust to expand the area of its operations by participating in a joint tender with another not-for-profit entity or a commercial operator. The Government proposes to make a contract only with one operator for the northern region. 
The circumstances are not materially dissimilar from those that existed in 2000 when the plaintiff sought and obtained approval from Hamilton J to the alteration to the terms of the trust. Hamilton J observed that the summons asked that leave be granted to the plaintiff to amend the terms of the trust. His Honour said that once a charitable trust is created it is well established that neither the donor nor the trustee may amend its terms, but the Court has jurisdiction to settle schemes in relation to the carrying out of charitable trusts. His Honour observed that a cy-pres scheme is appropriate and necessary where the instrument creating the trust evinces a charitable purpose but it is impossible to apply the gift to carry out the purpose. The Court will then give effect to the intention of the donor as closely as possible. But, his Honour said, a cy-pres scheme is only one subspecies of the genus scheme. His Honour said that what was then being sought was not a variation to the terms of the trust, but a variation of a scheme (at [6]). His Honour concluded (at [8]) that: "This variation is not a Cy-Pres scheme, nor was the scheme embodied in the original Terms of Settlement. It was a scheme concerning administrative arrangements within the more general concept of scheme ...".
In Corish versus Attorney-General's Department of NSW <case>, Campbell J (as his Honour then was) said: "[9] There is a clear conceptual difference between a cy pres scheme and an administrative scheme for a charitable trust. It is the difference between ends and means. A cy pres scheme can be directed when it is impossible or impractical to carry out the objects of the trust in all the details the settlor stipulated. An administrative scheme supplements and/or clarifies any provisions the settlor has stipulated concerning the manner in which the objects of the trust are to be pursued, when practical circumstances show that the settlor's stipulation (if any) of the means is inadequate or impractical."
Because Hamilton J did not consider that he was settling or varying a cy-pres scheme, his Honour did not address the question raised by [s 9](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cta1993201/s9.html) of the [Charitable Trusts Act 1993](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cta1993201/) as to whether or not the original purposes of the trust had ceased to provide a suitable and effective method of using the trust property having regard to the spirit of the trust. [Section 9](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cta1993201/s9.html) provides: "9 Extension of the occasions for applying trust property cy pres 
The circumstances in which the original purposes of a charitable trust can be altered to allow the trust property or any part of it to be applied cy pres include circumstances in which the original purposes, wholly or in part, have since they were laid down ceased to provide a suitable and effective method of using the trust property, having regard to the spirit of the trust.

References in this section to the original purposes of a charitable trust are to be construed, if the application of the trust property or any part of it has been altered or regulated by a scheme or otherwise, as references to the purposes for which the trust property are for the time being applicable."
Counsel for the plaintiff submitted that its application to extend the area of its geographic operations was better seen as an application for a cy-pres scheme rather than an administrative scheme, because the purpose of the charitable trust involves a geographical limit. Counsel for the Attorney-General agreed. So do I.
There is another arguable source of power to make the orders sought, namely, [s 81](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/s81.html) of the [Trustee Act 1925](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/). [Section 81](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/s81.html) relevantly provides: "81 Advantageous dealings 
Where in the management or administration of any property vested in trustees, any sale, lease, mortgage, surrender, release, or disposition, or any purchase, investment, acquisition, expenditure, or transaction, is in the opinion of the Court expedient, but the same cannot be effected by reason of the absence of any power for that purpose vested in the trustees by the instrument, if any, creating the trust, or by law, the Court: may by order confer upon the trustees, either generally or in any particular instance, the necessary power for the purpose, on such terms, and subject to such provisions and conditions, including adjustment of the respective rights of the beneficiaries, as the Court may think fit, and may direct in what manner any money authorised to be expended, and the costs of any transaction, are to be paid or borne as between capital and income.

The provisions of subsection (1) shall be deemed to empower the Court, where it is satisfied that an alteration whether by extension or otherwise of the trusts or powers conferred on the trustees by the trust instrument, if any, creating the trust, or by law is expedient, to authorise the trustees to do or abstain from doing any act or thing which if done or omitted by them without the authorisation of the Court or the consent of the beneficiaries would be a breach of trust, and in particular the Court may authorise the trustees: to sell trust property, notwithstanding that the terms or consideration for the sale may not be within any statutory powers of the trustees, or within the terms of the instrument, if any, creating the trust, or may be forbidden by that instrument, to postpone the sale of trust property, to carry on any business forming part of the trust property during any period for which a sale may be postponed, to employ capital money subject to the trust in any business which the trustees are authorised by the instrument, if any, creating the trust or by law to carry on."
In Freeman versus The Attorney-General for New South Wales [[1973] 1 NSWLR 729], Helsham J held that the section applied to charitable trusts in no less extensive a way than it does to private trusts (at 735). His Honour observed (at 735-736) that: "In its application to charitable trusts I do not consider that the jurisdiction conferred by [s.
](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/s81.html) is any less extensive than when applied to private trusts. As it was put by Dixon
J., as he then was, in Riddle v. Riddle: '[Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/s81.html) is a provision conferring very large and important powers upon the Court which depend upon the Court's opinion of what is expedient, a criterion of the widest and most flexible kind. The power necessarily carries with it responsebilities of equal extent. The responsibilities imposed involve business and financial considerations, but responsibilities of that description have always fallen on courts of administration.

I do not think that the powers given by [s.
](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/s81.html) were intended to be restricted by any implications.' 
In its application to charitable trusts there is still, of course, a requirement of jurisdiction that the transaction in question must be one arising in the management or administration of property vested in trustees.
And in connection with such trusts expediency must be determined by reference to the purpose or objects of the particular trust. The section would not permit an order to be made that enabled a use of trust property which went outside the confines of the purpose or objects to benefit [or] achieve which the trust was constituted, but would permit an order which enabled use of trust property directed towards furthering such purpose or objects."
In RSL Veterans Retirement Village Ltd versus NSW Minister for Lands [[2006] NSWSC 1161] Palmer J said (at [45]): "[45] Sometimes, it will be clear enough that even radical changes to the terms of the trust do no more than 'adjust' the respective rights of beneficiaries of a private trust or the purposes of a charitable trust: the section permits such adjustments if they are expedient in the management or administration of the trust. Sometimes, however, it will not be easy to draw the line between 'adjustment' of rights or purposes and 'subversion'. In the case of a charitable trust one has to identify the essential characteristic of the objects which the trust is designed to achieve. A change which alters the essential characteristic of the objects will be a subversion; a change which affects merely ancillary or incidental aspects of the objects will be an adjustment. In some case, minds may differ as to what is essential and what is ancillary or incidental."
In Attorney-General of New South Wales versus Fulham <case>, Bryson J (as his Honour then was) said (at [16]) that [s 9](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cta1993201/s9.html) of the [Charitable Trusts Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cta1993201/) has widened the grounds on which the Court may act in that it is no longer necessary that actual compliance with the original terms of the trust should be impossible, but it is enough they have ceased to provide a suitable and effective method of using the trust property. 
The only potential difficulty with the application of [s 9](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cta1993201/s9.html) is that the circumstances have not yet occurred whereby the original purposes of the trust have ceased to provide a suitable and effective method of using the trust property, having regard to the spirit of the trust. That will happen if the plaintiff fails in its tender for a contract to provide helicopter emergency medical services to the northern region from 2014. But at present the original purposes of the trust are working well. 
In my view, [s 9](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cta1993201/s9.html) can be applied proleptically. [Section 9](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cta1993201/s9.html) is remedial and beneficial legislation and not to be narrowly construed. A construction of [s 9](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cta1993201/s9.html) that the court could not make an order altering the original purposes of a charitable trust until those purposes have ceased to provide a suitable and effective method of using the trust property, even though it will then be too late to do anything about it, should not be adopted if an alternative construction is reasonably available. [Section 9(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cta1993201/s9.html) does not purport to state exhaustively the circumstances in which the court can alter the original purposes of the charitable trust. The section says that the circumstances in which those original purposes can be altered "include" circumstances in which the original purposes have ceased to provide a suitable and effective method of using the trust property having regard to the spirit of the trust. As the power can be exercised in those circumstances, it is only logical that it can also be exercised if it is shown that the original purposes will cease to provide a suitable and effective method of using the trust property having regard to the spirit of the trust.
By [s 11](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cta1993201/s11.html) the trustee of a charitable trust is under a duty, if the case permits and requires the trust property or any part of it to be applied cy-pres to secure its effective use for charitable purposes, to take steps to enable it to be so applied. This provision makes it clear that the court can make orders for trust property to be applied cy-pres to secure its effective use for charitable purposes in anticipation and prevention of events that would otherwise prevent the property being effectively applied for the original purposes of the charitable trust.
Pursuant to [s 9(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cta1993201/s9.html) the Court is to determine the original purposes of the trust having regard to the alteration to the trust purposes made by the orders of Hamilton J of 17 June 2000. (Compare Permanent Trustee Co Limited versus Attorney-General (Re Byrnes Estate) (12 December 1994, Young J, Supreme Court of New South Wales, unreported; BC9403435 at [4]-[6]). 
The proposed alteration is clearly within the spirit of the trust. 
The Attorney-General accepted that the terms of settlement approved by Hamilton J on 17 June 2000 should be altered by approving a further scheme in the terms ultimately proposed by the plaintiff. The plaintiff did not pursue a proposal to expand the geographic area in which helicopter services might be provided to any part of New South Wales in the event that the Ambulance Service in the future wished to move to a single contract for the provision of helicopter emergency medical services for the whole of New South Wales. That is not the present proposal and counsel for the plaintiff acknowledged that the present circumstances would not justify such an alteration. 
Having regard to these conclusions, it is unnecessary to decide whether [s 81](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/s81.html) of the [Trustee Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/) would provide an alternative source of power to alter the trusts.
The plaintiff proposed that the alteration to the trusts include a provision that notwithstanding that the trusts would be amended to provide helicopter services in expanded regions, pursuant to the plaintiff's contractual arrangements, it will be tasked from time to time to operate the helicopter service outside those areas, and that this would not constitute a breach of the trust. The purpose of that provision is to enable the plaintiff from time to time to provide helicopter services outside its region as the Ambulance Service may require. It appears that this will be a necessary requirement of a new contract, as it is a requirement of the present contract. The thought behind the proposed term is sound. The Attorney-General wishes to consider the drafting of the provision and that is appropriate.
For these reasons I will make an order pursuant to [s 9](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cta1993201/s9.html) of the [Charitable Trusts Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cta1993201/) as sought, or substantially as sought, by the plaintiff. The parties asked for a little time to consider the drafting of the appropriate orders. I will stand the matter over to a convenient time for the parties to bring in short minutes of order.
 * * * 
