

Stephen Wodzga versus QBE Insurance Limited [1996] NSWSC 594 (3 December 1996) 
STEPHEN WODZGA v. QBE INSURANCE LIMITED /92 
TUESDAY 3 DECEMBER 1996 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
BADGERY-PARKER J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: On 27 July 1991, the plaintiff was involved in a motor vehicle accident. The defendant has admitted its liability to pay damages in respect of such injuries as he may have received. The plaintiff claims that he sustained an injury to his neck which led to the need for an anterior cervical spinal fusion carried out by Dr. Segelov on 27 October 1992; and an injury to his lumbar spine necessitating an L5/6 fusion, also carried out by Dr. Segelov, on 14 September 1993. At the trial, the following issues emerged:-
The nature of any injury suffered by the plaintiff to his neck.
Whether the cervical spinal fusion performed on 27 October 1992 was rendered necessary by any injury sustained in the motor vehicle accident.
The nature of any injury to the lumbar spine.
Whether the lumbar spinal fusion was rendered necessary by any injury sustained in the motor vehicle accident.
The extent to which the plaintiff's earning capacity has been impaired by reason of injury sustained in the motor vehicle accident, including the psychological consequences of injury.
Whether the state of the plaintiff's cervical spine and/or lumbar spine prior to the motor vehicle accident was such as would in any event have caused him to become disabled for the kind of work in which he was engaged at the time of the accident; and if so, when such disablement was likely to occur.

That all of these issues arose, and were able to be strongly contested by the defendant, reflects three features of the evidence.
Evidence which clearly demonstrates the presence, in the plaintiff's cervical spine, of a significant degenerative condition, well established at the time of the motor vehicle accident; and of a significant defect in the plaintiff's lumbar spine, also clearly shown to have been present prior to the motor vehicle accident.
The plaintiff's history of a series of traumatic incidents and of relatively frequent episodes of low back pain over many years prior to the happening of the accident.
The plaintiff's unusual personality and lifestyle.

The plaintiff was born on 30 March 1957, the eldest of three children. His siblings became qualified as medical practitioners; they now are and for some years have been practising in partnership in a general practice of which the plaintiff became a patient in 1987. The plaintiff himself left school at the age of 15 with the intention of entering his father's business as a lorry owner/driver but, at his father's insistence, first undertook and completed an apprenticeship as a fitter and turner, thereafter working in that trade for about one year before entering his father's firm as a driver at the age of about 21. Following his father's death on 21 September 1984, the plaintiff took over the trucking business previously operated by his father and was still engaged in that business at the time of the accident. Between 1974 and , the plaintiff was involved in a number of accidents of different kinds and suffered a variety of injuries.

It should be said that although the plaintiff appeared frankly to reveal his past injury history in the course of his evidence in chief, some of the matters with which I am about to deal emerged only in the course of cross- examination of him and of his sister, Dr. Angela Campbell, on the basis of entries in medical records. The defendant relied upon that as one of a number of matters supporting a submission that the plaintiff has not been frank with the court and that his evidence should be treated with some caution. It was submitted also that I should gather from the plaintiff's demeanour that he was at pains to conceal certain matters adverse to his claim, revealing only those as to which it appeared to him that the defendant was already in possession of the information. I gained no such impression from the plaintiff's demeanour nor generally from the way in which he gave his evidence. I was satisfied that he was at all times endeavouring to be frank about his pre-accident history of injury, and gave as complete an account of that as his memory permitted. When other matters were brought to his attention in the course of cross- examination, either he recalled them and frankly conceded them, or he indicated (as was the case on a number of occasions) that he had no recollection but was prepared to accept what he understood to be put to him on the basis of documentary material. I found him to be an honest and truthful witness but a witness whose reliability was affected by his poor memory for detail and by his psychological state, itself a consequence of the accident.

In the course of the evidence, the following history of previous injury emerged.

During his apprenticeship, in about June 1974, the plaintiff fell from an elevated position and landed on his right hip. He experienced pain in his lower back, "at the side of my back"; he had x-rays, physiotherapy, and saw a specialist who recommended surgery. The x-rays then taken are not before the court, but bearing in mind that x-rays taken in September 1986, and others taken shortly after the motor vehicle accident in July 1991, revealed a defect at L5/S1, the better view of which is that it is a congenital or developmental spondylolysthesis, a condition which ordinarily appears during a person's teen years, it is relatively easy to infer that the recommendation for surgery in was related to the identification at that time of just such a defect as the source of the plaintiff's then symptoms. However the plaintiff rejected that advice and, subject to the exigencies of the physiotherapy programme, continued at work. He readily concedes that from that time onwards he experienced low back pain from time to time, associated with activity and particularly occurring after subsequent traumatic incidents. To some of those
I will shortly refer. It is convenient at this stage to observe, however, that his history reveals no previous instance of an injury specifically affecting his neck although on some occasions when he attended for outpatient treatment at Westmead Hospital, there is recorded a complaint of neck tenderness.

On 19 March 1982, the plaintiff suffered a fractured collar bone in a fall from a pushbike. There is no evidence that that episode had any untoward effect on his neck or back directly, in the sense that it was accompanied by symptoms in those areas. Following it he returned to work.

Also in 1982, or thereabouts, he suffered a back injury or, at any rate, a recurrence of low back pain whilst engaged in karate. This is one instance where the plaintiff had clearly forgotten a particular incident in his history but readily conceded it when it was brought to his attention. Although he gave no evidence of this in chief, he had given a history of back pain associated with karate to Dr. Kim Edwards who examined in on behalf of the defendant on March 1994. Counsel for the defendant also sought to make something of the discrepancy between the plaintiff's own account of his involvement in karate and the account given by his sister, Dr. Campbell; but it is a discrepancy which I find readily explicable on the basis of faulty recollection. I accept as true what the plaintiff said at one stage of his evidence, that he retains a clear recollection of major matters but matters which he has not regarded as significant have become unclear in his recollection.

On 14 April 1984, he went to the casualty department at Westmead Hospital after a fall from a motor cycle (trail bike) on his property at Catherine
Fields, in which he struck his forehead and nose. It is recorded that his neck was tender but he does not appear to have had any treatment for his neck.
According to the plaintiff, that fall was but one of many tumbles he experienced while riding the trail bike, none of which he seems to have regarded seriously. I gather that his attendance at the hospital on that occasion was because of his concern that he may have fractured his nose. In fact he had not.

On 16 October 1985, the plaintiff attended the casualty department at one of the Parramatta hospitals in respect of the consequences of a motor vehicle accident two days earlier. He had struck his right knee on the dashboard and he complained that his cervical spine was very tender. X-rays were ordered but revealed no abnormality.

On 14 September 1986 while working on his property, the plaintiff fell from roof height. He attended Westmead Hospital complaining of significant back pain. As a precaution pending review by an orthopaedic specialist, he was placed in traction, and remained in traction on and off over a period of three days until eventually reviewed by a specialist who determined that the procedure was unnecessary and he was fit to be discharged.

There are no reported or recorded incidents of trauma to his neck or back thereafter until the date of the motor vehicle accident out of which this action arises. The evidence of the plaintiff and of his sister, which I accept, is that throughout the period from 1974 to the time of the motor vehicle accident, but subject to the interruptions to which I have referred, he was capable of carrying out heavy work and did so; he engaged in surfing, and in folkloric dancing (of a particularly vigorous kind); he carried out the major part of the physical work in the construction of a large shed for the purposes of his trucking business, and in the construction of his home. His neck and low back in no way interfered with those activities. It is however clearly the case and he does not suggest otherwise, that he did experience back pain from time to time in the course of such activities.

The plaintiff's work activity during all of this period was substantial. He had inherited the trucking business from his father. His principal activity was carting coal, mostly but not always from the South Bulli mine to the coal loader at Port Kembla Harbour. It was a feature of that work that loading the vehicle at the mine was a somewhat inaccurate exercise and it was necessary before departure for the driver to trim the load, reducing the weight to the legal limit by shovelling as much as one to two tonnes of coal. He carried out all maintenance operations on his truck and for that purpose had a well equipped workshop. He also had one other truck (there were two, but one at a time) in his shed which he was rebuilding with a view to its eventual use in his business. It is clear that the plaintiff was a very hard worker, indeed obsessively so, and I suspect he was prepared to put up with a level of symptoms in his low back which might have caused a different man to moderate his activity. Apart from the specific occasion when he complained of neck tenderness on a visit to Westmead Hospital, it does not appear to be the case that he experienced any neck symptoms, notwithstanding the presence in his neck, as I have remarked, of well established degenerative changes.

On 27 July 1991, the plaintiff was driving a car. He became stationary waiting to make a right hand turn, and was leaning forward in the driving seat to improve his view of the traffic. A vehicle insured by the defendant, travelling fairly fast, ran into the back of the plaintiff's car. The plaintiff has usually described his symptoms at the time of that impact principally in terms of tingling, numbness or pins and needles affecting both arms and hands, but at times has said also that those sensations affected the whole of his body. The latter complaint does not seem to accord with any medical diagnosis; it may reflect the plaintiff's emotional state rather than an actual recollection of the sensation which he experienced at the time. The description of numbness or pins and needles affecting both arms has attracted some scepticism from Dr. Sturrock but it appears to me that his opinion may be based on a less than accurate understanding of what it was that the plaintiff was trying to describe. Dr. Segelov seems to have had no difficulty in attributing the sensation described by the plaintiff to an injury to the plaintiff's neck of the sort which Dr. Segelov diagnosed and to which I shall shortly come. The plaintiff's said that on waking the next day he was stiff and had pain in his neck and low back. On that day, a Sunday, he would normally have worked at his home in the maintenance or repair of his trucks but he was unable to do so.

On the Monday, 29 July, he consulted his brother and sister, Dr. Woods and Dr.
Campbell. I accept the evidence of Dr. Campbell that on that day he gave her history of having at the time of the accident severe neck pain with radiation to both arms and that on the night of the day of the accident he experienced the sensation of numbness and pins and needles earlier referred to, and also experienced low back pain. It seems to me tolerably clear that neither the plaintiff nor his doctors at that stage regarded the complaint of low back pain as a matter of any particular significance. It was a not unfamiliar experience to the plaintiff and it is notable that Dr. Campbell's examination of him as recorded in her report of 14 November 1991 was entirely related to the condition of his neck and the related condition of his arms. She ordered x-rays, and a CT scan of his neck but also of his low back.

So far as the low back was concerned, those investigations revealed the spondylolisthesis of L5 on S1 which had been detected in 1986 and presumably in 1974. There is nothing in the evidence to suggest that the investigations revealed any alteration in the pathology of the lumbar spine from that which had been observed on earlier occasions. It appears to me clear that the evidence does not show that the accident in July 1991 caused any change in the pathology of the lumbar spine. I accept, however, that it did precipitate in the lumbar spine a fresh episode of symptomatology such as might have been expected from a spine in that condition subjected to trauma. Although I think it is not expressly so stated by him in the course of his evidence, the general thrust of the plaintiff's evidence appears to indicate that it is his present recollection that he was thereafter not free of symptoms of low back pain throughout the period ending with the performance of surgery to the low back in October 1993. If that is correctly to be understood from his evidence, then I must say that I think he is mistaken in that recollection. I accept that he still had symptoms in the low back as at 19 August 1991, because Dr.
Campbell referred to that in her certificate issued on that day, but I am not persuaded that any symptoms attributable to the low back were still continuing as at 6 September 1991, when he was seen by a consultant neurologist, Dr. Neil
Griffith whose report of that date forms part of Exhibit G (Dr. Campbell's records). When the plaintiff was seen by Dr. Segelov on 24 September 1991 and by Dr. Fearnside on 15 November 1991 and again by Dr. Segelov on 21 November , the concerns which he expressed were only in respect of his neck. Dr.
Campbell's report of 14 November 1991 refers to back symptoms only as at and immediately after the date of the accident; the whole of the rest of her report deals only with neck related symptoms.

The x-rays of the neck done on 1 August 1991 were reported as showing severe degenerative disc changes at C6/7 and further disc degenerative changes of lesser extent at C5/6, with encroachment by osteophytes into the related intervertebral foraminae. An MRI scan dated 7 August 1991 demonstrated the extent of the degenerative changes - disc dehydration and degeneration at both levels, some mineralisation of the posterior longitudinal ligament and extensive osteophyte development with compression of the theca at both C5/6 and C6/7 levels. That scan also demonstrated posterior rupture of the disc at
C5/6 with a moderate sized broad based protrusion and right postero lateral disc protrusion; and at the C6/7 level posterior rupture of the disc with a moderate sized left postero lateral disc protrusion.

Dr. Segelov saw the plaintiff on the referral of the general practitioner on September 1991. It was Dr. Segelov's opinion that the accident had produced protrusions of the C6/7 and C5/6 discs and he recommended a two level anterior discectomy and fusion. Dr. Griffiths' report of 6 September 1991 expresses a similar opinion. Dr. Fearnside reported to Dr. Campbell on 15 November 1991 that the history was suggestive of a cervical disc prolapse. Although some other specialists who have reported on the case on behalf of the defendant (subsequently to the later performance of surgery) expressed some doubt as to the necessity for such a surgical procedure, the first consultant qualified by the defendant, Dr. Edwards, in his report of 5 May 1992, expressed an opinion similar to Dr. Segelov; and Dr. Fearnside clearly recognised the validity of an opinion that surgery should be performed, although himself expressing a preference that conservative therapy be tried first. The need for surgery at the time when Dr. Segelov recommended it is, in my view, clearly established on the evidence. The real question is whether the necessity for that surgery was the motor vehicle accident.

One view is that the condition of the plaintiff's neck was already such that surgery would inevitably be required; that the effect of the accident would have been to produce no more than a temporary aggravation of the condition of the plaintiff's neck, meaning, I take it, aggravation in the sense of producing symptoms which had not previously been present, and that the need for surgery related only to the underlying and pre-existing condition (see, eg., the reports of Dr. Edwards). The alternative view, which I understand to be the view expressed by Dr. Segelov and Dr. Searle is that, although the condition of the plaintiff's neck prior to the accident was such that it might be anticipated that at some time the neck would become a source of symptoms and disability, so that a need for surgery might in any event have arisen at some future time, it was the production of symptoms in the motor vehicle accident which rendered surgery necessary at the time when Dr. Segelov recommended it and at the time when in fact he carried it out, a year later.

I am satisfied that the fact is that before the accident the plaintiff had no symptoms referrable to his neck, but from the time of the accident he experienced symptoms of increasing severity consisting of pins and needles in his shoulders and arms, pain in the neck and an increasing inability to use his arms effectively particularly in controlling his coal truck. The evidence satisfies me that those symptoms were continuous and that they at no time remitted following the accident.

I am satisfied that the severity of the symptoms at the time when the plaintiff saw Dr. Segelov in September 1991 justified Dr. Segelov's recommendation at that time that a cervical fusion be performed. It is clear that that was still Dr. Segelov's view when he saw the plaintiff on 21
November and it was only the fact that the plaintiff's wife was expecting a baby in the next few months that caused the decision to be postponed. On 28
January 1992, Dr. Segelov saw the plaintiff again, and it appears that a firm decision was taken to proceed with the operation but because of financial factors the plaintiff wished to defer the procedure until later in the year. I am satisfied that had it not been for the personal and financial situation, the plaintiff would have had the operation late in 1991, approximately a year earlier than the date when he fact had it, but it is obvious that the plaintiff was not keen to undergo surgery in the light of his then domestic and financial circumstances. It is true that his actual decision to proceed to surgery in October 1992 was precipitated by the dramatic increase in his symptoms which occurred early in that month at a time when he was carrying out a heavy maintenance job on one of his trucks. It does not appear to me, however, realistic to say that it was that event rather than the motor vehicle accident which created the need for surgery. On the contrary, that event demonstrated the need for surgery already identified by Dr. Segelov over a year earlier.

Counsel for the defendant seized on the fact that the plaintiff had made no mention of that particular incident in his evidence in chief as a further ground for doubting the honesty and reliability of the plaintiff's evidence. I reject that submission. The episode was clearly identified in the history given by the plaintiff to Dr. Segelov and in Dr. Segelov's reports served by the plaintiff's solicitors on the defendant. A more complete presentation of the plaintiff's evidence in chief would no doubt have revealed it but the fact that it was not referred to until raised in cross-examination seems to me to reflect the way in which plaintiff's counsel sought to adduce his evidence, with commendable brevity focusing only on matters of particular relevance, rather than on any attempt on behalf of the plaintiff himself to mislead.

I accept that the plaintiff had had continuing difficulty, and increasing difficulty, in carrying out his work as a truck driver by reason of the condition of his neck and the radiation of pain into his arms, which caused him to have concern as to his ability properly to control his vehicle. In view of the history of his earlier attendances on Dr. Segelov and Dr. Segelov's repeated recommendations for surgery, I am satisfied that surgery had become necessary as a result of the motor vehicle accident and would have been carried out in any event at some time late in 1992, indeed probably at about the time when it was carried out, because the plaintiff was forced to the realisation that he could not in fact carry on much longer.

Some criticism of the plaintiff's credit was sought to be based also on some confusion in the evidence as to precisely when it was that he gave up driving and sold the Atkinson truck which he used in his business. It appears to me that the proper understanding of the evidence is that the plaintiff made the decision to sell that vehicle once he had decided, in consultation with Dr.
Segelov on 8 October 1992 to proceed to surgery that month. I find no substance in the attack on the plaintiff's credibility in respect of that question. A further attack was made based on his decision later in 1992 to sell a second truck, a Kenworth, which was at that time (and had been for some months) disabled by mechanical problems. The suggestion seems to have been that the true motivation for the sale of that vehicle was that the trucking industry was depressed and the plaintiff was unlikely to have continued in that industry irrespective of the fact that he had been injured. I am satisfied that the plaintiff was in fact increasingly disabled from driving by reason of his neck injury; that it was that circumstance which caused him to agree to have the operation in October 1992 and which caused him to sell the
Atkinson truck, and that the sale of the Kenworth truck was probably the result of a combination of factors, which may have included the economic downturn, but which certainly included the plaintiff's realisation that he was unlikely to be able to return to trucking work, and if he did, was unlikely to be able himself to complete the necessary mechanical work to make the Kenworth truck useable. It appears to me that the question of the downturn in the trucking industry and the sale of the Kenworth vehicle are in effect irrelevant.

It is no doubt the case that the nature of the pre-existing condition of the plaintiff's neck was such as may have caused him to give up truck driving earlier than his intended retirement age and may have rendered it necessary that he submit to surgery to the cervical spine at some future date. The latter perhaps is the basis of Dr. Edwards' opinion that the need for operation was attributable not to the accident as such but to the underlying degenerative condition. The possibility or probability that the plaintiff may have experienced disabling neck problems in future, even if not injured in
July 1991, and that he may in the future have come to operation do not provide an answer to the contention that it was the July 1991 accident which created the need for operation. They are, however, relevant to the quantification of damages once the question of causation is resolved, as I have resolved it, in the plaintiff's favour.

The question then is what is likely to have been the course of the plaintiff's neck disorder had the accident for which the defendant is responsible not occurred. It is clear from the medical evidence that the extent of the degeneration of his neck was unusually great in a man of the plaintiff's age.
Accepting Dr. Segelov's view that the diminution of the disc material and the loss of mobility of the spine would tend to protect the spinal discs themselves from injury, nevertheless it was clearly on the cards that should the plaintiff be subjected to trauma (such as indeed occurred in the accident of 27 July 1991) that might cause protrusion of the degenerated discs and the onset of disability as in fact occurred. Clearly that is one possibility that existed. It was also the view of Dr. Segelov, and I think Dr. Searle, that leaving aside disc rupture, the plaintiff's cervical spine was more susceptible to other sorts of injury than would have been a normal spine, for example injury by way of spondylolysthesis or fracture; but although this is not expressly referred to in the evidence, I would take it to be part of the opinion of both doctors to that effect that they were postulating a vulnerability to further injury occurring only in the event that the spine should be subjected to trauma. Finally, and as it seems to me most significantly, the degenerative condition of the plaintiff's spine was such as not only to increase the risk of injury in the event of specific trauma, but was such that it was to be anticipated that if he continued to carry out heavy physical work there was likely to be progression of the degenerative changes, referred to in a phrase which Dr. Segelov adopted as "increased risk of bony disease", the consequence of which, as I would understand the evidence, is that it should reasonably be anticipated that irrespective of specific trauma, the plaintiff would, as time went by, have commenced to experience in his neck symptoms the severity of which would progressively increase to a point where they might be expected to interfere with his capacity to carry out the kind of work that he was doing at the time of the accident.

The existence of those possibilities requires that once I find, as I do, that the plaintiff's capacity to earn has been diminished by reason of the injury to his neck, the amount which might otherwise have been awarded as compensation for that loss requires to be discounted to take account of the possibility that the plaintiff would in any event have been disabled from earning by the ordinary progression of his neck disease or by the effect of some other trauma upon his vulnerable state. The question is as to the extent of the discount which should be made. In the course of cross-examination of
Dr. Segelov and Dr. Searle, an attempt was made to extract from each of them an assessment, in percentage terms, of the probability that quite apart from the July 1971 accident, the plaintiff would have been forced to give up his heavy work in the transport industry. Dr. Searle was of opinion that:- "On the balance of probabilities he would have found that his spinal degenerative changes would have probably caused some impairment later in life if he were involved in heavy trucking work, particularly with a lot of loading and unloading. But of course there are a variety of types of jobs available in the transport industry, and if he found that the heavy work was beyond him he would presumably have been able to switch to some sort of lighter transport work." 
It was Dr. Searle's opinion that he "would probably have a 50:50 chance of seeing out his working days in that type of work" that is, in some form of transport work. He said it would have been no surprise to him if, within only a few years, the plaintiff, continuing in heavy transport work, had suffered a disc injury which brought him to surgery, or some significant exacerbation of his symptoms such as may have caused him to change his job. Dr. Segelov also said that he would assess at 50% the plaintiff's chance of continuing in heavy transport work had the injury of July 1991 not occurred. Earlier, he had said that within a matter of a few years (whatever that means) there would have been a worsening of his symptoms had he continued in the kind of work that he was doing, and that that worsening of symptoms might be such (but he would not say necessarily within a few years) as to compel the plaintiff to give up that sort of work.

I think it is necessary to make a distinction between two possible consequences of the prior condition of the plaintiff's neck. Clearly there was a very large probability that he would, if he continued in the same sort of work, begin to experience symptoms of discomfort in his neck which would no doubt increase the longer he continued in similar work; the existence of such symptoms may or may not have represented a significant impairment of his enjoyment of life, but given the sort of man that the plaintiff appears to me to have been, a very hard working man, very anxious to demonstrate his capacity to continue at work and to that end prepared to put up with symptoms which might have caused a different man to discontinue his activity, I think there is a relatively small chance that that sort of consequence of his pre- existing neck condition would have caused him to give up work in the trucking industry. The other possible consequence is that because of the vulnerability of his neck and his willingness to expose himself to trauma in the course of his work and in the course of his other activities, the plaintiff would at some future time have suffered a protrusion of the cervical discs producing a need for surgery and possibly causing total disability. The possibility that such a thing would have occurred or the likelihood that such a thing would have occurred cannot by any logical process be expressed in percentage terms.
The most that can be said is that it was a very real risk for which an allowance should be made. I am of opinion that a fair and reasonable allowance for the combination of these two sorts of contingencies in their effect on the plaintiff's future earning capacity is to discount by 30% (rather than the more conventional 15%) for the vicissitudes of life which, in this man's case, include those produced by his pre-existing condition. In relation to the cost of operation, it was submitted on behalf of the defendant that that should be similarly discounted because it was a cost which the plaintiff may or was likely in any event to have incurred by reason of factors other than the July accident. I accept that the amount of the cost of the operation should be discounted to some extent but the discount should in my view be relatively small. The fact is that the accident did precipitate the need for surgery, a need which may never have eventuated otherwise. If it did eventuate otherwise, that may not have been for many years in the future. I propose to discount the out of pocket expenses in respect of the neck operation by 10%.

The plaintiff has failed to persuade me that the operation to his lumbar spine was rendered necessary by the July 1991 accident. The existence of the L5/S1 spondylolisthesis prior to his accident was clearly established. It was a condition which might be aggravated by severe trauma or even possibly by relatively minor trauma to the extent that surgery, which had been previously contemplated but not proceeded with, might become necessary. Such might occur, as I understand the evidence, if such trauma increased the degree of slip of the L5 vertebra upon the S1 vertebra; but it is my understanding of the evidence that the radiological findings after the 1991 accident do not demonstrate that any such thing had occurred. Alternatively, trauma might produce symptoms in a spine which, although the site of a spondylolisthesis, was previously asymptomatic, or might exacerbate symptoms previously existing, so as to produce a level of symptomatology so great that the need for surgery could no longer be denied or postponed. Had there been a continuity of severe symptoms from the time of the accident to the time when the operation was deemed necessary in October 1993, the plaintiff might have succeeded, on that ground, in establishing that it was the accident which produced the need for surgery. However, as has been demonstrated, there was no such continuity of symptoms.

Symptoms next occurred in the plaintiff's lumbar spine some time after the
October 1992 neck surgery and the plaintiff, faintly supported by Dr. Segelov, suggests that that may have been a consequence of the fact that he was no longer appropriately exercising his back as (I am asked to infer) had been his practice before the accident. It seems to me that that hypothesis really is not advanced beyond the level of speculation by anything in the evidence. I accept that the plaintiff did commence to experience symptoms again in the low back late in 1992 but the evidence does not persuade me that that onset of symptomatology is attributable to the accident or to the treatment which was given in respect of the neck injury. As I understand the evidence, it is the nature of the pre-existing condition of spondylolisthesis that it might, with or without trauma, at any time become symptom producing. It does not appear to me that the plaintiff has been able to show on the balance of probabilities that the symptoms which occurred were not simply the ordinary result of the pre-existing pathology uninfluenced by the accident or any treatment given in consequence of it. Indeed, I am not persuaded that the symptoms would have caused the plaintiff, stoic as he was, to seek surgical relief of them were it not for the fact that he had obtained what at that stage appeared to be a very good result from the cervical fusion whereby his severe neck and arm symptoms had been very much relieved. It seems to me that the situation demonstrated by the evidence is no more than this - that whereas the plaintiff was experiencing back symptoms of a kind which he had had before, but on this occasion longer lasting, and whereas he would probably have put up with those symptoms without resort to surgery, his confidence in surgery having been boosted by the success of the neck operation and he having been made aware that surgery could relieve the back symptoms, he elected to undergo that surgery. That is not to suggest that the operation was not an entirely proper one to perform in the circumstances. I am satisfied that, having regard to the pathology clearly demonstrated on x-ray, it was an appropriate medical response to the severity of the symptoms which the plaintiff was experiencing in his lumbar spine. I am not satisfied that his experience of symptoms of that severity was a consequence of the July 1991 accident.

It follows that his claim for a continuing loss of earning capacity needs also to be discounted to some extent to take account of the very real possibility, which has in fact matured into reality, that apart altogether from the motor accident of July 1991, the condition of his lumbar spine was such that he might become thereby disabled and in need of surgical attention.

It is, I think, too simplistic simply to say that the fact that the plaintiff came to lumbar spinal surgery in October 1993 demonstrates that that would have his fate in any event. The plaintiff has failed to satisfy me that it was the accident that brought him to that condition; but that is not the same as saying that I am satisfied that he would have come to that condition in any event. The most that can be said is that there was a very substantial risk that his back condition would produce disability at some stage in the future, particularly if subjected to heavy trauma such as his work and lifestyle exposed him to, and that the fact that he came to such surgery in October 1993 is a very powerful indicator of the extent of the risk. One matter which has to be taken into account is this, that had the condition of his lumbar spine deteriorated to the extent where surgery was necessary, the outcome of that surgery, if successfully performed, might have been such as to enable him to return, if not to the heaviest form of transport work, certainly to lighter forms of work in that industry. It is my understanding of the evidence that his present inability to return to his pre-accident level of work is a consequence of the combination of the disability in his neck and the disability in his low back, and would not necessarily have been the consequence had he had surgery only to his lumbar spine. Indeed, it is my understanding that the principal reason why he was compelled to give up work in the transport industry was the condition of his neck, not the condition of his low back. It appears to me in all of the circumstances that a proper allowance is made for the chance that his low back would have disabled him from earning as a transport operator is made by discounting by 25% the figure which would have been awarded as damages for loss of future earning capacity had the lumbar spinal condition not had to be taken into account.

Since very soon after the back operation, the plaintiff has engaged in a considerable amount of physical exertion involving mechanical work and welding construction work carried out by him in the workshop at his home at Catherine
Fields. The plaintiff claims to have derived from that work a very small income currently running at about $100-$150 per week; but no figures have been produced. In those circumstances, there is some difficulty about proceeding simply on the basis of his counsel's assertion that that is the limit of his earnings. On the other hand, the evidence of Dr. Segelov and of Dr. Campbell strongly suggests that, exerting himself as he is in that work, the plaintiff is exceeding the reasonable limitations upon his work capacity which flow from his combination of disabilities, so that even if it were demonstrated that the actual economic return at the present time of such work as he is doing exceeded, even considerably exceeded, the estimate of $100-$150 per week which he has offered, such figure as was thus demonstrated could hardly be said to be an accurate reflection of the plaintiff's long term earning capacity.

There is no doubt that the plaintiff has demonstrated a determination to work notwithstanding his disabilities. That is contrary to the advice of the doctors treating his physical condition and is recognised by Dr. Lim, a psychiatrist to whom he has been referred, as symptomatic of a practice of denial. The plaintiff is so concerned about the possible effects of his injury in disabling him from carrying on the business which he loved and from supporting his wife and family that he endeavours, by an excess of physical activity, to demonstrate that his physical disabilities are less gross than they are in fact. His concern about the effect of his disabilities upon himself, his life and his family is so great as to have led to the development of a reactive depressive illness clearly identified by Dr. Lim in his reports, the severity of which has been such on some occasions in the past as to cause the plaintiff to attempt suicide. Fortunately he has responded to anti- depressant medication and is no longer suicidal, but he requires continuing psychiatric treatment. It was Dr. Lim's opinion that finalisation of the present proceedings (which I would not take to be limited to finalisation in a way which the plaintiff regarded as satisfactory, necessarily) would assist the alleviation of his psychological state, but I would not understand his evidence as suggesting that completion of legal proceedings will lead to a recovery from his present illness. On the contrary, it is my understanding of his evidence, and I accept, that so long as he is physically disabled he is likely to suffer from depression, albeit the degree thereof may be alleviated as time goes by. This represents a significant part of his claim for damages for non-economic loss and is reflected also, of course, in the amount claimed for future medication and treatment.

Assessment of damages 
I turn then to assess damages under each of the relevant heads, observing that the damages are to be assessed in accordance with the provisions of the [Motor
Accidents Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/).
 . Out of pocket expenses 
It is agreed that treatment to date has cost $23,792.87. From that is to be deducted 10% of the expenses incurred in relation to the neck operation and the whole of the expenses incurred in relation to the back operation. Making the best allowance I can on the basis of the information available, I reduce the award for out of pocket expenses to $18,000 (the defendant will in due course be entitled pursuant to [s.45(4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s45.html) to credit of $12,100.10.
 . Future out of pocket expenses 
The plaintiff incurs for medication about $20-$25 per week. The present value of a cost of $25 per week for 35 years (which is a reasonable estimate of the plaintiff's expectation of life: Australian Life Tables 1980-82) using five percent tables and a multiplier of 876 is $21,900. I accept the defendant's submission that that sum ought be discounted to some extent for the possibility that the plaintiff will not need medications for the whole of his life and for the possibility that he would have in any event have incurred an expense for medication by reason of the degenerative condition of his back and spine unrelated to the tort for which the defendant is liable. However, there is also the uncontested evidence of Dr. Lim that the plaintiff would need continuing psychiatric treatment and while there is no evidence of the actual cost of his regular attendances upon a psychiatrist, it seems to me that the reasonable approach is to regard the cost of that throughout many years in the future as at least approximately equal to any amount by which the likely cost of future medications should otherwise be discounted. Accordingly in respect of future treatment costs I allow $21,900.
 . Past loss of earnings 
From the date of the accident until the end of September 1992 when the plaintiff gave up his truck driving work, it is not possible to determine with any great precision the amount of any economic loss, although there is evidence that he incurred an expense of approximately $2,000 to employ a driver during the period that he was unable to work at all. I accept the defendant's submission that in respect of that period it is appropriate to allow the sum of $4,000.

From then until the time when the plaintiff underwent surgery to his low back, it is in my view only realistic to assess him as totally disabled and to attribute that disability to the neck injury and the consequences of the neck operation. I reject the defendant's submission that there should be any allowance for retained earning capacity during that period or that there should be any discount for the possibility, during such a short period, that his neck condition which had not previously caused him any disability may have done so quite apart from the effects of the accident. I allow him for his loss of earnings for that period (taking as the appropriate rate the rate of pay for a driver of a transport worker Grade 7 as set out in Exhibit B) $363.45 per week net for 50 weeks - $18,172.50, which I round to $18,175.

From the time of the back operation until October 1994, a period of approximately two years, the plaintiff was effectively totally disabled for work notwithstanding that he did undertake some activities in and about his property and his workshop. Again using a figure derived from Exhibit B, the calculated loss for the period 14 September 1993 to 14 October 1994 (108 weeks) is $39,252.60. It appears to me likely that had the plaintiff not chosen to undergo the back operation, he would have been less disabled or disabled for a shorter time and it appears to me appropriate to discount that sum by approximately one-quarter. I allow in respect of loss of earnings during that period $29,000.

From 14 October 1994 to the date of trial, had the plaintiff continued to work as a truck driver earning the rates set out in Exhibit B as appropriate to the transport industry State award, he could have expected a gross wage of $462.10. Had he worked under the Heggies Bulk Haul Limited bulk haul enterprise award he would have earned from 1 July 1994, $475.96 and from 1
January 1995, $489.83. There is necessarily an element arbitrariness in relying on award rates to determine his loss. I propose to adopt a gross figure of $475 per week in respect of the whole period which again is approximately 108 weeks. That is approximately $390 per week net, a calculated earning but for his disabilities of $42,120. That figure should, in my opinion, be discounted for the possibility that he would in any event during that period have suffered disability by reason of the condition of his cervical spine or lumbar spine unrelated to the accident. Applying a discount on those counts of 15%, I allow $35,800. Accordingly the total allowance for past loss of earnings to the date of judgment is $86,975.
 . Future loss of earnings 
To determine the plaintiff's continuing loss I rely on the evidence of Mr.
Schreiterer of Schreiterer Transport Pty. Limited who employs a driver in work of the sort to which the plaintiff might have gone had he ceased to carry on his own business, and pays him at present approximately $40,000 per annum. He acknowledged that earnings might fall as the volume of work fluctuated, but on the other hand, his evidence is that on some occasions his driver has earned $42,000 per annum. I regard an allowance of $40,000 gross as appropriate to reflect what the plaintiff was likely to have earned but for his injury.
Deducting tax of $9,802, the comparable net earning figure per week is $580.
It is difficult to assess what the plaintiff's residual earning capacity is.
It is not nil; on the other hand it is not necessarily to be measured by the value of the work he is in fact able to carry out, given that he is working contrary to medical advice. Looking at his position on the open labour market, it is obviously the case that he would find extreme difficulty in finding an employer who would take him on and who would modify the conditions of work to enable the plaintiff to work at his own pace, to decline repeated bending and heavy lifting if his back condition on a particular day made that work distressing to him. On the other hand he is undoubtedly a determined man who will try to make the best of his condition. Considering that one is looking at a fairly long period to age 65, I think it appropriate to assess his residual earning capacity as not exceeding $200 per week, to assess his loss of earnings as $380 per week and to calculate the present value thereof on the five percent tables over a period of 25 years and six months, using a multiplier of 761.5. The resulting calculated loss of $289,370 I discount first by 30% for reasons earlier given, to take account of the ordinary vicissitudes of life and the prospect that in any event he may have become earlier disabled by reason of his neck condition. The resulting figure of $202,559 I discount by a further 25% (approximately) to allow for the substantial risk of further disability resulting from his back condition. In the result I allow for future loss of earning capacity (rounding up the calculated figure) the sum of $152,000.
 . Non-economic loss 
It is necessary to take account of the fact that the plaintiff has suffered a severe injury to his neck which required surgery, which is an eventuality that may never have happened in his lifetime. It is necessary to accept that that has deprived him of the opportunity of working in the business which he loved and is a significant contributing factor to the general disruption of his way of life. It is necessary to take into account his gross distress, amounting to a chronic depressive illness involving the risk of suicide. It is necessary to take into account the level of his continuing disability and the fact that in order to carry on, as he will seek to carry on, an active working life, he will be subjected to considerable pain and discomfort every day of his life.
On the other hand it is necessary to take account of the strong possibility that he would in any event have become disabled as a result of his underlying conditions even if the accident had not happened. Taking all of those things into account, I am of the view that his case ought be assessed as equal to 55% of a most extreme case, an assessment which entitles the plaintiff on the basis of the provisions of the [Motor Accidents
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/) to $135,850.

The total of the above figures leads to an assessment of damages amounting to $414,825. The defendant is entitled to credit as previously indicated of $12,100.

The plaintiff claims interest on the past loss of earnings. The defendant opposed the award of interest, relying on [s.73(4)(a)(i)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s73.html) of the [Motor Accidents
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/). I grant leave to the plaintiff to restore the matter to the list for argument should the claim for interest be persisted in and not the subject of agreement.
Unless an arrangement is made with my associate prior to Friday 13 December to have the matter re-listed on a later date for argument on the matter of interest, I will make no allowance for interest but will enter judgment for the plaintiff in the sum of $402,725.
 * * * 
