

Kenneth Anthony Osmond -v- Mable Florence Marcantelli [1997] NSWSC 90 (25
March 1997) 
Kenneth Anthony OSMOND -v- Mable Florence MARCANTELLI 
R400007/94 
Tuesday 25 March 1997 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
TEMBY AJ 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an appeal against the decision of Master Greenwood who on 3 March 1995, granted the respondent's motion pursuant to s.66G of the Limitations Act 1969 for an extension of time within which to bring an action for damages against the appellant.

The following short account contains all relevant dates.

On 19 January, 1988, the respondent went to the surgery of the appellant, her doctor, for the purpose of having wax in her ears removed. While Dr Osmond was syringing Mrs Marcantelli's right ear the syringe broke. She fell to the floor. Her right ear was bleeding. She felt dizzy. Later at home she began to vomit, and was taken to the Wagga Wagga Base Hospital, where she remained for about a week. She came under the care of Mr B. Krishan, an ear, nose and throat specialist, who operated on her on 20 June 1988. According to the first affidavit she swore, after that she "still suffered from tinnitus, dizziness, complete loss of hearing in the right ear and I also lost my sense of taste." 
The respondent was born on 10 April 1938. In the affidavit already referred to, she said that she gave up work on medical advice in September 1990.
Whether that was because the state of her ear does not appear. She was then 52 years old.

In a second affidavit, sworn about three months after the first, the respondent said this: "Further to the contents of that Affidavit, I wish to add that my condition significantly deteriorated in May 1993. On or about 17 May 1993 an incident occurred when I felt that a sound as if lightening [sic] was exploding inside by [sic] head causing tingling and numbness down the right side of the face. A similar but more severe attack occurred on or about 20 May, 1993 at approximately 2:00 am. On that occasion I also suffered from a sensation of pins and needles all over my body. I was very frightened by this attack and I was unable to go back to sleep that night. These attacks were frightening to me and have caused me great anxiety over the damage they may have done and about my condition generally.

As a result of the incidents referred to above I telephoned Mr Krishan's office and made an appointment to attend him on 24 May, 1993.

It was because my condition appeared to be deteriorating that I attended my
Solicitor, Geoffrey John Potter, on 28 September, 1993 for the purpose of providing instructions regarding the preparation of the Statement of Claim." 
Proceedings were commenced in the Wagga Wagga registry of this Court by statement of claim lodged on 20 January 1994 and duly filed on 27 January
The argument before me has proceeded on the basis that the respondent was out of time in any event, although why a further seven days then elapsed does not appear and is rather disturbing.

The facts related to this stage are not contentious. There is nothing in them which is inconsistent with anything said by the learned Master in his reasons for decision.

There are other facts which he did not mention, or at least dwell upon, which seem to me to be important.

In an affidavit sworn by the respondent's solicitor it is stated that on or about 28 September 1993 she instructed him to brief counsel regarding the preparation of a statement of claim. Counsel provided a memorandum of advice dated 15 October 1993, to which was attached a draft District Court statement of claim, and which included advice as to expert reports that should be obtained, chiefly on the question of negligence. Medico-legal appointments were then arranged for the plaintiff, and reports obtained. The first of them is from Mr Krishan, dated 5 November 1993. It is a report of nearly two pages, of which only one paragraph needs to be quoted: "I saw her last on 24 May, 1993. She said that she has been feeling pretty good until about a week ago when she felt that a sound as if lightning was exploding inside her head, causing tingling and numbness of the right side of the face. At this point again a moderate amount of wax was removed from both the ears, but no other disease could be detected." 
The second was from Dr R. Carroll, is dated 26 November 1993, and said nothing about the incident in May of that year. The third from Mr John Walker, dated November of the same year, said this concerning the May incident, as it was referred to in argument. I note that no date is stated by the report's author: "She is also now complaining of what she describes as "lightning strikes".
This is a sudden onset of noise in her ear "like and [sic] explosion in the right side of her head". This noise is loud enough to wake her from sleep. She is also now noticing a feeling of numbness on the right side of her face anterior to the right ear." 
Later in the report this appears: "Her recent symptoms of sudden explosive noise in the right ear are difficult to explain in terms of her ear injury. It is possible she has some underlying neurological disorder unrelated to the above incident. The report of her forthcoming neurological examination should be obtained in relation to this." 
The solicitor prepared at least three versions of the statement of claim, the last after it was decided to commence proceedings in this Court. He delegated the matter to an employed solicitor, but just why the matter was not dealt with in time does not appear.

The statement of claim alleged that the plaintiff's right ear was injured by reason of the negligence of the defendant, or alternatively the injury was caused by his breach of contract, or alternatively breach of an implied warranty by him that the syringe was reasonably fit for purpose. Particulars were given of negligence, defects, injuries and disabilities. The last contains 12 items, one of them being "(g) Numbness of the right side of the face;".

It will be noted that this is precisely the phrase used in Mr Krishan's report, and almost exactly what was contained both in the first passage quoted from Mr Walker's report and in the respondent's second affidavit.

This appeal is by way of re-hearing -- [Supreme Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/), [s.75A(5)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s75a.html) -- which is something different from a re-trial: Do Cormo -v- Ford
Excavations Pty Ltd [[1981] 1 N.S.W.L.R. 409.] That was a case very like the present, although under [s.58](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s58.html) of the Limitations Act. In that case Cross J. said at 420: "...on such an appeal, if no fresh evidence is called to warrant a departure from a master's primary findings of fact, those findings of fact are binding on the court hearing the appeal unless those findings, or the inferences drawn from them, are so flawed as to attract the approach taken in Warren -v-
Coombes <case>; [(1979) 53 A.L.J.R. 293."] 
As Barwick C.J. said in Edwards -v- Noble <case>; [(1971) 125 C.L.R. 296] at 304, the question "is not whether the appellate
Court can substitute its view of the facts which, of course, it is empowered to do; but whether it should do so". In that regard I bear in mind that the only witness called before the learned Master was the solicitor for the respondent, and he was questioned very briefly indeed. Questions of credibility did not arise, and the case is not one in which the impressions made by witnesses on the fact-finder are of any significance. Accordingly I am in as good a person as was the learned Master to draw inferences from the primary facts which must be taken to be largely, if not entirely, uncontested.
This is a case in which the appeal Court suffers no disadvantage in that respect. See Warren -v- Coombes (supra) at 301: if a trial Judge was in no better position to decide a factual question than the appeal court is, the
Judges comprising the latter must "discharge their duty and give effect to their own judgment".

In the end the appeal is against the exercise of a discretionary power -- see below. Accordingly the principle stated in House -v- The King <case>; [(1936) 55 C.L.R. 499] at 504-505 applies: "It is not enough that the judges composing the appellate court consider that, if they had been in the position of the primary judge, they would have taken a different course. It must appear that some error has been made in exercising the discretion. If the judge acts upon a wrong principle, if he allows extraneous or irrelevant matters to guide or affect him, if he mistakes the facts, if he does not take into account some material consideration, then his determination should be reviewed and the appellate court may exercise its own discretion in substitution for his if it has the materials for doing so. It may not appear how the primary judge has reached the result embodied in his order, but if upon the facts it is unreasonable or plainly unjust, the appellate court may infer that in some way there has been a failure properly to exercise the discretion which the law reposes in the court of first instance. In such a case, although the nature of the error may not be discoverable, the exercise of the discretion is reviewed on the ground that a substantial wrong has in fact occurred." 
The statutory framework was examined relatively recently by the High Court in
Dedousis -v- The Water Board <case>; [(1994) 181 C.L.R. 171.] Sub-division 3 of Div. 3 of Pt. 3 of the Act and Sch. 5 to the Act were inserted by the Limitation (Amendment) Act 1990. That sub- division commences with s.60F, which is an introductory provision indicating the purpose of the newly inserted provisions. The primary substantive provision is s.60G, which so far as is relevant provides: "(1) This section applies to a cause of action that accrues on or after 1
September 1990, founded on negligence, nuisance or breach of duty, for damages for personal injury, ...

If an application for an order under this section is made to a court by a person claiming to have a cause of action to which this section applies, the court ... may, if it decides that it is just and reasonable to do so, order that the limitation period for the cause of action be extended for such period as it determines." 
Section 60I provides, so far as is relevant: "(1) A court may not make an order under section 60G ... unless it is satisfied that: the plaintiff: did not know that personal injury had been suffered; or was unaware of the nature or extent of personal injury suffered; or was unaware of the connection between the personal injury and the defendant's act or omission, at the expiration of the relevant limitation period or at a time before that expiration when proceedings might reasonably have been instituted; and the application is made within 3 years after the plaintiff became aware (or ought to have become aware) of all 3 matters listed in paragraph (i)-(iii)." 
The effect of Sch. 5 is to make s.60G applicable to causes of action arising before 1 September 1990, that being the date on which the amending Act came into operation.

Accordingly the learned Master had power to extend the normal six year limitation period -- s.14(1) -- if he decided it was just and reasonable to do so, but not unless satisfied that one or other of the factors contained in s.60I(1)(a) applied at the relevant time, and subject to application being made within the time stipulated of three further years. Unless the Court is satisfied as to one or more of those factors then it is precluded from making an order by way of extension of time. The learned Master decided that the case was one in which the plaintiff was unaware of the connection between her personal injury and the defendant's act or omission at the relevant time.
Argument before me proceeded on the basis that only that factor -- contained in s.60I(1)(a)(iii) -- was relevant, and that the two other factors mentioned in the same sub-section, and also s.58, were irrelevant.

The learned Master referred to two reports received after the commencement of proceedings and placed in evidence before him. The first was dated 19 October , and came from Dr R. Brooder, a consultant neurologist. He expressed the view that the symptoms from which the respondent was suffering after May 1993 related in some way to the original injury of January 1988, although he was unable to determine the mechanism. The other was from Mr P. Barnes M.A., a psychologist who expressed the opinion the plaintiff was suffering from a severe post-traumatic stress disorder with indications of chronic depression and generalised anxiety disorder which he felt, from the timing and specific reference of her symptoms, related to the incident with the syringe.

The learned Master said this: "I have formed the view that the plaintiff was not aware of the connection between the personal injury she suffered and the defendant's act or omission.
On 17 May 1993 when the plaintiff suffered from symptoms of which, it would seem, she had not suffered before and which caused her considerable distress she apparently firmed her resolve to seek legal redress 
True it was, as the defendant has properly pointed out, that the plaintiff believed that incident was connected to her original problems in the doctor's surgery, however, a belief is of no assistance in litigation unless a nexus can be established and it was not until October 1994 that the medical evidence became available which connected the incident of 17 May 1993 with the incident in Dr Osmond's surgery. It is on this ground that I am prepared to extend time.

The defendant argued that the nature or extent of the personal injury was known to the plaintiff from the time of the original incident, and I was referred to authority for the proposition that the gradual onset in symptoms which can relate back to the original event do not enable a plaintiff to be unaware of the nature or extent of personal injury. In my view the incident of May 1993 was outside the type of events which are referred to in the various authorities which define "nature or extent". Whilst it related to her injury there is no question that this was an event of a different nature from those which the plaintiff had been subjected to since the syringe had broken in her ear.

The psychiatric evidence only came to light when the plaintiff was referred to a psychologist.

It is the plaintiff's evidence that she had been anxious well before the limitation period had expired. There is nothing before me which suggests that the plaintiff ought not have sought help from a psychiatrist well before the expiration of the limitation period. The late seeking of confirmation of the plaintiff's condition is not, of itself, sufficient reason, in my view, to extend the time.

As McHugh J. said in Brisbane South Regional Health Authority -v- Taylor <case>; [(1996) 70 A.L.J.R. 866] at 872, a limitation provision is the general rule, and an extension provision is the exception to it. The exception will not arise unless the plaintiff lacked certain knowledge or awareness. In this case she must establish that she was unaware of the connection between the personal injury and the defendant's act or omission. According to the approach adopted by the learned Master, that injury was not just what happened to her on 19 January 1988 but also what happened in May 1993. The purpose of the statutory provision is of course to avoid unfairness to an injured person who lacked particular knowledge or awareness.

The lack of awareness contended for is the connection between the incident or incidents of May 1993 and the defendant's act or omission of January 1988.
Assuming that incident or those incidents amounted to personal injury within the meaning of the Act, which in my view is a dubious proposition on the evidence, the fact is that the respondent has sued to recover damages for that which the learned Master held she was unaware. The numbness of the right side of her face stems from May 1993, and it was included in a statement of claim her solicitor was aiming to file before the limitation period expired. It may well be that more is known now, as a result of the subsequent report of Dr
Brooder, than was known at that time. That would strengthen the plaintiff's position in an evidentiary sense if a trial took place. But the report of
October 1994 would not, in my considered view, have changed materially the statement of claim. The plaintiff has sued as if what happened in May 1993 is due to the negligence of the appellant. She does not need an extension of time because of any lack of awareness. She needs it simply because her solicitor was tardy.

In such circumstances, even if there was an unawareness within the meaning of s.601(1)(a)(iii) it is irrelevant. The respondent instructed her solicitor to commence proceedings in September 1993, well within time, and she did so because her condition seemed to be deteriorating. That of course was subsequent to May 1993. The solicitor prepared a statement of claim which included the consequences of the May events. Hence the respondent has been prejudiced, not by her lack of awareness (if any) but by the delay in issue of the writ. The lack of awareness was irrelevant to that delay.

So far as the exercise of discretion is concerned, the learned Master said this, after the passage quoted above and noting, irrelevantly as this was not sought, that the respondent was entitled to s.58 relief: "I am of the view, therefore, that the plaintiff has satisfied the court in terms of section 60(1)(a)(iii). It is therefore just and reasonable to extend the time within which the action can be brought. Quite properly, the action being only one week out of time, nothing is put by the defendant as to prejudice. The only prejudice that the defendant would suffer is its loss of the statutory defence to the proceedings.

With respect to the plaintiff I am satisfied that she was unaware precisely of the nature of her problems until such times as they were diagnosed in October
Although she had a belief that the problems on 17 May 1993 related to the event with the syringe one must always distinguish between an awareness which is properly based and a belief which can only be converted into an awareness with the benefit, in this case, of the medical opinion creating a nexus between the incident and the event with the syringe.

The plaintiff would suffer great prejudice if the time were not extended in that she would lose her right of action against the defendant. In light of this I extend the time in which action can be brought until 27 February 1994." 
The appellant submitted that the opening two sentences of this passage involved a heterodox approach, and relied upon Brisbane South Regional
Health Authority -v- Taylor (supra). In that case McHugh J., with whom
Dawson J. agreed, said that powerful policy reasons underlie limitation periods, which are not just arbitrary blocks to the realistic expectations of an injured person, and (at 870) that an applicant who satisfies the statutory pre-conditions to the exercise of the power to extend time does not acquire a presumptive right to an order.
 "An applicant for an extension of time who satisfies those conditions is entitled to ask the court to exercise its discretion in his or her favour. But the applicant still bears the onus of showing that the justice of the case requires the exercise of the discretion in his or her favour." 
What the learned Master said does read as if he thought that satisfaction of the statutory pre-condition gave rise to an entitlement to relief. The word "therefore" is surely of high significance. I read what follows the first two sentences as being by way of comforting comment.

In any event, House -v- The King (supra) makes clear that a discretionary judgment is no better than the grounds upon which it is based, which must include all relevant considerations and exclude all that are irrelevant. In this case a highly relevant consideration has not been stated, and I conclude was overlooked. It is that there is no causal connection between the s.60I(1)(a)(iii) factor as found and the fact the statement of claim was filed late. Furthermore, as Brisbane South Regional Health
Authority -v- Taylor (supra) makes clear, the lack of demonstrable and particular harm to a defendant does not loom large as a consideration favouring the grant of leave.

It is clear to me that the discretion miscarried. It is not in the circumstances of the case just and reasonable that time be extended. I need only add that, had it been necessary to my decision, I would have concluded that the statutory finding relied upon should not have been made. The better view is that the plaintiff suffered symptoms in May 1993, not an injury.
Indeed what has just been said accords precisely with the terminology used by the learned Master, and it is not clear how he reasoned that symptoms became personal injury. To say as he did that "this was an event of a different nature from those which the plaintiff had been subjected to" after the syringe broke in her ear does not fill that gap.

Accordingly I make the following orders: allow the appeal; set aside the order of Master Greenwood, and in lieu thereof dismiss the motion with costs; and order the respondent to pay the appellant's costs of the appeal.
 * * * 
