

Oceanic Life Ltd versus Chief Commissioner of Stamp Duties Matter Nos 30125/96 [1998] NSWSC 1002 (27 February 1998) 
Last Updated: 31 March 1998 
OCEANIC LIFE LTD versus CHIEF COMMISSIONER OF STAMP DUTIES /96 /96 February 1998 
Howie AJ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Administrative Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: These are two separate proceedings brought in order to determine what is substantially the same issue, being how certain insurance policies should be characterised for the purpose of the assessment of stamp duty. The first matter is an appeal under <case> of the [Stamp Duties Act 1920](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/) from an assessment made by the Chief Commissioner of Stamp Duties in respect of insurance policies issued by the plaintiff in the period from 1990 to August 1993. Such an appeal is available where the Chief Commissioner has refused to modify his assessment of stamp duty after an objection has been made to that assessment. The appeal to this Court is by way of rehearing of the objection and is limited to the grounds of that objection: <case> of the Act. 
The second matter purports to be an appeal under <case> in respect of policies issued after September 1993. However, in respect of these policies, there is no basis for an appeal under the Act because the pre-conditions for an appeal have not yet taken place. Ultimately the parties agreed between themselves that I should dismiss the second proceedings. It was accepted by them that there was no material difference between the policies which are the subject of the two proceedings and that, subject to the right of appeal from my decision, the assessment by the Chief Commissioner of the duty payable on the later policies would be made in accordance with my determination in respect of the earlier policies. It was agreed that I should dismiss the second proceedings without making any order for costs in respect of those proceedings.

The policies to which the first proceedings relate were issued by the plaintiff under the name of "The R.S.L Cash Accident Programme". There are two different forms of the policies issued by the plaintiff under this title depending upon when the policies was issued. The first form of policy was used for policies issued before 31 August 1990. On the first page of the policy there is a general statement as to the nature of the policy in these terms: "We agree, subject to the conditions of this Policy, to pay you the appropriate Benefit whenever an Accident (as defined) results in Hospital
Confinement, Loss of Use or death while this policy is in force." 
The policies in this form provided benefits where the insured suffered certain consequences as a result of an "accident" as defined in the policy. These benefits were as follows: Daily Hospital Cash Benefit; Daily Intensive Care
Benefit; Accidental Death Benefit; and Loss of Use Benefit. The maximum benefit payable in respect of the death of the insured, or under the Loss Of
Use Benefit, was $10,000. There was a further benefit provided called a 100%
Premium Refund Benefit. This benefit was described in the policy in these terms: "If this policy is maintained in force during your lifetime and throughout the next 10 years and no claim for any Benefit is made, we will pay you a lump sum equal to 100% of all Premiums you have paid during such 10-year period." 
The second form of policy was used for policies issued between September 1990 and September 1993. This form of policy contained no general statement of the insurer's obligations as was contained in the earlier form. Policies in this form offered the insured the following benefits as a consequence of an accident: Death by Accident Benefit; Partial Loss of Use Benefit; Total Loss of Use Benefit; and Specific Injury Benefit. The policy contained a list of specific injuries and the amount to be paid as a consequence of the insured suffering such an injury. This form of policy also contained a 100% Premium
Refund Benefit which was described as follows: "If this policy is maintained in force for a period of ten (10) years and no claim for any Benefit is made, we will pay you a lump sum equal to 100% of all
Premiums you have paid during that ten (10) year period".

In both forms of policy there is an almost identical list of exceptions relating to factual situations in which coverage by the policy would not apply. Both forms of policy state that there is no surrender value. Both policies are for a term of ten years and there is an automatic right of renewal given to the insured provided that he or she has to reached a stated age, that being 75 years in the first form of policy and 80 years in the second.

At the heart of this appeal is the proper characterisation of the 100% Premium
Refund Benefit contained in each of the forms of policy. The parties are agreed that the difference in the wording used to described this benefit as between the two forms of the policies issued by the plaintiff is irrelevant to the determination of the question raised by the appeal. The plaintiff contends that the provision of this Benefit (which has been described by the parties as the "Survival Benefit" or the "Return Benefit" and which I shall refer to as the "Refund Benefit") effects a separate endowment policy, distinct from the accident insurance provided by the policies, and which, for the purposes of the assessment of stamp duty, is a policy of life insurance. The
Commission, to the contrary, contends that the Refund Benefit does not effect a policy of insurance at all.

Those who are familiar with reported decisions in this area of the law might be surprised that the plaintiff, an insurance company, is attempting to assert an additional basis for paying stamp duty than that which has been determined by the Chief Commissioner. They might also find it perplexing that the Chief
Commissioner is resisting that attempt. But a consideration of the basis upon which duty is assessed on insurance policies under the legislation in this
State will resolve the paradox and make it clear that, if the plaintiff's contention is accepted, there would be a substantial reduction in the stamp duty payable as a result of the issue of these policies and the premiums it has received under them.

The [Stamp Duties
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/) provides generally that duty is payable on instruments specified within the Act or the
Schedules to the Act, see [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s4.html)
Whether duty is payable on an instrument, and the rate of duty which is to be paid on an instrument, is generally determined by the object or objects of the instrument. [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/index.html#p3) of the Act deals with the assessment of duty on instruments and contains provisions of a general nature as well as provisions dealing with different types of instruments according to the specific object of the instrument. So, for example, there are separate Divisions of the Act dealing with conveyances, loan agreements, and leases. Policies of insurance are dealt with in Division
The various types of insurance with which the Act is concerned are defined in [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s86.html) of the Act. At the time the policies were assessed for duty there were four types of insurance which attracted duty being: Class 1 insurance; Class 2 insurance; life insurance; and life insurance riders. Class 1 insurance was insurance which was other than Class 2 insurance, life insurance or insurance exempted under [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s87.html)
Class 2 insurance was made up of specific types of insurance which were listed in the definition and included disability income insurance and hospital and ancillary health benefits insurance. Life insurance riders are irrelevant to the present matter and may be ignored. "Life insurance" was defined as follows: "'life insurance'" means insurance on a life or lives or on any event or contingency relating to or depending on a life or lives, but does not include insurance for any payment agreed to be made on the death of a person only from accident or violence or otherwise than from a natural cause or as compensation for personal injury".
 [Section
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s88a.html) requires persons carrying on the business of insurance to be registered.
[Section
B(1)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s88b.html) requires a registered person to furnish monthly a return to the Chief
Commissioner stating the amount of the premiums which have been received in respect of each of the two Classes of insurance. Duty is to be paid to the
Chief Commissioner at the various rates prescribed for each of the categories of insurance defined in the Act, see [s
B(1)(b).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s88b.html)
Each of the two Classes of insurance under the Act has a different rate of duty applicable to it and duty is assessed upon the amount of premiums received by the insurer referrable to a particular Class of insurance.
However, in respect of life insurance the duty is assessed, not on the amount of premiums received, but upon each policy for life insurance issued by the insurer; see [s
B(1)(b)(iii).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s88b.html)
The duty is calculated by reference to the sum insured as set out in the
Second Schedule to the Act.

The Chief Commissioner has power under [s
C](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s88c.html) to redetermine the apportionment of premium between the various Classes or types of insurance and reassess the amount of duty payable. That section is as follows: "If the Chief Commissioner is not satisfied that the premium paid in respect of a policy of insurance which effects any 2 or more of the following types of insurance, namely: 
Class 1 insurance; 
Class 2 insurance; life insurance; exempt insurance; insurance referred to in [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s88.html), has been properly apportioned for the purposes of a return under [section
B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s88b.html) or [88D](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s88d.html) having regard to the property or risk concerned, the Chief Commissioner may determine the apportionment, reassess the liability to duty of the return and charge duty accordingly." 
It is clear from a consideration of this section that the Act envisages that a single policy of insurance can effect different types of insurance for the purposes of the assessment of stamp duty. This is in accordance with the general proposition, contained in [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s17.html) of the Act, that an instrument may be liable to more than one charge of stamp duty. [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s17.html) relevantly provides: "Except where express provision to the contrary is made by this or any other
Act, an instrument containing or relating to several distinct matters is to be separately and distinctly charged with duty in respect of each of such matters, as if each matter were expressed in a separate instrument." 
There was some discussion before me as to the significance of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s17.html) to insurance policies in light of the provisions in [ss
B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s88b.html) and [88C](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s88c.html).
[Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s17.html) appears in the general provisions in Division 1 of [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/index.html#p3) of the Act. Such a provision has a long history in legislation concerned with the imposition of stamp duty and recognises a common law rule that stamp duty was payable on the principle object of the instrument and covered matters which were merely associated with that object: Commissioner of Stamp Duties v Pendal Nominees Pty Limited <case>; [(1989) 167 CLR 1] at 10. It seems to me that [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s17.html) applies in relation to instruments effecting insurance as much as it does to instruments concerned with other matters which attract the payment of duty.
The conclusion as to whether an instrument effects two or more types of insurance depends upon the operation of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s17.html) and the proper construction of the instrument.

What [ss ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s17.html), [88B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s88b.html) and [88C](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s88c.html) require is that an apportionment be made of the premium received by an insurer in respect of a single policy of insurance where that policy actually effects more than one type of insurance in order that duty is assessed and payable as if each type of insurance was contained in a separate and distinct policy of insurance. It does not matter that a single premium is received by the insurer in respect of the policy instrument issued. I will return to a consideration of the operation of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s17.html) later in these reasons but for present purposes it is enough if I indicate that in my view there is nothing inconsistent between the specific provisions of the Act relating to insurance and the general statement contained in [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s17.html)
In other words I do not believe that [ss
B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s88b.html) and [88C](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s88c.html) provide an exception to the general operation of [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s17.html) 
Both in its objection to the assessment submitted to the Chief Commissioner and before me, the plaintiff has relied upon actuarial calculations as to the allocation of the premiums paid to each type of benefit provided by the policies. Those calculations were not made until 1993 and are not reflected in the terms of either form of policy. It appears that there is no difference in the calculations as between the two forms of policy. Those calculations are as follows: 
Benefit % of Monies Paid 
Loss of Use and Specific Injury Benefit 7.1% 
Accidental Death Benefit 14.4% 
Refund Benefit 78.4% 
The Chief Commissioner has made his assessment of stamp duty payable on the policies by taking the whole of the premium paid and apportioning it between what he asserts are the two types of insurance manifested by the benefits provided by each form of policy. So in relation to the second form of policy, the Chief Commission has determined that 33 per cent of the premium paid is referable to the Loss of Use and Specific Injury Benefits (Class 2 Insurance) and 67 per cent to the Accidental Death Benefit (Class 1 Insurance). He has then assessed stamp duty according to the rate applicable to each Class.
Although the plaintiff has no quarrel with the basis of the assessment for those two types of benefits or that duty is levied upon the premiums received in respect of them, it maintains that the premium which it says is referable to the Return Benefit should not be liable to duty. Rather the plaintiff contends that, because that Benefit is a form of life insurance, duty is payable only on the individual policies issued assessed at the rate prescribed for life insurance. If the plaintiff's argument were accepted, only 21.5 per cent of the premium received in respect of both forms of policy was dutiable.

It is clear that both forms of policy under consideration effect accident insurance. Further it is not contested that, by the operation of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s17.html) or otherwise, each form of policy effects at least two distinct forms of insurance as defined by the Act by reason of the nature of the benefits offered. The fact that one policy may contain more than one form of insurance was recognised long before provisions such as those appearing in [ss
B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s88b.html) and [88C](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s88c.html) were ever contemplated, see General Accident Assurance Corporation Ltd v
Commissioners of Inland Revenue [(1906) 8 SC 477.] The question raised by the appeal is whether the forms of policy also contain a separate and distinct contract of insurance. That question is to be answered by a construction of the forms of policy before the Court.

The definition of "life insurance" under the Act is a very broad one and reflects what has generally been considered by the courts to be the fundamental nature of life insurance. Insurance against death by accident is excluded by the Act and this is consistent with the general distinction which has been recognised between life insurance and accident insurance: see
National Mutual Life Association of Australia Limited versus Federal Commissioner of Taxation <case>; [(1958) 102 CLR 29] at 46-47; Re Carter [[1963] Qd R 45] at 52. In the
National Mutual Life case the history of life insurance and the various forms which life insurance can take was reviewed by Windeyer J. At the outset of his consideration of life insurance his Honour adopted the statement in CJ
Bunyan The law of Life Insurance being: "The contract of life insurance can be further defined to be that in which one party agrees to pay a given sum upon the happening of a particular event contingent upon the duration of human life in consideration of the immediate payment of a smaller sum or certain equivalent periodical payment by another." 
The plaintiff submits that the Refund Benefit has the character of endowment insurance, the basic term of that insurance being survival by the insured for a period of ten years. As this benefit is not payable unless the person survives the term, it would, on the plaintiff's characterisation, be a policy of pure endowment. It is clear that an endowment policy, that is a contract where the benefit is paid only if the insured survives a particular term, is within the concept of life insurance; Prudential Insurance Company versus Inland
Revenue Commissioners [(1904) 2 KB 658] at 662-664;
National Mutual Life Association of Australia versus Federal Commissioner of
Taxation, above, at 44-45. It was not suggested before me by counsel for the
Chief Commissioner that such insurance would be excluded from life insurance for the purposes of the Act by reason of the definition of "life insurance" which I have set out above. Although there may in some situations be a distinction drawn between an endowment policy and life insurance, see
Commissioner of Stamp Duties versus Jones <case>; [(1971) 125 CLR 511] at 513, 528, there is no need in this case to make any such distinction.

The plaintiff submits generally that the Refund Benefit is a distinct policy of life insurance which is independent from, or at least not merely ancillary to, the accident insurance which is clearly effected by the other benefits provided in both forms of policy under consideration. It is submitted that, if there were any doubt about the matter arising from a consideration of decided cases as an aid to the proper construction of the forms of policy, that doubt is put to rest by the actuarial calculations which I have set out earlier. The plaintiff argues that the premium paid in respect of the whole of the policy (in both forms) is divisible between the different benefits offered and that this fact is highly persuasive, if not determinative, of a conclusion that the policies contain three different forms of insurance as defined in the Act and not only the two which were identified by the Commissioner.

For the Chief Commissioner reliance is placed heavily upon the decision in
General Accident Assurance Corporation Ltd versus Commissioners of Inland
Revenue [(1906) 8 SC 477.] It is submitted that the policy that was before the
Court of Sessions is virtually indistinguishable from the forms of policy before me. The policy instrument under consideration in that case provided that, for the payment of a stated premium payable monthly, the company would pay the insured, or his representatives: a certain sum paid monthly in the event of illness; a similar sum in respect of accident; and a sum of 100 pounds in the event of death, or loss of limbs or sight by accident. It also contained a stipulation for the return to the insured, or his representatives, of half of all the premiums paid under the policy, when the insured reached the age of 65 years, or in the event of his previous death, provided the policy remained in force. The question for the court was whether, by reason of the agreement to return part of the premiums, the policy instrument was dutiable both as an accident insurance policy and a life insurance policy or only as an accident insurance policy. It was held that it was to be assessed as a policy of accident insurance only.

Both the Lord President and Lord McLaren in their separate judgments acknowledged that the one policy instrument could contain two distinct and different policies of insurance. The specific question was whether the instrument before them, which clearly contained a policy of accident insurance, had also effected a policy of life insurance. After reading the clause providing for the return of part of the premiums, the Lord President considered whether that clause created a policy of life insurance and stated: "I cannot think of any better test than to take the second so-called contract and see if it would stand alone; that is to say, to use the current expression, whether it would stand upon its own feet. Looking at what is said to be the contract of life insurance here, and testing it by that test, I have no hesitation in saying that it would not. The clause which I have read would be a meaningless contract of life insurance if it were not for what had gone before, and accordingly, the result on my mind is this, that that clause does not, in any true sense of the word, constitute a contract of life insurance at all, and that it is merely a stipulation for a reduction of the premiums in certain events." 
Lord McLaren, substantially agreeing with the Lord President, held that the provision could have no meaning apart from the main purpose of the policy and that it was not intended to be a separate and independent obligation on the part of the insurer.

Although not referred to in either judgment, the Act in force at the time contained a section similar to [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s17.html), see Commissioner of Stamp Duties versus Pendal Nominees Pty Limited, above, at 10 where Mason CJ refers to the history of such a provision. There was a suggestion by Mr MacFarlane QC, who appears for the plaintiff, that a statement made by the Lord President as to the general operation of the legislation there under consideration is inconsistent with the existence of a provision such as found in [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s17.html), and so his Lordship's reasoning in that case was flawed. But I do not read anything that the Lord President said as being inconsistent with the existence of such a provision. In my view he was merely emphasising the general rule, to which I have referred earlier, that matters merely incidental to the general object of the instrument were covered by the duty payable on that object and not separately dutiable.

The test proposed by the Lord President for determining whether a provision in an instrument should be considered as effecting a separate object for the purposes of the assessment of stamp duty was recently applied by Malcolm CJ in National Mutual Life Association versus Commissioner of State Taxation (WA) ATC 4615 at 4626. In that case his Honour was considering a section of the Western Australian [Stamp
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa85/) which is virtually identical to [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa85/s17.html) The instrument being construed by the court was a policy of life insurance which contained both a disablement and a trauma rider. There were supplementary premiums payable in respect of each of the riders in addition to the premium payable for the basic life insurance benefit. In order to determine whether the riders were distinct provisions which effected general insurance independent from the life insurance, his Honour considered whether the riders could stand alone. He held that in the context of the policy as a whole they could not.

The plaintiff contends that the decision in General Accident Assurance
Corporation Ltd versus Commissioners of Inland Revenue can, and ought to be, distinguished on the facts. The distinguishing feature is said to be that, in respect of the two forms of policy with which I am concerned, the premium is divisible as between the different types of benefits provided, whereas in respect of the policy considered by the Court of Sessions there was no suggestion that the premium could be divided between the benefit for death or injury by accident, on the one hand, and the benefit provided by the stipulation for the refund of half the premium, on the other.

There is no reference in either of the judgements of the Lord President or
Lord McLaren to the issue of the ability to apportion the premium paid between the benefits provided. That may be because, as the plaintiff suggests, it was not possible to make such an apportionment or it may because there was no evidence one way or the other. It may also be because it never occurred to their Lordships that a notional apportionment of the premium was a decisive, or even relevant, consideration when construing the actual policy instrument as the Lordships were doing. It seems clear that the actual policy being construed did not indicate on its face that there were different amounts of premium payable for the different benefits obtained under the policy. That is also the situation in respect of the policies before me. It appears that it was not until July 1993 that it ever occurred to anybody within the plaintiff company that the premium payable on these policies could, or should, be apportioned between the benefits. The plaintiff, however, contends that the significant matter is whether the premium can be apportioned between the benefits and not whether any body has actually made such a calculation. On the face of it I find it curious that the construction of an instrument for the purposes of applying [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa85/s17.html), can depend upon such a matter.

The plaintiff has submitted that there are two reasons why the ability to apportion the premium between the benefits is of significance. Firstly, it is argued that, if the total premium is even notionally divisible between the benefits provided, then a benefit which returns the whole of the amount of premium paid for the policy should be treated as returning to the insured more than the return of the premium in respect of that particular benefit. In order to understand this submission regard should be had to the actuarial calculations in the present case. The plaintiff contends that, if the cost to the insured of the Refund Benefit is notionally $78 and for the other benefits $22, then once the conditions for the payment of the Benefit are fulfilled the insured receives a refund of $100 for the payment of $78. So, the argument runs, the actual benefit provided by the Refund Benefit is more than the return of the premium paid for that benefit.

By this line of reasoning the plaintiff seeks to distinguish the present case from those, such as General Accident Assurance Corporation Ltd v
Commissioners of Inland Revenue, which have suggested that a provision providing merely for the return or refund of premium cannot effect a contract of insurance. In re Commonwealth Homes and Investment Co Limited <case>; [[1943] SASR 211] at 231 Mayo J took the view that a term in a bond, which contracted to return premiums paid in respect of the bond if death occurred before the date on which the bonds matured, could not make the bonds policies of insurance for the purposes of the Insurance Act 1932 (Cth). His Honour drew a distinction between an agreement to return premiums in the event of death occurring, on the one hand, and insurance on the life of a person, on the other. His Honour explained this distinction as follows: "To 'insure' suggests an indemnity, or payment of an amount to cover loss or injury, where an element of risk, or what might be called speculation, is present, which is insured against in consideration of premium (Seaton v
Heath [[1899] 1 QB 782] at 793 per Romer J). A life policy as ordinarily understood is the purchase of a reversionary sum payable at death in consideration of a present payment of money, or as is generally the case on the payment of an annuity to the insurer during the life of the person insured (Jessel M.R. in
Freyer versus Moreland [[1876] 3 CH D 675] at 685.
The word 'insure' is inapt to describe an undertaking to refund, or acceleration of the repayment of a loan." 
But his Honour held that, if something more was to be provided other than simply the refund of premium paid, a contract of insurance may have been effected, depending, of course, upon the conditions upon which the benefit was payable . So in that case Mayo J came to the view that the bonds did amount to a policy of insurance because they provided, in addition to the refund of premiums, bonus additions as declared by the company issuing the bonds which would have been payable on maturity. Similarly in NM Superannuation Pty
Limited versus Young, above, it was held that an agreement to pay a sum calculated by reference to the premium paid together with an agreed interest component was not inconsistent with the agreement being characterised as a policy of insurance, see per Hill J at 197.

The other significance which is said to arise from the ability to apportion, even notionally, the premium paid as between benefits provided is that it would strongly indicate that each of the benefits should be considered as a separate and distinct contract of insurance - the consideration for the obligation to provide that benefit being the payment of the corresponding part of the premium. It is submitted on behalf of the plaintiff that the ability to apportion the premium between the benefits is a highly significant factor, if not the decisive one, in determining whether the provision containing the benefit can stand alone from the other provisions in the policy. I was referred to a number of decided cases for the purpose of showing how the ability to apportion the premium was crucial in the construction of the particular instrument under consideration.

Considerable reliance was placed by the plaintiff on the decision of the High
Court in the National Mutual Life case, to which I have earlier made reference. That case concerned the assessment of income tax in respect of the income of an insurance company for premiums received by it under policies it had issued. The policies were of four different types but generally they provided life insurance with additional benefits in the nature of accident and disability insurance. The premiums were expressed in the policies as a single sum but were computed by adding to the premium payable for life insurance a further amount attributable to the additional benefits provided. The question raised was whether premiums received by the company in respect of those policies were "premiums received in respect of policies of life assurance" for the purposes of the Income Tax Assessment Act. If they were, they were exempt from the taxable income of the company. The Commissioner contended that the relevant policies contained accident and disability insurance together with life insurance and, therefore, the premiums receives in respect of those policies were not wholly exempt. It was further argued that, because the amount of total premium attributable to the accident and disability insurance was ascertainable, that amount should be treated as part of the company's assessable income.

The judgement of Windeyer J was adopted by the majority of the Court. His
Honour concluded that the Commissioner's arguments were correct and that so much of the premium as was attributable to accident and disability insurance should be included in the assessable income of the company. After referring to the differences between life insurance and accident insurance, his Honour turned his attention to the particular policies in question which he found fell into four different classes. In respect of the policies in the first class his Honour held that the obligation of the company under the life policy was separate from its obligation in relation to the permanent disability benefits provided. He noted that the amount of the total premium attributable to the additional insurance "was recorded and ascertainable" by the company and that the insurer might relinquish the additional insurance and thereafter pay only the equivalent premium for life insurance. Although the insurer could not relinquish life insurance in favour of disability insurance, this did not, in his Honour's view, mean that they were not separate insurances.

Policies in the second and third class were similar to those in the first class and the same considerations applied. In respect of policies in the fourth class the premium paid was not apportioned by the company in respect of the life insurance and the disability benefits but in respect of a similar policy issued by the company, which did not contain the additional benefits, the company charged a premium being 5 per cent less than that charged for the combined policy. It was held that this was an appropriate amount for the
Commissioner to use to assess the income derived from the premiums relevant to the policies in this class.

The plaintiff's submission is that this case shows that the apportionment of premium to different benefits is critical in the characterisation of the policy under consideration. Support is sought for that proposition from the fact that Windeyer J distinguished the decision in General Accident
Assurance Corporation Ltd versus Inland Revenue Commissioners. However, while his
Honour was able to distinguish that decision on its facts, one being that the premium in the earlier case was not divisible, he indicated that he did not derive much assistance from cases dealing with the issue of whether an instrument has more than one character for the purposes of assessing stamp duty. Similarly, I do not think there is much assistance to be derived from the decision in the National Mutual case in construing the policies before me because of the different issue that the High Court had before it. The fact that the premium could be apportioned between the two types of insurance contained in the policies was important in that case because it provided an appropriate basis upon which the Commissioner could tax the premiums received.
Windeyer J at p 50 pointed out that had the premiums not been divisible, either actually or notionally, the result would not have been that the policies would have been considered to be only life insurance policies so that no part of the premium would have been taxable, but rather the consequence may have been that the whole of the premium should be included as taxable income.

Reference was also made to Re Carter [[1963] Qd R 45.] This was a decision of Gibbs J in the Supreme Court of Queensland. The question in this case was whether the proceeds of certain life insurance policies were to be considered as part of the property of a bankrupt under the provisions of the
Bankruptcy Act 1924-1960. Section 91(b) of that Act provided that property of the bankrupt for the purposes of the provisions of the Act shall not include policies of life assurance. The bankrupt had died by reason of an accident.
There were four policies under consideration by the court and the issue was how they were to be characterised for the purposes of <case>(b). The first policy was determined by Gibbs J to be a pure accident policy but the other three had benefits of the nature of both accident insurance and life insurance. In respect of the second policy there was an endorsement slip which indicated the premium which was paid for the accident benefit. The third policy contained nothing to indicate how the premium was calculated but there was a letter tendered which indicated how the company had calculated the premium between the life and accident benefits at a time when the premium had been increased. In respect of the fourth policy, the policy itself indicated the premium payable for the additional accident benefits.

Gibbs J said that there were three possible ways in which <case>(b) could operate on the policies in question. Firstly they may be regarded as basically policies of life assurance, notwithstanding the presence of provisions for accident insurance - in such a case <case>(b) would protect all the benefit payable. Secondly, it may be said that the provisions in respect of accident insurance prevented them from being considered as policies of life assurance - in such a case the protection of <case>(b) did not extend to any part of the policies. Thirdly, the protection of the section may extend to only the life assurance elements of the policies. This last possibility was the one favoured by his Honour. After considering the terms of the policies and noting their differences, his Honour concluded: "In spite of all these differences it remains true that each of these policies provides an accident insurance benefit that is additional to and distinguishable from the life assurance benefit and that the amount of the premium in respect is either fixed by the policy or is apportionable. The policies are in truth combined policies, operating both as life assurance and accident assurance. In my judgment, <case>(b) applies to them only insofar as they operate as policies of life assurance." 
Clearly his Honour was primarily concerned with the proper characterisation of the policies by a consideration of the terms of the policies themselves. The fact that the premium was apportionable between the different benefits was at most one only of the factors which his Honour needed to consider. Although
Hill J in NM Superannuation Pty Ltd versus Young, above, at 203 believed that
Gibbs J may have came to a different view had the premiums in respect of each policy before him not been apportionable as between the benefits provided, I do not believe that the fact that the premium was apportionable was crucial.
As Hill J indicated earlier in his judgment at 202, in determining how a policy of insurance should be characterised much will depend upon the purpose of the characterisation as well as whether separate premiums are payable for the separate cover provided.

In NM Superannuation Pty Ltd versus Young there was no evidence that the premiums had been actuarially calculated. But that fact does not seem to me to have been decisive in the way the policy in question was characterised for the purposes of that case, which was to determine whether the proceeds of the policy were excluded from the property of a bankrupt for the purposes of the [Bankruptcy Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/). In that case it was held that the whole of the policy was to be characterised as a policy of life insurance. There was no necessity to attempt an apportionment of the amount of premium received in respect of a particular benefit under the policy and the question of whether the premium was apportionable seems to have been seen as largely irrelevant to the question with which the court was concerned.

In my view whether the premium in respect of a policy containing different benefits can be apportioned as between those benefits is only one of the matters to be considered when determining whether or not the policy creates separate and distinct contracts of insurance for the purposes of the assessment of stamp duty. The fundamental question is to determine in accordance with [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/s17.html) whether the policy instrument contains more than one separate and distinct basis upon which stamp duty should be assessed. One matter which may assist in that determination is whether the policy itself apportions the premium payable between the benefits provided. If it does, that may be highly significant in a conclusion that there is in fact more than one contract of insurance contained in the instrument. If it does not, the court may consider extraneous material which might indicate how the instrument is to be characterised, including how the company calculated the premium to be charged on the policy, see for example Marac Life Assurance Ltd versus Commissioner of Inland Revenue [[1986] NZLR 694], in a passage from the judgement of Richardson J at 705-706 and quoted by Hill J in NM Superannuation Pty Ltd versus Young, above, at -201.

But where as in this case, all that has happened is that at some later stage, after the premium has been determined and the policies issued, actuarial calculations are made to notionally divide the premium paid between the benefits provided, the divisibility of the premium seems to me to carry little, if any, weight in deciding the proper construction of the instrument under consideration. It may be that, if the instrument can be construed from its terms as creating separate and distinct policies of insurance, such a notional apportionment of premium would be a valid way for determining the duty payable. But in my view such an apportionment of the premium does not have the significance attributed to it by the plaintiff. I do not think that had some person been able to make an actuarial calculation of the proportions of the premium paid in respect of the policy considered in General Accident
Assurance Corporation Ltd versus Commissioners of Inland Revenue that such would have altered the decision in that case.

Nor in my opinion is the situation altered by the fact that, for the purposes of ss 88B and 88C of the Act, some notional division of the premium may have to be calculated for the assessment of duty. I have already stated my view that those sections do not displace, or form an exception to, the operation of s 17. Before those sections operate there must be more than one distinct and separate form of insurance contained in the one policy instrument. It may well be that the provision in the one policy of separate and distinct benefits falling in different Classes of insurance will be sufficient for the purposes of the Act to give rise to separate and distinct contracts of insurance. But it all depends upon the terms of the instrument. The fact that the premium is, or is not, divisible between the benefits is not, in my view, determinative of the question. The fact that the premium can be divided between the benefits will not necessarily mean that the any particular benefit can stand alone as a separate contract of insurance. Nor will it determine whether the benefit is merely ancillary to the general purpose of the instrument.

In deciding whether an instrument contains more than one distinct matter under the Act regard is to be had to the approach to <case> laid down by the High
Court in Commissioner of Stamp Duties versus Pendal Nominees Pty Limited, above. As Mason CJ said (at 12) each case will depend upon its own facts and will involve questions of impression and degree. But the court must approach the task under the section having regard to the following propositions which can be derived from that decision: a) a matter is not distinct if it is merely accessory or merely ancillary to a particular transaction in an instrument or to an operation or character of an instrument; b) it is impermissible to characterise an instrument by reference to a single broad purpose or object so that all obligations created by the instrument are considered as accessory to that purpose or object; c) matters may be distinct even though in a contractual sense and in terms of the agreement they are integrated or interlocked as parts of a single larger agreement; d) to be distinct the matters must be different from the point of view of the assessment of stamp duty and must be separately and distinctly dutiable, as if they had been subject of a separate instrument.

The prohibition against characterising the instrument in terms of a broad- brush approach, set out in (b) above, does not mean that one cannot consider the instrument as a whole to consider its purpose or object. It is only by considering the instrument as a whole that one can tell whether the particular provision under consideration is merely ancillary to the overall purpose or object of the instrument. The primary purpose of each of the policies before me is unquestionably to provide the insured with accident insurance. This is clear from the terms of the policies including the name of the policies, the benefits provided, the statement of the extent of cover, and the description of the insurer's obligations in the first form. The fact that neither policy has a surrender value tends to suggest that they do not contain a policy of life insurance; see Re Estate of Carter, above, at 53.

The benefits provided by the payment of premium in each policy are payments of money where death, disability or loss are occasioned by an accident during the term of the policy. The Refund Benefit is, in my view, merely an agreement to refund the amount of premium paid for those benefits if the insured survives the term and no claim is made against the policy for the benefits provided by the payment of that premium. The description of the Refund Benefit recognises as much when it states, as one of the conditions for the payment of the
Benefit, that "no claim for any Benefit is made", that is any benefit under the policy relating to the consequences of an accident. Although the Refund
Benefit is payable on condition that the insured survives for the ten year term of the policy and, therefore, has one of the characteristics of life insurance, that survival condition is merely part of what I consider to be the substantial condition upon which the Refund Benefit is payable, being that there is no claim against the policy in respect of the benefits it provides.
One can well understand that the plaintiff would not want to refund the amount of the premium paid where the insured dies during the term (where the death is not covered by the terms of the policy) and so would never make a claim against the policy.

In my opinion the Refund Benefit is not an endowment policy at all. I do not believe that in any real sense the insured is seeking to provided against his or her survival for ten years. I come to this view regardless of whether or not there is any requirement that, for a valid contract of insurance, the event insured against must be adverse to the insured; see Prudential
Insurance Company versus Inland Revenue Commissioners, above, at 664 and cf NM
Superannuation Pty Limited versus Young, above, per Burchett J at 188. In my judgment the real substance of the agreement between the insured and the plaintiff in respect of the Refund Benefit is not in the nature of life insurance within the definition contained in Bunyan's work which I quoted earlier. It is not an agreement that the plaintiff would pay to the insured a sum of money in the event that the insured survived for ten years in consideration of the payment of a premium. Rather it is an agreement to return the amount of premium paid in respect of accident insurance if the insured did not make a claim in respect of that insurance in the circumstances where the insured had survived the term of the policy.

I accept that conditions can be imposed upon the payment of a benefit under an endowment policy without destroying the nature of the contract as being one of life insurance. For example, a policy conditioned upon a person surviving for a particular period and remaining an employee of the person taking out the insurance does not alter the nature of the agreement as being one for life insurance: Commissioner of Stamp Duties versus Jones [(1971) 125 CLR .]
But, conversely, the existence in an agreement of a condition that one party survives for the period of the agreement does not turn the agreement into a contract of life insurance. This is clear from the decision in General
Accident Assurance Corporation Ltd versus Commissioners of Inland Revenue. The provision there was held not to amount to a contract of life insurance notwithstanding that the agreement was for the payment of a sum of money on the insured reaching the age of 65 years.

Further, the agreement in the Refund Benefit is in effect for the return of the premium paid. I cannot accept the plaintiff's argument that the benefit was for the return of more than the insured paid to obtain the Benefit. That argument is based upon the actuarial calculations made years after the policies were issued and accepted by the insured. The suggestion that the insured was to receive the whole of the premium paid for the payment of only per cent of the premium is specious. Even if the notional apportionment of the premium is relevant, which I doubt, the true situation is that the insured had to pay the 22 per cent of the premium for the accident insurance before he was entitled to any benefit at all. Even if it could be said that the insured received 100 per cent of the premium paid for the payment of only 78 per cent of it, he could only obtain that result if he had already paid the other 22 per cent.

But even if I am wrong and the Refund Benefit can be said to fulfil the criteria for an endowment policy and could amount to a contract of life insurance, I do not believe it is a separate and distinct matter under <case>.
It cannot in my view stand alone as a separate matter for the purposes of the payment of stamp duty. It would be, in the words of the Lord President in
General Accident Assurance Corporation Ltd versus Commissioners of Inland
Revenue, "a meaningless contract of life insurance if it were not for what had gone before". I appreciate that, simply because the Refund Benefit is contractually bound up with the other benefits in the policy, it would not necessarily follow that it could not be considered to be a separate and distinct matter; Commissioner of Stamp Duties versus Pendal Nominees Pty
Limited, above, at 11. The fact that the benefit is not available to the insured independently from the other benefits provided by the policy is also not decisive: see the National Mutual Case at 48.

But in my opinion the Refund Benefit was merely ancillary to the accident benefits provided by the policy. What the insured was seeking to insure against was the adverse consequences of an accident and that was what the plaintiff was willing to provide. As an inducement to the insured to enter into the accident insurance the plaintiff was prepared to agree to return the premiums at the end of the term if no claim had been made in respect of the consequences of an accident occurring within that term. The survival of the insured for the term of the policy was merely incidental to the substantive pre-condition for receipt of the Refund Benefit, being that there was no claim for any benefit under the policy. Further, even if the premium can be regarded as being apportioned between the benefits, as I have already noted the premium for the Refund Benefit was conditioned upon the payment of the premium in respect of the other benefits. That part of the premium said to relate to the
Return Benefit is only part of the consideration for that benefit: see
National Life Mutual Association versus Commissioner of State Taxation, above, at 4626.

The proceedings in each matter are dismissed. The plaintiff is to pay the costs of the appeal in the first matter. I make no order as to costs in relation to the second matter.
 * * * 
