

Powell versus Ho Matter No 21287/95 [1997] NSWSC 548 (6 November 1997) 
Powell versus Ho /95 November 1997 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /95 - Powell versus Ho 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: A motor vehicle accident took place on 1 October 1994 on Rocky Point Road, Kogarah. The plaintiff was riding his pushbike in a southerly direction. The defendant was driving a motor vehicle in a northerly direction. The collision took place whilst the defendant was in the process of executing a right-hand turn. 
The plaintiff gave notice of a claim to the defendant's insurer. On 8 February , the insurer made an admission of liability.

On 8 December 1995, a Statement of Claim was filed. The solicitors for the defendant commenced to act on 24 May 1996. On 13 August 1996, a Statement of
Defence (the Defence) was filed. The Defence contained an admission of breach of duty of care.

On 30 August 1996, the plaintiff attended upon Dr Wilcox for examination on behalf of the defendant. The plaintiff gave a history to Dr Wilcox. The history contained a version of the accident. The report prepared by Dr Wilcox contains the following:- "He had a light on the back but not on the front of the bike".

In December 1996, a proposed Amended Statement of Defence (the Amended
Defence) was sent to the solicitors for the plaintiff. The proposed Amended
Defence sought to agitate the question of contributory negligence.

The proposed Amended Defence contains the following particulars of contributory negligence:- "a. Riding a bicycle at night with inadequate lighting on it.
 b. Riding at an excessive speed in the circumstances.
 c. Failure to keep a proper lookout." 
The plaintiff did not consent to the proposed amendment. His case had been conducted on the basis that quantum was the only question in issue.

The defendant filed a Notice of Motion on 4 July 1997. It was heard by
Registrar Irwin and determined on 26 August 1997. The application for leave to amend was refused by the Registrar. The file contains a draft of written reasons for the decision made by the Registrar.

The Registrar had before him material contained in an affidavit sworn by Mr
Harvey (the solicitor for the defendant). Also, he had material contained in two affidavits sworn by Mr Gourlas (a solicitor in the employ of the solicitors for the plaintiff).

In opposing the application, the plaintiff relied on prejudice. It appears that the Registrar refused the application on this ground. Also, it appears that he placed significant emphasis on a matter that had not been agitated by the parties.

The written reasons contain the following :- "The basis of it is a statement by the plaintiff to the doctor. If liability had not been admitted, or if contributory negligence had been placed in issue, one imagines the plaintiff would not have disclosed this information to the defendant's doctor. I think the same considerations apply. The plaintiff's case has been prepared on a particular basis, the basis disclosed by the issues raised in the pleadings.

I am most reluctant to grant leave to amend when the very failure to raise contributory negligence could well have resulted in that statement being made by the plaintiff to the defendant's doctor.' `I can imagine a situation where the plaintiff's solicitor would have warned the plaintiff not to mention anything about the accident to the defendant's doctor if liability, or contributory negligence, had been placed in issue and
I have already mentioned the plaintiff's evidence concerning the ability to investigate further the identity of the unknown witness and my attention has also been directed to the inability to produce clothing which, although it doesn't go to whether or not there was a lot, perhaps it does go to contributory negligence, or the degree of it." 
On 22 September 1997, the defendant filed a further Notice of Motion. It seeks a review of the decision of the Registrar.

The review took place on 23 October 1997. On that occasion, there was an attempt to place before the Court material that had not been put before the
Registrar. As the effect of this material would have been to turn the proceedings before me into a fresh application (as opposed to a review), the tender of the material was rejected.

The material placed before the Court concerning the accident is sparse. As a consequence, the Court is faced with a difficult task in dealing with the matters in issue.

The accident took place at night. Apparently, at some time after 11pm. There is a P4 Traffic Collision Report. There is a report from the Ambulance
Service.

The issue agitated by the parties is a narrow one. It is whether or not leave to amend should be refused because of prejudice to the plaintiff. The plaintiff says that, if leave is given, further investigation will be required (including the obtaining of an expert's report dealing with, inter alia, the visibility of the plaintiff at the time of the accident). There is material to the effect that he was wearing a reflective bike riding shirt.

The plaintiff has identified three areas of prejudice. Firstly, there is the matter of the pushbike itself and the clothing worn by the plaintiff on the evening of the accident. There is evidence that the pushbike and riding equipment was disposed of by the plaintiff after he had been informed that the insurance company had admitted liability. Secondly, there is a matter of a bystander "witness" who cannot now be located. Thirdly, there is the matter referred to by the Registrar in his written reasons and which has been earlier mentioned in this Judgment.

I have already observed that this matter involved a question that was not agitated by the parties before the Registrar. It should not be necessary to observe that decisions should be made having regard to matters that are relevant and put in issue by the parties.

There is no evidence from the plaintiff himself. There is nothing in the material to suggest that he disputes the accuracy of the history recorded by
Dr Wilcox. Accordingly, it would seem that there may not be any issue between the parties that the plaintiff did not have a light on the front of his bike.

It is difficult to assess the significance of the disposition of the pushbike and riding equipment. The evidence is that it was disposed of at some unspecified time after the insurance company had admitted liability. This information was ascertained by Mr Gourlas in July 1997. Whether or not it is a case in which expert evidence will actually assist the presentation of the plaintiff's case is a matter of some conjecture. If expert evidence is required, evidence founded on, inter alia, the plaintiff's recollection and/or similar equipment could be obtained. No doubt the task of the expert may be made somewhat more difficult in the absence of the original equipment.

There is no material to suggest that the plaintiff has suffered any diminution of recollection in respect of the circumstances of the accident. However, the
Court may infer that his recollection now may not be as good as it was at the time of the accident.

The proposed particulars of contributory negligence concern related matters.
It could be expected that the plaintiff would be capable of giving relevant oral evidence concerning each of these matters.

Whatever evidence the bystander may have been able to give is largely a matter of conjecture. All that is presently known is that he had stated that the plaintiff had been hit by a car travelling at approximately 20 to 30kph. It seems that neither his name or address was taken (apparently, because of a belief formed by an investigating police officer). It may be that, at best, there was little prospect of ever locating him following the accident.

The evidence would suggest that the insurer was unaware that there was no light on the front of the bike until the obtaining of the report from Dr
Wilcox. There is nothing to suggest that it was earlier disclosed by the plaintiff to the insurer. It is not said that it should have been ascertained at some earlier time. It was a matter that would have been relevant to the determination made by the insurer in admitting the liability. It may well be a matter relevant to the quantification of the damages that may be recovered by the plaintiff.

If delay has led to any prejudice, I am not satisfied that it is of a significant kind. I am not satisfied that it should disentitle the defendant to the relief sought.

In applications of this nature, the Court has a discretionary power to grant relief. The power is exercised having regard to the relevant circumstances of the case and so that justice is best served between the parties. Each case will turn on its own particular facts. Counsel have sought to refer the Court to various decided cases (including the decision of Spender AJ in Nothman v
Hough (11 July 1995)). At best, other decided cases can be expected to give some guidance in the exercise of the discretion.

When regard is had to the relevant circumstances in this case, it seems to me that justice is best done if leave to amend is granted to the defendant.

Accordingly, my review of the decision of the Registrar leads me to the conclusion that his decision refusing to grant leave to amend should be set aside. It seems to me that, inter alia, he has wrongly taken certain matters into account and not had regard to other matters which should have been taken into account.

The defendant is to have leave to file the proposed Amended Defence within seven days. The defendant is to pay the costs of the Notice of Motion filed on September 1997.

There is no issue between the parties that these proceedings can be appropriately disposed of in the District Court. I was informed that the transfer of the proceedings to the District Court had been delayed pending the determination of this review. I order that the proceedings be remitted to the
District Court.
 * * * 
