

Wily versus Parker; Re Rainbow Systems of Australia P/L [1996] NSWSC 289 (19
July 1996) 
WILY V PARKER; RE RAINBOW SYSTEMS OF AUSTRALIA PTY LTD /96 
THURSDAY 18 JULY 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application by a liquidator to search for and seize a company's books and property under <case> of the Corporations Law. I dealt with this type of case in Cvitanovic versus Kenna & Brown Pty Ltd [(1995) 18 ACSR 387.] I then indicated that when one balanced the needs of the liquidator and the public, and the rights that are recognised by the law of New South Wales of people to have their property secure, that the warrant should issue subject to certain terms and conditions, including when it might be executed. A look at the file shows that I in fact signed the warrant as a judge.

In the present case the matters about which the court has to be satisfied before issuing the warrant are made out on the evidence which has been presented to me on an ex parte basis because there is fear that if there is notice of the making of this application the books and records may well disappear.

I am satisfied that the officers of the company have concealed books of the company from the liquidator. This is abundantly clear from the affidavits of the liquidator's officers. They have just been given the run around since the company was put into liquidation on 11 April 1996.

Mr Chippindall, who appears for the liquidator, has drawn my attention to an unreported decision of the Federal Court of Morton versus Robins 4 June 1996 in which Northrop, J declined to follow my decision. I believe that a lot of what his Honour has said has to do with the fact the Federal Court only has a judicial power, whereas a judge of this Court is not bound by the doctrine of separation of powers and has administrative as well as judicial authority. I also consider that it is the practice of this Court for judges to issue personally warrants, rather than the court constituted by a Registrar, even with the authority of a judge.

Northrop J considered that I had given too much importance to the protection given by the Search Warrants Act of the State of New South Wales and had misunderstood the Bankruptcy Act. The second point does not concern me very much, but I do think that in New South Wales a State Court must bear in mind the intention of the legislature, which is made manifest in the Search
Warrants Act, which gives some protection to people whose premises are to be invaded because of some higher public right. I think unless the Court of
Appeal in New South Wales or the majority of the judges in this Division take a different line I should continue to follow what I said in Cvitanovic's case.

Accordingly, I would be prepared to sign warrants in the same form as those issued in the earlier case.

I should say this, however, that there is provision under <case> of the
Corporations Law, which was inserted, as was <case>, by Act No 210 of 1992. I think also the time has now been reached where the public expects that if people do not comply with the Corporations Law in respect of failed companies they can expect to be pursued. There is power under <case> to arrest a company director who is concealing books from the liquidator. It seems to me that, generally speaking, if a warrant is issued under <case> and produces a nil result an order should be made for the arrest of the directors, but for the writ to lie in office for, say, seven days so that they can explain to the court what has happened to the records so that the law does not take the course it would otherwise take.

Accordingly, I make an order that warrants issue in the form which I will approve in respect of the four defendants. I make order 2 in the summons. I give liberty to the liquidator to apply for an order to arrest the directors of the company under <case> of the Corporations Law should the warrants produce insufficient result. I stand the matter over to Friday 19 July 1996 for short minutes.

Friday 19 July 1996: 
I issue and sign a warrant in the form attached.
 * * * 
