

Kanittha Ninubon versus Gag Pty Ltd Matter No 2342/98 [1998] NSWSC 298 (21 July )

Last Updated: 28 August 1998 `KANITTHA NINUBON versus GAG PTY LTD` `2342/98` `21 July 1998` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` 
JUDGMENT. 
HIS HONOUR: This is a dispute between the landlord and tenant of a restaurant premises in Surry Hills. 
The plaintiff is the tenant in lease O143993Y, which was for three years, commencing on 1 November 1949 and terminating on 30 November 1997. Clause 15 of the lease provided for two options of three years each and provided that if the tenant decided to exercise those options she was to give the landlord not less than three months nor more than six months' notice in writing. Clause .9 is as follows: "14.9 Should the Lessee continue to occupy the Demised Premises beyond the expiration of the term of this Lease or any further Lease granted hereunder with the consent of the Lessor it shall do so hereunder and subject to the covenants, terms, conditions and provisions hereof as a monthly tenant only at a monthly rental equal to one (1) month's proportion of the annual rent payable immediately prior to the expiration of this Lease for such further
Lease (as the case may be) payable monthly in advance such tenancy being determinable at the will of either the Lessor or the Lessee by one (1) month's notice in writing to the other expiring on any day of the week." 
There was no written notice given to the landlord by 30 August 1997 and the landlord has treated the tenant as merely holding over after 30 November 1997.
The tenant says that she had been working in the restaurant since 1991 when it would appear it was owned by her uncle. She purchased the restaurant in August and she dealt with the agent, who was then Blake Kittle. She does not know whether the lease was ever transferred from her uncle's name to hers. She says that in 1994 Mr Ambrose of Blake Kittle told her that her lease had expired and asked her whether she wanted to do a new lease and eventually the current lease was entered into.

The flavour in her affidavit seems to be that this incident gave her the expectation that at the end of the 1994 lease the agent would behave in the same way. Indeed, had either she or the agent read the [Retail Leases Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rla1994135/) something like that should have happened, but in fact it did not.

In November 1997 the plaintiff says that she attended the offices of Scott
Ritchie Real Estate Agents. It would seem that they had taken over the management of the property as from 1 November 1997.

Although the full story is not before the court, it would seem that Mr Scott was a former employee of Blake Kittle and that relations between Blake Kittle and himself were not particularly good. It would seem, for instance, that Mr
Scott did not have in his possession copies of the relevant leases to the various tenants.

The plaintiff says that some time in November 1997 she attended Scott
Ritchie's offices and there saw a Marleese Sharp, who said to her: "Your lease is about to expire, do you wish to exercise your option to renew your existing lease of your restaurant here in Crown Street?" 
The plaintiff said "Yes I do" where upon Miss Sharp said: "Okay, I'll get the papers drawn up and I will send them back to you for signature".

Nothing happened, on the plaintiff's story. She purchased some expensive fittings between November 1997 and March 1998, including a new oven for $15,000. She says that she would not have done this had she not understood that she had a further lease. When nothing happened she went to the agent's office in March 1998, handed over her rent cheque for the month and said she would like to enquire about the lease that Marleese was going to provide. The receptionist told her that Marleese Sharp was not there at the moment. Indeed, the evidence shows she was on holidays.

It then appeared that another agent had the property up for sale. This moved the plaintiff to go to the office of Scott and Ritchie and find out what was happening. She was told her lease had expired, and she repeated that Marleese said that she would get the new lease back to the plaintiff, who could have a new lease. The person at the estate agent's office told the plaintiff not to worry.

She later returned to the office with her husband and spoke to Marleese and, according to the plaintiff, the plaintiff said: "You told me last year I could have a new lease and exercise the option on the lease on my restaurant. You said you would send out to me the new lease agreement." 
The plaintiff said Marleese Sharp said: "Yes, I did say that. I've tried to get back to the landlord and I've tried to discuss this with him and I am not having any success." 
The plaintiff then said: "I have invested a lot of the money in the restaurant. I will lose my business if my lease doesn't continue".

The plaintiff's husband and Miss Sharp then had a conversation, which the plaintiff says she found difficult to understand.

The plaintiff's husband, Mr Woods, gave evidence. He says that he had a conversation in April 1998 with David Frame, of David Frame Real Estate, who told him that he was the sole selling agent for the whole building.

What was said to him made him accompany his wife to Scott and Ritchie where he saw Marleese Sharp and they had a conversation, Mr Woods saying that his wife had told him that since last November Miss Sharp had been trying to get her lease option exercised, but it appeared that there was some delay, which Miss
Sharp allegedly replied: "That's right. I've been trying to get the lease for you but Blake &
Kittle have been really difficult and they have kept all the paperwork. They have been quite obstructive and the landlord has no copy of the lease. Do you have a copy of the lease?" 
There was then further conversation in which Mr Woods expressed surprise that the managing agent did not know what was going on, which ended up by saying that the landlord had done the dirty on the agent with the sale too.

After the meeting Mr Woods drafted out a letter of 2 April, which was delivered to the agent and then transferred to one of the directors of the principal. The letter made it clear that the tenant thought that there was a shabby bit of trickery being wrought on her, and that the tenant vigorously pursued the exercise of the lease option already granted to her and intended to continue occupying the premises. The letter actually commenced with these words, which I will quote: "Dear Marleese, 
Further to our meeting yesterday regarding the renewing of my lease option I wish to clarified my position.

Firstly, I wish to thank you for your efforts over the past five months in attempting to have my lease renewed." 
The letter of 2 April was not responded to in any meaningful way, and a statement of claim in this Court seeking specific performance was issued by the tenant on 11 May 1998.

The further amended statement of claim puts the plaintiff's case on various bases; viz (a) an agreement made between the plaintiff and Marleese Sharp on or about 1 November, being the exercise of the plaintiff's option (the time and method of exercising the option having been waived); (b) estoppel; (c) that the landlord's conduct in denying that the option had been validly exercised was false and misleading in trade and commerce.

The landlord issued a notice to quit, which is dated 5 June 1998 and which appears to have been served on 10 June 1998. A copy of the notice to quit will be set out in the appendix to these reasons.

The statement of claim was in due course amended to seek a declaration that that notice to quit was void and of no effect, and that it be set aside and for an injunction restraining the landlord from taking any steps to rely on it.

On 2 July 1998 the landlord filed a cross-claim seeking a declaration that the tenancy was determined on 9 June 1998, or alternatively 10 June 1998, with effect from 10 July 1998, and an order for possession.

The cross-claim, as a matter of strict law, must fail because as at the date when it was filed the landlord was not entitled to possession. At the very earliest the landlord would only become entitled to possession on 10 July , but no-one has taken any point on this, presumably because it would be open for the landlord to issue a fresh cross-claim today and have the matter dealt with. I merely mention the point in case anyone may think it has passed me by.

The plaintiff's case was met on the facts by the evidence of Marleese Sharp.
She said that she had worked for Scott Ritchie for approximately two and a half years. She was twenty-one years of age, had no formal qualifications and that her employment at Scott Ritchie was on the residential side of the business. However, it was quite clear from all the evidence that the Scott
Ritchie office was not tremendously large and that from time to time Miss
Sharp, with others, would handle whatever had to be done.

Miss Sharp denies any conversation in November 1997 or, indeed, that that conversation took place at any time. She can remember that in December 1997 she was asked by the plaintiff whether she had a copy of the lease and she said that she would look in the file, and she did and could not find it. She said if she located it she would bring it down to the plaintiff's restaurant, from which, from time to time, she ordered some take-away food.

She says that she spoke to the plaintiff at the restaurant and said she could not find the lease and: "I rang Blake & Kittle and they don't have one either. You will have to ring your solicitor if you need it." 
The plaintiff denied that that conversation every took place or that she had ever spoken to Miss Sharp at the restaurant.

Miss Sharp denies that she ever said to the plaintiff: "You can have a new lease and exercise the option".

Miss Sharp denied that there was any conversation with Mr Woods in April, though she can remember one in January when Mr Woods told her that his wife had been trying to get the lease, but there had been problems, and that she had replied: "I've been trying to get the lease for you but Blake & Kittle have been obstructive and the landlord does not have a copy" 
Mr Woods then said: "Would it help in locating the lease if I put my request in writing?" 
To which Miss Sharp said that that might be of some value. She denied that she would ever have presumed to undertake the granting of a new lease, let alone a new lease on the commercial side of the real estate business.

The only other witness on the merits was Mr Scott, the principal of Scott
Ritchie. I do not really consider that his evidence takes either sides' case any further.

There is, as will have been observed from my recounting of the facts, an irreconcilable conflict between the evidence of the plaintiff and Miss Sharp.
Because she had to go overseas, Miss Sharp was cross-examined before me some two weeks ago and then the matter stood over to today to be completed.

She was a strange witness in many ways. She started to give her evidence in a self-assured fashion. She was swaying in her chair and showed that she was mistress of the situation by using the word " Yeah" and by just saying "repeat" if she did not understand the question, rather than the reaction of most witnesses who at least start off humbly and then perhaps get more cocky.

After about twenty minutes, however, the self-assurance appeared to vanish, the swaying stopped and the witness seemed to adopt a position that as such a junior employee she would not really have been making the statements to the plaintiff that the plaintiff accused her of making. Indeed, at one stage she said she did not even understand what an option to renew a lease was.

I did not accept that Miss Sharp was as stupid as she tried to make out to be.
I considered that really she was a fairly capable, though unskilled young lady, who was quite sure of her ability to do whatever she thought she could do.

There was one matter where Miss Sharp's evidence was certainly wrong. She denied that she had a conversation with Mr Woods in April. She said it was
January. I think the answer is that Miss Sharp remembered that the conversation was after a holiday and she has put it as after the January holiday rather than the two weeks she took off between 17 and 31 March. I know
I put this to the witness and she rejected it, but I still think it is really the most probable explanation of the confusion of the date and that the conversation with Mr Woods did take place in March.

The plaintiff was also a strange witness. She has been a lady who has worked in a restaurant for eight years and for the last six has been the proprietor.
When she got into the witness box she started to have great problems in understanding any questions that were put to her, although, with respect to Mr
Cashion, some of his questions were a trifle convoluted or obscure, there was nothing really so complicated as one would expect the plaintiff to have much problem with them, yet she did.

Indeed, I was so concerned that the plaintiff was not quite understanding what was being put to her and was not doing herself justice that I suggested that she might need an interpreter. This got two reactions. First, from counsel to say that he had had no problems with the witness in chambers and, secondly, that the plaintiff very quickly started to understand far more English than she previously had. I did not think this really laid very much to her credit.

Accordingly, just on demeanor I did not find either of the principal witnesses people who would obtain one hundred percent in the credibility stakes, but on the other hand it is always difficult to judge people in the strange environment of the witness box and it is often more satisfactory to evaluate the likelihood of what they said and did.

Mr Gyles for the plaintiff says that there are four main reasons why I should accept the plaintiff over Miss Sharp. One, that it was on 10 November, shortly after the conversation that the plaintiff says happened, that the agent received a photocopy of two pages of the lease from the solicitors. Why, Mr
Gyles asks, would that happen, because the lease was coming to an end, it would not be of value to anyone in the administration of the property, the rental was already known to the agent, the only rational explanation is that it came as a result of something the plaintiff had said to the agent. I think that within limits that is a valid point.

Secondly, he says the plaintiff had only one property and she would be more likely to remember a dealing with that property than Miss Sharp, who was handling many properties. I think my comment on that is, "not necessarily so".

Thirdly, Mr Gyles says that there was no response to the letter of 2 April.
Again, that is a valid point, as far as it goes, but the letter of 2 April was not a lawyer's letter, though it was followed up by lawyers' letters, and the divided forces of the landlord between the directors and the two sets of agents were not really in a position to give as clear a response as a landlord who would be acting through the one channel.

Fourthly, Mr Gyles says that the purchase of the expensive plant between
November and March shows that the plaintiff was more likely to have had the conversation in November than not, because otherwise why would she spend the money.

There are, however, alternative explanations for this. One is that she was an optimist, and the other is that she really did not pay very much regard to the legality and technicality of the matter because she thought, as in 1994, everything would work itself out, as, of course, it might were it not for the fact the landlord had resolved to sell the premises.

Mr Cashion pointed to matters that went the other way and also gave his submissions as to why Mr Gyles' four points really were not as strong as Mr
Gyles would have me think. Although Miss Sharp may have been handling many matters, there is absolutely no reason why she would give false evidence against the plaintiff. Her firm was being removed from this property anyhow, so that there was no loyalty to the clients left in Miss Sharp. It may be that she feared that she would get into some trouble with her boss, for exceeding her authority, but that was never put to her and one just cannot think of any reason why Miss Sharp would so vehemently deny that there was any such conversation. It is also odd, if it did not happen, that Miss Sharp would make up going to the restaurant and telling the plaintiff that she could not find the lease.

It seems to me that the version given by Miss Sharp is more likely to be correct. She was a person who, although in a junior position, was working in an estate agent's office, was more attuned to what was happening than the plaintiff, who does, to my mind, appear to be a person who did not let technicalities get in her way.

Accordingly, although there are points to be made either way, I prefer the evidence of Miss Sharp.

As Mr Cashion SC, for the defendant, says that really ends the matter so far as the claim is concerned.

However, there are other reasons why even if the conversation did take place I still would not have found for the plaintiff. The case is put on probably five grounds. First, that the option was exercised. This cannot succeed because, to put it as succinctly as Mr Cashion puts it, the exercise was not in writing, not in time, not to the lessor and not clear and unequivocal.

Secondly, it is put that Miss Sharp made an agreement on behalf of the landlord for a new lease. This would not succeed because even if the conversation did take place it was not an agreement that set out the time, the terms or any other of the vital matters about the lease. It was not in writing and the conversation does not read to me as one intending legal relations, but rather a preliminary or prefatory conversation to something that might happen when the relevant parties prepared the relevant documents, "I'll get the papers drawn up".

Thirdly, that there was a waiver of the landlord's rights under the lease to insist on the option. I cannot see any authority of Miss Sharp to waive. That the true construction of the conversation does not amount to a waiver and again it appears only to be an indication that if the plaintiff wants a new lease, well then Miss Sharp will put into action the necessary steps to produce that result.

Fourthly, so far as an estoppel is concerned, despite what Mr Gyles says, I cannot see any representation in the conversation that there is a new lease being granted or that the landlord has waived any requirement. The representation is said to be "you have exercised your option, there is no need for any writing". I cannot see that from those words.

The court also bears in mind that ordinarily parties do observe their contractual rights because they have laid them down for a purpose and the court does not encourage people who fail to do that to put forward some estoppel case as a back stop. There will be some cases where estoppel can be relied on, but they are the exception rather than the ordinary case. There may have been some purchase of equipment by the plaintiff after she got it into her own mind that the lease had been renewed but, as Mr Cashion put it, any such relation was autodidactic.

Accordingly, the plaintiff's claim must fail, except insofar as it deals with the notice to quit. However, the only relief claimed about the notice to quit is that it is void and should be set aside. That does not deal with the only point that could be argued in the plaintiff's favour, that is, that the notice to quit was ineffective to terminate the tenancy. Accordingly, it seems to me that the plaintiff's claim should simply be dismissed.

I now turn to the cross-claim. The lease commenced on 1 November 1994, though the document itself shows that it was not actually executed by the plaintiff until 14 February 1995. In any event, it was a lease made after 1 August 1994.
It referred to premises being used as a restaurant and, accordingly, it was a lease to which the [Retail Leases Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rla1994135/) applied.

There has been much discussion between counsel and myself as to the effect of the application of that lease, though probably when all is said and done that discussion amounts to very little result. [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rla1994135/s16.html) requires a minimum five year term for any retail shop lease. However, that is satisfied by a three year term with a three year option. The word "option" is not defined in [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rla1994135/s16.html) (1) and it may be that some ephemeral option, such as one only to be exercised if the tenant has first murdered her husband, might not be an option within the meaning of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rla1994135/s16.html) , but otherwise it would seem all options remove the five year time from [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rla1994135/s16.html) .

Again [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rla1994135/s44.html), which seems to guarantee a tenant of a retail lease that she will be offered a new lease or informed that one will not be offered not less than six months before the expiry of the lease, again does not apply if the lease contains an option to renew or extend the lease.

The lease, in any event, was a registered lease so that any advantage of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rla1994135/s16.html) would be lost, unless [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rla1994135/s81.html) was availed of, and it would appear that [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rla1994135/s81.html) probably has to be availed of before the initial term has come to an end. The holding over after the lease cannot be in itself a lease to which the Act applies because of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rla1994135/s6.html) (a).
[Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rla1994135/s68.html) would normally prevent any proceedings because there has been no attempt to mediate under the Act, and [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rla1994135/s75.html) (2) does give the flavour to disputes between landlord and tenant being mediated rather than decided in a court of law.

The present dispute is a retail tenants dispute under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rla1994135/s63.html) . However, both parties agree that the only finding I can make on the evidence is that mediation would be unlikely to resolve their dispute, accordingly [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rla1994135/s68.html) (1) does not prevent me hearing the case. There was some argument as to the extent of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rla1994135/s68.html) (3) which make it clear that the prohibition on a court hearing a matter does not apply to proceedings for an order in the nature of injunction, and this is to be compared with [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rla1994135/s75.html) (4) which does not prevent a court from granting urgent relief of an interlocutory nature.

It was put by Mr Gyles that so long as injunction is the principal relief than anything else can be added on to the injunction and decided. I think that is right up to certain extent, but merely because the proceedings seek an interlocutory or final injunction would not seem to me to be a full answer to [s 68](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rla1994135/s68.html) and, indeed, I would have thought were it not for the fact that I must be satisfied that mediation was unlikely to resolve the dispute there would be problems for both side in [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rla1994135/s68.html) 
Essentially then I have very seriously considered the [Retail Leases
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rla1994135/) because it is obviously the policy of the legislature that that Act apply, but having seriously considered it I cannot really see how it can impact on the decision.

Accordingly, I must deal with the cross-claimant's claim that the caveat should go and that there should be an order for possession on the merits.

For the reasons which I have given in answer to the claim, the caveat is bad and there must be an order to remove it as sought in 11 (g) of the cross- claim.

I have found, however, the question of the notice to quit more difficult to dealing with.

The holding over clause in 14.9 set out in the appendix is not really easy to construe. With his usual advocate's flare Mr Cashion submitted that really anyone who had any difficulty with the plain meaning of 14.9 was the exception rather than the rule. He put that the broad approach to the clause was the same as looking at it word by word, and that was that there was a tenancy from month to month terminable by a month's notice and that there was an agreement between the parties that, notwithstanding the common law rule, that notice may expire on any day of the week.

I do not think it is quite that simply. There are some obvious problems with the clause, even putting aside the fact that the "for" in the fourth last line must be regarded as a typographical error for "or", the drafter seems to confuse a monthly tenancy with a tenancy at will.

Mr Cashion say that the words "at the will" indicate that no ground is necessary for a notice to quit, but the riposte to this is "why on earth would anyone think there had to be". The clause probably has the effect of making sure that the holding over lease is one determinable at the discretion of the lessor, so that it is not a tenancy under the [Retail Leases
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rla1994135/) because of [s 6](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rla1994135/s6.html) , but it is difficult to credit the drafter with that sort of technical knowledge in view of the rest of the document.

However, it seems to me that the better construction is that there is a tenancy from month to month commencing on 1 December 1997, which is terminable by one month's notice in writing. There is no definition of "month" in the document and ordinarily even in a lease the better view would appear to be that "month" means lunar month see Kodak (Australasia) Pty Ltd versus Hally [[1960] Qd R 452.] 
It does not really matter in the instant case whether it is a tenancy from calendar month to calendar month or not, but probably the decision of the Full
Court in Willshire versus Dalton [(1948) 65 WN 54] means I should construe it as subject to the term by one calendar month in writing. But what is meant by the words expire on any day of the week"? Under the general law a tenancy from month to month can only be terminated by a notice which puts an end to the tenancy at the last day of the current month for tenancy or the first day of the next month, and unless there is an agreement to the contrary the notice to quit putting an end to the lease at any other time is invalid Amad versus Grant <case>; [(1947) 74 CLR 327.] 
Do the words "expire on any day of the tenancy" amount to some contrary agreement, and if so to do what.

There has been argument that there are two rules applying to notices to quit; that the notice must expire on the periodic day and (b) that it cannot expire on a Sunday. (b) just could not be right because traditionally leases were granted from and terminated on quarter days and all quarter days were holy days within the meaning of the Act passed by Henry III in honour of the saints by requiring no-one to work on the saints' days, including Lady Day and
Michaelmas.

However, it may well be that the drafter of the lease thought that there was such a rule. One cannot really see any other sense in providing that the notice may expire of any day of the week. One would have thought that the expression used in <case> of the Conveyancing Act "at any time" and which has been used by drafters of leases for hundreds of years, would have been employed, which would have meant there was an agreement contrary to the rule which says that a notice to quit must expire on the end of the monthly cycle.

The drafter has deliberately not used those words, and the words which the drafter has employed must go to some imaginary Sunday rule rather than anything else. Accordingly, there is no offer to agree to the contrary of the periodic rule and the notice to quit was not effective to terminate the tenancy as at 10 July and the tenancy thus still continues until determined by one month's notice to quit which ends on either the last day of the month or first day of next succeeding month.

Accordingly, on the cross-claim I make orders 11 (a) and 11 (g) of the cross- claim, but dismiss the claim in ejectment.

The plaintiff must pay the defendant's costs on the claim, and I make no order for costs on the cross-claim. The exhibits may be returned.

After saying what I have said Mr Giles for the plaintiff suggested that the proper order was that each party pay her or its own costs. He put, among other things, that the plaintiff had asked for an injunction to retrains proceedings on the notice to quit. It is true that the plaintiff did ask this, but she could not have succeeded. The plaintiff would not have an equity to grant an injunction to protect a short term tenancy; Argyle Art Centre Pty Ltd v
Argyle Bond & Free Stores Pty Ltd [[1976] 1 NSWLR 377.] So the claim for injunction should fail. I think that I have made the appropriate order for costs.
 * * * 
