

Hungry Jacks P/L versus Burger King Corporation [1996] NSWSC 635 (19 December )

HUNGRY JACKS PTY LIMITED versus BURGER KING CORPORATION /96 
THURSDAY 12 DECEMBER 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMERCIAL DIVISION 
ROLFE J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: These proceedings, as originally constituted, involved a claim by the plaintiff, Hungry Jacks Pty Limited against the defendant, Burger King Corporation and, inter alia, sought injunctive relief in respect of the franchising of businesses operating under the name of, "Burger King Restaurant." A substantial issue in the proceedings involves a development agreement and a service agreement which, as I understand it, were entered into in November 1990. It is alleged by the defendant that it has validly terminated the development agreement which is not accepted by the plaintiff. 
The matter has been before the Chief Judge on various occasions since 26
November 1996 in respect of the plaintiff's claim for interlocutory relief.

The matter came before me yesterday when the Mr Ellicott of Queen's Counsel, for the plaintiff, foreshadowed that the plaintiff would wish to join as a defendant The Shell Company of Australia Limited, ("Shell"). I stood the matter over until today so that that and other matters could be considered and today I granted leave to the plaintiff to file in court an amended summons joining Shell as a defendant. That was done without any objection from Mr
Jucovic of Queen's Counsel for Burger King Corporation, and thereupon Mr
Sullivan of Queen's Counsel announced his appearance for Shell.

So far as I am aware, the present immediate urgency in relation to the matter is that Shell had intended, pursuant to some arrangement it has with Burger
King Corporation, to open a food outlet, in circumstances which the plaintiff asserts would be in breach of the agreement to which I have referred, on
Sunday 15 December 1996. Shell, having been joined, is prepared to give an undertaking to the Court not to open that particular business or outlet until pm Thursday, 19 December 1996, and I shall refer to the undertakings in more detail at the conclusion of these reasons. That being so, the parties are agreed upon a timetable to prepare the matter for an interlocutory hearing in the terms of the following directions: the plaintiff file and serve by 5pm on Friday, 13 December 1996, any further amended summons upon which it seeks to rely and an amended notice of motion setting forth all interlocutory relief it now seeks; the plaintiff file and serve by 10am on Monday, 16 December 1996, any further evidence upon which it wishes to rely on the interlocutory application; the defendant, Burger King Corporation, file and serve by 5pm on Tuesday, December 1996, its defence to either the further amended summons or the amended summons filed in court today and any further evidence upon which it seeks to rely in the interlocutary proceedings; the defendant, The Shell Company of Australia Limited, file and serve by pm on Tuesday, 17 December 1996, its defence either to the amended summons or to the further amended summons.

In making that order, however, I will note that Shell is not presently apprised of the case made against it but I would be hopeful that it will be in a position to file its defence by that time. On the other hand, Mr Sullivan has made clear that there may be material contained in the originating process to which the defence is filed, which may make it not possible to file the defence by that time.

The Shell Company of Australia Limited file and serve any evidence upon which it wishes to rely by 5pm on Wednesday 18 December 1996.

Upon the plaintiff by its its counsel giving to the defendant, The Shell
Company of Australia Limited the usual undertaking as to damages and upon the defendant, The Shell Company of Australia Limited, undertaking to the Court not to open the food outlet at 133 Westlakes Boulevard, Westlakes in the State of South australia before 5pm on Thursday 19 December 1996, 
I stand the proceedings over to 10am on Thursday, 19 December 1996. I grant any party liberty to apply on three hours or such shorter notice as a judge of the Court may allow.

I reserve the question of the costs of today.
 * * * 
