

Independent Commission Against Corruption versus Kenneth George Cripps and Anor [1996] NSWSC 372 (27 August 1996) 
Independent Commission Against Corruption versus Kenneth George Cripps & anor /96 
Friday 9 August 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES ADMINISTRATIVE LAW DIVISION 
SULLY J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: By a summons filed on 11 July 1996 the Independent Commission Against Corruption, ["ICAC"], seeks relief, as follows, against Mr. Kenneth George Cripps, ["the first defendant"], and against his solicitor, Mr. Richard John Bain Allsop, ["the second defendant"]: "1. A declaration that the first defendant has waived any privilege within the meaning of sub-section 37(5) of the [Independent Commission Against
Corruption Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/icaca1988442/) against production of the documents required by the summons addressed to him dated 12
June 1996.
A declaration that the first defendant has waived any privilege within the meaning of sub-section 37(5) of the [Independent Commission Against
Corruption Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/icaca1988442/) which would otherwise entitle the second defendant not to answer questions addressed to him by Assistant Commissioner P M Hall QC or Counsel appointed to assist him on the matters specified in the letter addressed to the second defendant dated 3 July 1996.
Such further and other orders as the Court thinks fit." 
Tendered in the plaintiff's case and marked as Exhibit A is a document that seeks to put into a more precise and particular form the very broad claim for relief advanced in paragraph 2 of the summons. Exhibit A reads as follows: "1. Any information or instructions provided by or on behalf of Mr. Cripps or any other person as to any information he had obtained from Ms Silver as to the fact that a re-evaluation of the position of Director-General, Department of Community Services had been carried out or as to the existence of an initial evaluation by the PEO of that position where the evaluation resulted in an SES Level 7.
Any information or instructions provided by or on behalf of Mr. Cripps or any other person as to any information pertaining to the circumstances in which or which led to a re-evaluation being carried out as referred to in (1), or to a second evaluation of the Director-General, Department of Community
Services resulting in an SES level 6 being performed.
Any discussions which Mr. Cripps had with Ms Silver concerning the matters referred to in (1) or (2) above.
Advice given to Mr. Cripps as to whether any information relating to matters described in (1) (2) and/or (3) were or were not to be included in his statement (known as Exhibit 13) or in his oral evidence of 30 April 1996.
Any instructions given by or relating to Mr. Cripps as to the inclusion or exclusion of any of the matters referred to above, in his statement (Exhibit 13) and his oral evidence including but not restricted to 30 April ." 
The ICAC is an independent statutory corporation established by the
Independent Commission Against Corruption Act 1998 (as amended) ; ["The
Act"]. Executive authority is vested in a Commissioner appointed pursuant to section 5 of the Act. Provision is made by section 6 of the Act for the appointment by the Governor, with the concurrence of the Commissioner, of one or more Assistant Commissioners.

The functions of the ICAC are defined in Part 4 of the Act. For present purposes, it is necessary to note only section 12 and portions of section 13.
Those provisions are as follows: "12. In exercising its functions, the Commission shall regard the protection of the public interest and the prevention of breaches of public trust as its paramount concerns.
The principal functions of the Commission are as follows: to investigate any allegation or complaint that, or any circumstances which in the Commission's opinion imply that: corrupt conduct; or conduct liable to allow, encourage or cause the occurrence of corrupt conduct; or conduct connected with corrupt conduct, may have occurred, may be occurring or may be about to occur;.........
 
The Commission is to conduct its investigations with a view to determining: whether any corrupt conduct, or any other conduct referred to in subsection (1)(a), has occurred, is occurring or is about to occur; and whether any laws governing any public authority or public official need to be changed for the purpose of reducing the likelihood of the occurrence of corrupt conduct; and whether any methods of work, practices or procedures of any public authority or public official did or could allow, encourage or cause the occurrence of corrupt conduct.
 
The principal functions of the Commission also include: the power to make findings and form opinions, on the basis of the results of its investigations, in respect of any conduct, circumstances or events with which its investigations are concerned, whether or not the findings or opinions relate to corrupt conduct; and the power to formulate recommendations for the taking of action that the
Commission considers should be taken in relation to its findings or opinions or the results of its investigations." 
On 22 April 1996 the Commissioner of ICAC signed a so-called "Scope and
Purpose" document establishing the inquiry which is at the heart of the present application. Mr. Peter Hall of Queen's Counsel was appointed, in due course, as an Assistant Commissioner for the purpose of conducting the inquiry. The "Scope and Purpose" document reads, formal parts omitted, as follows; - it is Annexure "A" to the affidavit of Michelle Huntsman:- "SCOPE AND PURPOSE 
The Commission will investigate the circumstances surrounding: a. the evaluation of the position of Director General, Department of
Community Services conducted by the Public Employment Office in March 1996; and b. the recommendation and decision relating to the removal of Mr. Des Semple from the position of Director General of the Department of Community Services, together with any subsequent decision to stay the implementation of such recommendation or decision.
 
The investigation will be conducted with a view to determining the matters referred to in [s.13(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/icaca1988442/s13.html) of the [Independent Commission Against Corruption Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/icaca1988442/) (as amended).
 
At the conclusion of the investigation, and if appropriate, a report will be prepared and/or information will be disseminated to any appropriate authority.
 
The Commission will monitor the response to any findings and recommendations it makes." 
The investigation thus authorised by the Commissioner of ICAC commenced on 22
April 1996. The subsequent course of the investigation, so far as is relevant for present purposes, can be charted most conveniently by reference to part of the contents of an affidavit made on 11 July 1996 by one, Michelle Frances
Huntsman, a lawyer employed by ICAC, and having, as it would appear, some direct responsibility for the conduct of the present proceedings in this
Court. The relevant parts of that affidavit read as follows: "One of the matters central to the Commission's investigation is whether an evaluation conducted by officers of the Public Employment Office (PEO) of the position of Director-General, Department of Community Services involved corrupt conduct within the meaning of the [Independent Commission Against
Corruption Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/icaca1988442/) ("the
Act"), and in particular whether the PEO officers conducting the evaluation were improperly directed to evaluate the position at an SES level 6.
During the course of a private hearing on 22 April 1996, Ms Helen Silver,
Director SES Unit of the PEO gave evidence to the Commission that an evaluation of the position of Director-General, Department of Community
Services by officers of her Unit in early March 1996 had been undertaken and as a consequence the position had been assessed at an SES level 7. In her evidence, she related a conversation she said she subsequently had with Mr.
Kenneth Cripps, Commissioner of the PEO in relation to that evaluation.
(Note: The person here identified by name is the first defendant.) ............
Ms Silver gave further evidence of this conversation in public hearing on 6 May 1996. ..........
On both occasions Ms Silver gave evidence to the Commission that as a result of this conversation with Mr. Cripps, she told Mr. Darrel Cummings, a
Principal Policy Officer in her Unit, and one of the officers who had conducted the first evaluation, that the evaluation would have to be redone and should come out at an SES level 6. She told the Commission that the position was subsequently re-evaluated by Mr. Cummings at an SES level 6.
Mr. Kenneth Cripps was interviewed by Mr. Roger Wilkins, Director-
General, Premiers Department on 16 April 1996 and by officers of the
Commission on 17 April 1996. Mr. Cripps gave evidence to the Commission in a private hearing on 30 April 1996, at which time he also provided to the
Commission a statement bearing the same date. He subsequently gave evidence in public hearings on 16, 17, 21, 22, 23, 24, 28, 29, 30 and 31 May 1996, and 14 and 20 June 1996. At all times he was represented by Senior Counsel ........
and Junior Counsel ........, who were instructed by Mr. Richard Allsop, of
Holman Webb Solicitors. (Note: Mr. Allsop, here identified, is the second defendant.)
The conversation recounted by Ms Silver in her evidence to the
Commission in private hearing on 29 April 1996 was put to Mr. Cripps in private hearing on 30 April 1996. ............
At no time when interviewed by Commission officers on 17 April 1996, in his evidence to the Commission in private hearing on 30 April 1996, nor in his statement to the Commission dated 30 April 1996 did Mr. Cripps tell the
Commission that he recalled any conversation with Ms Silver in which the existence of two evaluations was discussed or acknowledged, and did not otherwise disclose the fact that he had received information from her that two evaluations had been undertaken of the position of Director-General,
Department of Community Services.
On 17 May 1996, Mr. Cripps gave evidence to the Commission, in public hearing, that he had become aware that an initial evaluation had been conducted some time before he attended to give evidence at the Commission in private hearing. .......
 .................................................................................................
Mr. Cripps gave further evidence on this matter to the Commission in public hearing on 29 May 1996. .........
Mr. Cripps gave further evidence on this matter to the Commission in public hearing on 30 May 1996. .........
 
It will be necessary to return presently to various details of the evidence thus given.

At the hearing on 30 May 1996, there was a discussion, to the detail of which it will be necessary to return presently, between the Assistant Commissioner and senior counsel for the first defendant, touching upon, among other things, the matter of legal professional privilege.

Thereafter, and on 12 June 1996, the Assistant Commissioner issued a summons pursuant to section 35 of the Act. Section 35, put very shortly, gives the
Commissioner or an Assistant Commissioner power to summon a person to appear before the Commission at a nominated hearing of the Commission; and for the purpose of giving evidence; for the purpose of producing documents nominated in the summons; or for both such purposes. In the present particular case, the summons nominated 10 a.m. on Thursday 13 June 1996 as the return date of the summons. The summons called for the production of the following documents: "DOCUMENTS TO BE PRODUCED
All documentation, including in particular all notes, memoranda, correspondence, working papers, and statements, whether made by you or any other person, including drafts of any of the above and computer stored data, (hereinafter collectively described as "documents") brought into existence on or before 2 May 1996 recording, relating to or referring to that which you brought to Mr. Allsop's attention as stated by you at p.2232 of the transcript. If any documents record matters the subject of legal professional privilege which do not record, relate or refer to that which you brought to
Mr. Allsop's attention as stated by you at p.2232 of the transcript, this summons does not require production of those parts of the documents, and copies of any such documents may be produced in sufficient compliance of this summons with such matters recorded in the documents whited out or deleted." 
On that return day, senior counsel for the first defendant informed the
Assistant Commissioner that a claim of privilege was being made, pursuant to section 37(5) of the Act, in relation to the documents for which a call had been made in the summons. A discussion ensued between the Assistant
Commissioner and senior counsel for the first defendant, and it will be necessary to return presently to the details of that exchange.

Thereafter, and on 3 July 1996, the Assistant Commissioner issued a summons addressed to the second defendant calling upon him to attend before the
Commission on 5 July 1996 at 10 a.m. for the purpose of giving evidence. At the same time, a letter was written over the signature of somebody described as "Principal Lawyer" of ICAC and addressed to the second defendant. That letter reads, formal parts omitted, as follows: "The purpose of this letter is to inform you as to those matters on which the Commission requires your evidence.
 
As you are aware on 12 June 1996 a Summons to Attend and Produce Documents was issued to Mr. Cripps. A copy of that Summons is enclosed.
 
Mr. Cripps through his Counsel, .........., has refused production of the documents specified in the Summons on the basis of the privilege referred to in section 37(5) of the ICAC Act.
 
It is envisaged that certain of the communications referred to in the above
Summons may not have been recorded in writing or otherwise evidenced by any documentation. Accordingly the Commission wishes to take evidence from you pursuant to a Summons to Attend and Give Evidence as to the matters detailed in the Summons issued to Mr. Cripps. Accordingly I enclose a Summons for you to attend to give evidence on Friday 5 July 1996 at 10.00 am.
 (Senior Counsel for the first defendant) has already foreshadowed that you will rely upon the ground of privilege referred to in section 37(5) of the
ICAC Act. Would you please advise, in writing, whether that remains your position. If so then the Commission will not require your attendance on
Friday." 
I am not clear, as at present advised, whether the summons and accompanying letter were actually served upon the second defendant, although I imagine that they were. It does appear that a copy of each document was handed to senior counsel for the first defendant.

On the following day, 4 July 1996, a partner of the second defendant's firm wrote a letter in the following terms, formal parts omitted: "Investigation Into the Evaluation of Position of Director General,
Department of Community Services 
We refer to your letter of 3 July 1996 and the enclosed Summons to attend and Give Evidence on Friday 5 July 1996 at 10.00 a.m. addressed to Richard
Allsop.
 
We confirm that, as previously foreshadowed by senior counsel for the first defendant, legal professional privilege referred and the ground of privilege referred to in Section 37(5) of the ICAC Act is asserted. We note that, in those circumstances, Richard Allsop's attendance is not required on Friday and trust that you will advise us at your earliest convenience as to whether or not the Commission will commence proceedings in the Supreme Court for declaratory relief in relation to either or both the Summonses issued to Mr.
Cripps to tender and produce documents or the Summons addressed to Richard
Allsop." 
Section 37 of the Act, upon the basis of sub-section (5) of which the first defendant and the second defendant have notified the Assistant Commissioner that they claim privilege, is central to the questions now to be determined.
The complete section is in the following terms: "Privilege as regards answers, documents etc.
 (1) A witness summoned to attend or appearing before the Commission at a hearing is not entitled to refuse: to be sworn or to make an affirmation; or to answer any question relevant to an investigation put to the witness by the Commissioner or other person presiding at a hearing; or to produce any document or other thing in the witness's custody or control which the witness is required by the summons or by the person presiding to produce.
 
A witness summoned to attend or appearing before the Commission at a hearing is not excused from answering any question or producing any document or other thing on the ground that the answer or production may incriminate or tend to incriminate the witness, or on any other ground of privilege, or on the ground of a duty of secrecy or other restriction on disclosure, or on any other ground.
 
An answer made, or document or other thing produced by a witness at a hearing before the Commission is not (except as otherwise provided in this section) admissible in evidence against any person in any civil or criminal proceedings or in any disciplinary proceedings.
 
Nothing in this section makes inadmissible: any answer, document or other thing in proceedings for an offence against this Act or in proceedings for contempt under this Act; or any answer, document or other thing in any civil or criminal proceedings or in any disciplinary proceedings if the witness does not object to giving the answer or producing the document or other thing irrespective of the provisions of subsection (2); or any document in any civil proceedings for or in respect of any right or liability conferred or imposed by the document or other thing.
 
Where: a legal practitioner or other person is required to answer a question or produce a document or other thing at a hearing before the Commission; and the answer to the question would disclose, or the document or other thing contains, a privileged communication passing between a legal practitioner (in his or her capacity as a legal practitioner) and a person for the purpose of providing or receiving legal professional services in relation to the appearance, or reasonably anticipated appearance, of a person at a hearing before the Commission, the legal practitioner or other person is entitled to refuse to comply with the requirement, unless the privilege is waived by a person having authority to do so.
 * * * 
It will be necessary to look in some detail at the precise terms of this section; but, before doing so, it is necessary to look in greater detail at what has taken place thus far during the hearings before the Assistant
Commissioner.

When the first defendant gave evidence on 30 April, he was closely questioned by senior counsel assisting the investigation. The flavour of the evidence given by the first defendant on this occasion appears from the following passages of evidence: "Let me suggest to you that so far as you were concerned when the evaluation process was being undertaken it was pre-ordained that Mr. Semple would be removed? --- That's not true.
 
And let me suggest to you that on either 1 March this year, which was a
Monday - Friday, or on 4 March which was a Monday, Mr. Fitzmaurice and Ms
Silver came to your office with an evaluation report of Mr. Cummings in which he evaluated the position as a grade 7, do you deny that occurring? --- I have no recollection of that occurring, but it's certainly possible it could have occurred.
 
And you looked at it, I suggest, and you said to Ms Silver and Mr.
Fitzmaurice words to the effect: this is not good enough, it has to be a grade
Do you deny saying that to Ms Silver? --- Yes, I do.
 
I suggest Ms Silver said to you: "Well, if you don't like the grade 7, you always have the power to allocate." 
Do you recall Ms Silver saying something like that to you? --- No, I don't recall this conversation, no. It's possible.
 
Do you deny it happened? --- There is a lot of discussion when evaluations are coming about and it's been practise for - ever since I've been in the position and before, that the assessment area bounces evaluations backwards and forwards.
 
So you agree it's quite possible that Ms Silver and Mr. Fitzmaurice came to your office on either Friday, 1 March or Monday, 4 March with an evaluation by
Mr. Cummings, recommending no change in the level? You don't dispute that? ---
I don't. If they say they said that, that's entirely possible.
 
And do you dispute that you looked at it and you said to Ms Silver and Mr.
Fitzmaurice: That's not good enough, it has to be a level 6, or words to that effect? --- I don't recall that part of this conversation but what I'd have to say it was entirely possible that there was some lively discussion about the level of the position, entirely.
 
Is it possible that what I've just recounted to you is the substance of what you said? --- Except that it would've been unlikely that I would have set a level.
 
What, you're saying it's possible that you might have said: "It can't be a , it has to be at a lower level?" --- Well, it's possible. There's a lot of debate that goes on about the levels of the CEO positions.
 
So it's quite possible you said that? --- There certainly would have - you know, it could have been a discussion, that's true, but in terms of what I actually said, it would be very difficult to remember the actual words. I don't recollect that conversation.
 
And is it quite possible Ms Silver said to you: "Well, it can't be, it's been evaluated at a level 7?" Is it possible something like that was said? ---
Well, it's possible there was some fairly lively debate about it, but I don't recall this conversation that you're talking about.
 
Is it possible that something like that was said? --- It's possible.
 
And is it possible you said it has to come out as a 6? --- I don't think it's possible I said it has to come out as a 6.
 
You think it's possible you might have said though, it has to come out at a lower level? --- That's certainly possible." 
On 17 May the first defendant gave further evidence. Towards the conclusion of that day's hearing, the Assistant Commissioner asked the first defendant a number of questions concerning aspects of his knowledge, derived from things said to him by M/s Silver, that there had been two prior evaluations of the relevant Senior Executive Service position. The following exchanges ensued: "Did that come to you as somewhat of a shock to learn that there had been an earlier evaluation with a different result? --- Yeah, surprised.
 
And did you do anything about putting in chain some form of inquiry as to what had happened which had in fact brought into existence a first evaluation and then somehow that became overtaken by a second evaluation? --- No I didn't - Mr. Wilkins - well. ICAC of course was carrying out an inquiry at the time.
Mr. Wilkins was carrying out an inquiry at that time and I certainly thought that issue would have been, or had been raised.
 
So do I understand that you first became aware of the fact that there were - there had been two evaluations done some time before the time Mr. Wilkins interviewed you and 30 April or was it before the time or date on which Mr.
Wilkins interviewed you that you became aware of that fact? --- I think it was post Mr. Wilkins but prior to private inquiry.
 
Are you sure about that or could it have been before Mr. Wilkins' interview which was 16 April? --- Well I think it was unlikely because I would have remembered it.
 
When you became aware of the fact for the first time that there were indeed two different evaluations do I understand you to say that you did not arrange for an investigation as to how there had been two evaluations? --- No I was more - my understanding of the inquiry that was going on at that time, particularly Mr. Wilkins, was that I'd been directed to change the level of the Director-General to get rid of Mr. Semple.
 
And after Ms Silver told you that there had in fact been an earlier and different evaluation did you report that to anyone? --- Well certainly to my solicitor - legal counsel.
 [COUNSEL] Commissioner, I rise at this point because Mr. Cripps retained solicitors and received some legal advice --- 
THE COMMISSIONER: Could I just explain this, ........, before you go on. I chose the word "report" in order to distinguish it from consultation with legal advisers.
 [COUNSEL] I am not referring to legal professional privilege when I say this, Mr. Commissioner.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: Just let me finish, ........., if you would please, on this.
 
I am sorry I asked you did you report it to anyone and then you referred, in answer to that, to solicitors. Leaving solicitors and lawyers out of it, after
Ms Silver imparted that information to you did you report that fact to anyone in government? --- No not formally.
 
At all? --- No.
 
Did you inform anyone in public administration of the fact that Ms Silver had told you there had been an earlier evaluation done with a different result? --- No.
 [COUNSEL] Commissioner, I will only be one moment. I just wish to confirm the timing at which his lawyers gave him certain advice.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: Just while that is being determined. 
I think you said it did come somewhat of a surprise to you? --- A surprise in the sense that, that whilst I wasn't aware of the original document it was quite normal to send drafts back - in regard to evaluations it was quite normal so I didn't think that was quite so unusual.
 [COUNSEL] Mr. Commissioner, my client retained his solicitor on 23 April and at that point was given some advice by his solicitor.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: Say no more, .......... at this point thank you.
 [COUNSEL] But it is relevant to any implication being made against my client as to him not having said something.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: We will deal with that on Monday. ........., did you want to raise anything else? [COUNSEL] It is only Mr. Commissioner this question of the advice he was given by a solicitor as soon as he spoke to that solicitor about whether he should talk to him or not.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: Well ......... I don't want to get into the content of legal advice unless you want to open up that whole area.
 [COUNSEL] I want to open it up. I want to say that the solicitor --- 
THE COMMISSIONER: We can deal with that on Monday I think.
 [COUNSEL] It is straightforward. I want to say the solicitor advised him at that stage not to talk to anybody about these matters.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: Does that include ICAC? [COUNSEL] No, as of the 23rd and then in due course he came down for his private hearing and we prepared a statement. It's a matter of not talking to anybody in government as you were asking Mr. Commissioner." 
On 29 May the first defendant answered questions put by his own senior counsel. He gave the following evidence: "You recall you've given some evidence as to some reference by Miss Silver that the position DG DOCS had been re re-evaluated? --- Yes.
 
Or evaluated again or something like that? --- Yes.
 
I think you've put that as at a time after you were interviewed by Mr.
Wilkins? --- Yes.
 
Do you recall whether that was before or after you were first interviewed by officers of ICAC? --- When I was first interviewed, after.
 
Was it before you received the draft statement from ICAC? --- No.
 
Was it after that? --- Yes.
 
And as to that matter, at the time at which she made the remark, firstly, perhaps I should go back. Could you tell us again as best you can your recollection of what the remark was? --- Well, it was a remark about I'm sorry, I can't put it into first person. It was a remark about re-evaluation of the position.
 
Did that attract your notice at the time? --- No, not specifically because the process with regard to the evaluations almost invariably involves some argument.
 
Subsequently in the light of what you've heard in evidence in this
Commission, and speaking to your lawyers, casting your recollection back did you make note of that conversation in your own mind at least? --- Well, yes, I suppose I made note of it, yes.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: .........., I'm sorry, when is this conversation said to occur? [COUNSEL] Yes, it's after the receipt of the ICAC statement and before his own statement and did the conversation occur, in fact, at a time at which you had instructed your present lawyers? --- No, it was at a time prior to the instruction of the lawyers." 
On 30 May, the Assistant Commissioner brought the first defendant back to the question of when he, the first defendant, had first heard that there had been a second evaluation of the particular Senior Executive Service position, and the then significance in the first defendant's mind of that information.
The relevant exchanges are as follows: "THE COMMISSIONER: It is in my copy, have you got that, 1221 about point 4 is where I'm directing attention to. And after you heard of a different evaluation, your impression was, it was a 7, and then, I think I asked you then did that come to you as somewhat of a shock to learn there had been an earlier evaluation with a different result and your answer is recorded as, yeah, surprised? --- Surprised, yes.
 
Yes. So you say that is the first knowledge of two evaluations in this matter, two different results? --- Two different results, yes.
 
And the result of the earlier one that you understood from the discussion with her was a result which, of course, did not result in downgrading and could not have opened the door for merit selection? --- Yes.
 
Yes, and you understood that from what she said she somehow was involved or at least had knowledge of that earlier evaluation result? -- Well, I understood by the term, re-evaluation, that certainly - yes, yes.
 
Yes, and do I understand once you became aware of this information that you understood that there had been probably some debate about this question as to whether or not the evaluation was a 7 or a 6 or should be a 7 or a 6? ---
Well, there would have been debate, yes.
 
And this information that there had been a different evaluation in the same matter involving the application presumably the CED methodology which occasioned you surprise when you heard about it was something I think you've told me before you made known to your solicitor, but no one else? --- Yes, that's true.
 
And it was, was it not, as you - I think you indicated yesterday by your evidence, a significant matter that you had come to hear that there was, in fact, or had been an earlier evaluation at a level - or that you had the impression was a level 7? --- Yes.
 
Well, then, knowing that there was controversy about how the evaluation of 6 had come about, why was it that you didn't include reference to that matter in your statement of 30 April? --- Well, I thought my - this - this statement here is the one you're talking about? 
Exhibit 13? --- Yeah, was a recollection of what I understood the events to be and I settled the statement with my legal counsel. I did mention that matter to legal counsel at the time.
 
But you would've read the statement to see if it included your instructions on all relevant matters? --- Yes.
 
As best your recollection would serve, at least? --- Yes.
 
And what I'm seeking an explanation is to why you did not reveal the fact that there had been two evaluations done in this same matter with different results? --- Well, I - I would've - I would certainly revealed it during questioning and, as I said, this was an attempt as a recollection of what I understood the case to be.
 
But you see, you sat here in this court or this hearing room and waited until the story of the second evaluation unfolded from Miss Silver or the earlier evaluation, didn't you? --- Yes, I heard that story from Miss Silver, yes.
 
You were under, I suppose an appreciation, before this hearing started, that any relevant matter that could bear upon this question ought to be made known to the Commission or its officers? --- Yes.
 
Yes. And the fact that there had been an earlier evaluation with a different result was a most material matter, wasn't it? --- Yes. It was a material matter. Yes.
 
And a material matter not included in your statement? --- Which I didn't seek to exclude.
 
Oh no, but it's not included in your statement? --- Yes.
 
And no mention made to any officer of the Commission about the fact of an earlier and different evaluation before Miss Silver, in evidence, revealed that fact? --- But a matter I would've revealed to the Commission in my own evidence.
 
You left it to her, in effect, to be the first person to reveal, so far as you are aware, in public hearing, the fact that there had been, not one, but two evaluations.
 [COUNSEL] Mr. Commissioner, with respect --- 
THE COMMISSIONER: It's all right. I won't press that.
 
What concerns me, Mr. Cripps, is this, that a material matter like that was known to you as head of your department.
 [COUNSEL] Mr. Commissioner, that - the witness hasn't given evidence he knew of two evaluations.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: No, No. No. I --- [COUNSEL] You're putting to him that he knew of the fact --- 
THE COMMISSIONER: No, No. ......... --- [COUNSEL] --- two evaluations --- 
THE COMMISSIONER: --- I appreciate the distinction between his recollection of something that happened back on 5 March or whenever it was and his recollection and knowledge of the fact of another evaluation which came to him by the imparting of information on the existence of it by Miss Silver in
April, just before 30 April some time. That is the distinction.
 [COUNSEL] No, that's not the distinction I'm adverting to, Mr. Commissioner.
You're putting to him questions that there was a fact that occurred, that is, that there were two evaluations.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: Well, he accepted that, didn't he? [COUNSEL] I don't think he did accept that. He accepted that Miss Silver said something to that effect suggesting there were two evaluations, 7 and 8.
Now, the further question does have to be put.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: Well, I'll put that.
 [COUNSEL] And I've sent my instructing solicitor and junior who were present at a certain process outside so that they can be called ---" 
These exchanges led to what appears to have been a fairly sharp exchange between the Assistant Commissioner and senior counsel for the first defendant.
The upshot of that exchange was that the first defendant was asked to wait outside the hearing room but not to speak to his solicitor or junior counsel.
While the first defendant was thus absent from the hearing room, a discussion took place between the Assistant Commissioner and senior counsel for the first defendant. It culminated in the following exchange: "THE COMMISSIONER: ........., what I prefer to do is to give Mr. Cripps another opportunity to express exactly what she said and what he took her meaning to be or what he factored into what she said by way of his understanding of what she was saying, what it indicated to him and let's just see what he says and --- [COUNSEL] Mr. Commissioner, the one thing I haven't risen to my feet for is legal professional privilege.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: I, as you will see from some earlier passage there, tried to avoid getting into that area and I think I am somewhere saying, "I don't want to get into that". You said, "I want to open it up." However, I am not going to hold you to that necessarily but if you don't want me to get into the area of legal professional privilege, I'll certainly respect that." [COUNSEL] Mr. Commissioner, your questions plainly indicate that you have a concern as to why he didn't include in his statement reference to this use by
Miss Silver of the word re-evaluated.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: Not so much but the meaning he attached to what she was saying but let's get it on the record as to what he understood her comment to indicate to him and take it from there. I'm happy for him to, as it were, come again afresh at it.
 [COUNSEL] While everybody is I can even pin my flag to the mast and indicate to you that I would expect that would be because he was told he shouldn't speculate into what she meant.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: Not necessarily but .........., as I said, I'm not going to trespass into areas that are normally the subject of legal professional privilege.
 [COUNSEL] We're offering them if that would resolve your --- 
THE COMMISSIONER: He seemed to, as to were, volunteer that as an aspect and that's how it came about.
 [COUNSEL] I know, but Mr. Commissioner, we are offering that if that would help to resolve any doubt.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: Anyway, that makes it a little less complicated in getting his evidence." 
When the evidence of the first defendant resumed, he was closely questioned by the Assistant Commissioner concerning a draft evaluation of the relevant
Senior Executive Service position. The Assistant Commissioner was interested to know whether the draft still existed; whether the first defendant had given any consideration to the relevance of such a draft, whether or not it now existed, to the matters as to which he would be giving evidence to the investigation; and as to the relationship of those considerations to the contents of his original statement furnished to ICAC in anticipation of his giving evidence before the Assistant Commissioner. The following extracts from the transcript of the investigation are of present relevance: "Did you think it could have some importance if it still existed or even if it didn't on the matters that were going to be investigated by this
Commission? --- The draft itself, if it still existed? 
Yes, whether the draft - whether it existed or not was a matter that could be of importance to the matters the subject of this inquiry? --- Well, I think - I think the knowledge that the matter was sent back for re-evaluation is of assistance to the inquiry. I think the validity of that is, in my view, of no doubt. The fact the drafts were returned consistently is of no issue. So --- 
But did you conclude that the existence of an earlier draft with a different result in this evaluation could be a matter of importance to this inquiry? ---
Well, certainly by the fact I mentioned to my solicitors, I thought the question of re-evaluation was important.
 
Well, the answer is "yes" to my question? --- Yes.
 
Is that why you drew it to your solicitor's attention because it was, in your mind, a matter of importance? --- Well, that a re-evaluation as a process of any issue would have been important, yes. Certainly --- 
Well, again, is the answer to my question ---? --- Yes.
 --- "yes", that why I drew it to the attention of my solicitors? --- Yes.
 
Particularly I suppose knowing that there were questions beingraised as to how the result of 6 came about in the process? --- Well, I think more particularly now but at that time, yes, it would have been of some relevance.
 .............................................................................................................
 .............................................................................................................

Well, what's the explanation then as to why you signed off your statement without making reference to the information that you obtained from Miss Silver and the understanding you placed upon that information? --- As I - as I said it was my understanding that the statement was to be what I understood my recollection to be.
 
What, and nothing else, just a statement of recollection? --- Well, a statement of fact as far as I was concerned.
 
A statement of facts? --- Fact as far as I was concerned.
 
Yes? --- But from my recollection.
 
Well, is there any explanation as to why that fact, that is to say the existence of a different evaluation wasn't referred to? --- Well, simply by the fact that I didn't recall an existing evaluation.
 
But you'd been given certain information by Miss Silver upon which you placed your understanding? --- Yes, I understand that, and there was certainly no intention to exclude that information from the ICAC inquiry.
 ...............................................................................................................
 ...............................................................................................................
 [COUNSEL] But the point I'm trying to make is, the witness's evidence is that within days the whole matter had been referred to ICAC. Now, there's one matter I would like to put to him if I can arising from what you have put to him concerning the re-evaluation so that the solicitor and junior can eventually come back into the room.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: You can do that now if you wish? [COUNSEL] If I could.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: Do you want to do it now? [COUNSEL] Yes, I would like to do that now.
 
Mr. Cripps, after Miss Silver made this remark to you, she was engaged at that time, was she not - well, you were all engaged in compiling documents for the ICAC? --- Yes.
 
And in response to a notice? --- Yes.
 
You were also attending your solicitors, in particular Mr. Allsop, for the purpose of settling his (sic: but I think it should read "this" or "your") statement? --- Yes.
 
Did you bring this matter to Mr. Allsop's attention? --- Yes.
 
That Miss Silver had made some such remark? --- Yes.
 
And was form a form of initial draft statement prepared referring to that matter? 
THE COMMISSIONER: Well, ........., I don't think you should put a question in that form, but if you want to tender a document or something, I think it's better, isn't it, to deal with it --- [COUNSEL]: I don't know how many drafts it's gone through, Mr. Commissioner.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: I'm not inviting you to, nor am I directing you to, but I don't think that question should be --- [COUNSEL]: No. Were various draft documents prepared? --- Yes.
 
And did you have a conference with Mr. King, the junior counsel and Mr.
Allsop in which an examination was made of the various drafts? --- Yes.
 
And was some legal advice given to you as to what should or should not be included in the drafts -----? --- Yes.
 --- in the final document? --- Yes.
 
Did that legal advice deal with questions of fact and speculation? --- Yes.
 
Tell the Commission, please, what it was you were told about whether - about matters of fact and speculation on your part? --- I think I've already said that the document should be factual.
 
Was something said to you concerning an expectation of what Miss Silver would do at the private hearing - at her private hearing? --- Yes.
 
What was that? --- She would tell the truth.
 
And was that said in relation to that matter? --- Yes.
 
At about that point --- 
THE COMMISSIONER: I'm sorry. What was said about that matter, precisely? --- Well, simply that Miss Silver would tell the truth.
 
No, but was anything else beyond that said? --- I - I --- 
About what she would say or wouldn't say or any other matter touching that? --- Oh, no. I don't - well, there was no - there was certainly no detail.
 [COUNSEL]: Did your lawyers say something about "You can expect Miss Silver to tell the truth"? --- Yes.
 
Right. At that point of time, did you understand that there was no contact between your lawyers and her lawyers because you'd both got notices? --- Yes.
 
I think that's all I need to get on that. I call - I can call my junior or solicitor if the Commission should wish as to that matter.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: No, I don't think you need prove the content of those questions you put, ........, at all." 
On the following day, 31 May, the Assistant Commissioner took up on two separate occasions with senior counsel for the first defendant the matter of legal professional privilege. On the first of those occasions, the relevant exchanges were as follows: "THE COMMISSIONER: ........., just on one other aspect concerning that segment of the evidence: there's been now a considerable amount of evidence that your client did impart some information to his legal advisers on - as to the information Miss Silver had given him. Would you care to give some consideration - I'm not asking for you to respond immediately -- [COUNSEL] Do you want me to set it out --- 
THE COMMISSIONER: No, I just - just a minute? [COUNSEL] Do you want me to set it out in a --- 
THE COMMISSIONER: No, I just want you to listen to me. No, no, it's fine, as to whether you would give consideration to the question as to whether your client is prepared to make available any note or record of the information on that matter that he imparted to his legal advisers. That's all, you don't have to respond. Just take it on board.
 [COUNSEL] Yes. Mr. Commissioner, I take it you are not talking about a note that he might have made. I take it you are talking about a note that they might have made.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: Well, either. A record, I don't know what it would be.
 [COUNSEL] Yes.
 
Later that same day, the Assistant Commissioner returned to the point. This time the exchanges were as follows: "THE COMMISSIONER: ...... - ......, do you have instructions on that matter
I raised this morning? That related to ---- [COUNSEL] Is that in relation to the solicitors? 
THE COMMISSIONER: Whether you're prepared to seek instructions is the way I put it, upon any note or memorandum of instructions given by your client on the information provided or imparted to him by Miss Silver? That was the discreet --- [COUNSEL] Mr. Commissioner, in one sense I'm remiss. There's a large post it slip on my notes saying to do this. Secondly, I had spoken to my solicitor yesterday. Certainly I am prepared to seek instructions on that and indeed I don't see any reason why I wouldn't be prepared to seek instructions at all and I expect that what I'd be able to do is get a short statement from the solicitor.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: What I had sought was whether you're prepared to have released to the counsel assisting copies of any notes or record made of the instructions given on that point.
 [COUNSEL] If we can, Mr. Commissioner, we will but once again and you're familiar with this in the exercise, a computer is being used to generate the statements and various portions have been over written but we will see what we can find.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: I had in mind any handwritten notes or statements provided or if it's been incorporated in some documents, those discreet (sic: but I think it should read "discrete") parts dealing with that matter could be the subject of the instructions.
 [COUNSEL] I am aware of the practice in that firm and by that solicitor and that is to actually use the computer as they go through it.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: Yes, well, look, I'll leave it to you to get instructions and if you could let me know on Monday perhaps. ......" 
On 4 June the Assistant Commissioner again raised with senior counsel for the first defendant the existence of materials which might be subject to a claim of legal professional privilege. The relevant exchanges were as follows: "THE COMMISSIONER: Just two things. .......... have you got any instructions on this documents (sic) I raised with you the other day? [COUNSEL] Mr. Commissioner, you raised with me as to whether or not there'd been any note made by the solicitor at the time the mention was made by Mr.
Cripps.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: Well, now, what I had in mind any record, be it counsel's note, solicitors --- [COUNSEL] It wasn't raised with me or with junior counsel. It was raised with the solicitor in the initial conference.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: I don't want to know anything about it. All I'm asking is that what I had asked for, for you to get instructions on whether the client's prepared to make available to the Commission any record, being it handwritten notes, typed up drafts or any other form of record by anyone touching or concerning information that he had imparted relating to the disclosure of Miss
Silver. Now, that's as broad as I can possibly express it to be.
 [COUNSEL] Mr. Commissioner, I'm in a position to answer that. There was no such note. I rely on the solicitor's recollection and indeed as to that recollection I can confirm that and have confirmed it with the solicitor.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: Are you saying that if I issued a notice under s.22 in those broad terms it would be met with a response: there are no documents? [COUNSEL] No, Mr. Commissioner. There were a whole lot of drafts prepared and gone through by the solicitor but there was no note made of that reference at the time it was made and there were various matters to which legal professional privilege goes concerning the advice on various matters. But on that matter it was simply we're reliant on the solicitor's recollection and --- 
THE COMMISSIONER: ........, I don't want to go into it, please, or we'll take time over it. Is the position that there is no record in existence? If your answer to me is: I've taken instructions. There are no documents. I'll pursue it no further.
 [COUNSEL] No, Mr. Commissioner, my answer is that there was no note of it that indeed nothing by the client or noted by the solicitor. There were various other things the solicitor did himself which depending on how broadly you put that description is they're matters that the solicitor brought into existence for himself but there's nothing by way of note of that conversation that the solicitor made of what the client said.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: Well, ............, I'm not concerned it it's a solicitor's note or not. What I might do is have printed up so that you can give a response. I don't want to put you through the embarrassment of me having to issue a s.22 notice.
 [COUNSEL] No.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: What I will do is simply record on a piece of paper those classes of documents that might exist and you can give me just a short response, no documents. If there are documents --- [COUNSEL] I can say that a document was prepared for me and indeed that I had used that document in what I've said here --- 
THE COMMISSIONER: ......., I'll follow the course I've suggested. I'll set out on a piece of paper or have counsel assisting do exactly what I had in mind and if you just give them the appropriate response once you've taken instruction we will not take any more time over it now.
 [COUNSEL] Yes." 
On the following day, 5 June, the following further exchanges on the topic took place: "THE COMMISSIONER: ......, just before recommencing, I had a draft schedule of documents prepared. Mr. Walton is handing you a copy. I've indicated to you that I want to ascertain whether you are prepared to deal with this on a co- operative basis with the Commission before any other course is considered by me, so I am giving you the opportunity of considering the draft schedule of documents that I've just handed down to you. Are you in a position to respond to that ? [COUNSEL] Might I respond to that, Mr. Commissioner, finishing my one hour of cross-examination.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: Yes, certainly, yes. All right.
 [COUNSEL] I don't want to truncate that.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: No, we will deal with that at 2 o'clock." 
Later that day the Assistant Commissioner asked senior counsel for the first defendant whether he had any instructions as to the draft schedule of documents. The following exchanges took place: [COUNSEL] "I have, Mr. Commissioner. Without wishing to be uncooperative in any way this schedule is - do you have a copy of the schedule? 
THE COMMISSIONER: Yes I do.
 [COUNSEL] Yes. Is extremely wide, indeed, and my client would not wish to waive that privilege to which he's entitled under s.37(v)(a) and (b) nor that to which he would be entitled under section --- 
THE COMMISSIONER: Yes, I understand the section.
 [COUNSEL] 24.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: 24, yes.
 [COUNSEL] We do wish to be cooperative. I can provide information, would you wish me to ask that, but I am in no position to waive privilege.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: When you refer to the width of the schedule, in what respect are you referring to the -- [COUNSEL] Well, Mr. Commissioner, the problem I have is that there are a number of people here and, as I understand the position, I cannot waive privilege lest it be argued that waive once in any particular and you waive for all time, in everything." 
After further discussion, the Assistant Commissioner said this to senior counsel for the first defendant: "THE COMMISSIONER: ........., perhaps I will make it plain. I'm not seeking to in any way limit legal professional privilege that your client is entitled to under the Act save for one matter or in one respect and that is that if there's been waiver of privilege and there's been much said about the communication by your client to his advisers - I use that not meaning you in particularly but perhaps through his solicitors, and if there's been waiver of privilege because it's been introduced, and I recall one statement by yourself in which you expressed the desire to open it up as you put it, then the question of privilege or no privilege will be determined as a matter of law." 
After some further brief exchanges, the following occurred: "[COUNSEL] Mr. Commissioner, I think it may be that we can get somewhere but the difficulty I have is this: these proceedings involve the compulsory answering of questions. Under that compulsory process, my client gave evidence and you, Mr. Commissioner, asked him questions which led to him or which required of him an answer and in one of those answers he referred to a re- evaluation. It was put to him at least by implication, if not expressly, that a conclusion adverse to him might be drawn on that question and at that point without any advice and without any understanding of this matter, he referred to what he'd said to his solicitors.
 
Then there was a suggestion that the solicitors had in some way - that it hadn't made it through the solicitors to his final form statement. Now, an implication was put and that's what I raise an exception to initially, any suggestion of an implication against his solicitors. And I put them as to that, indeed sent them out of the room in respect of that matter because it is quite important to avoid a person being placed in such a situation where the material has been obtained from him by compulsory process and where what he is referring to are certain facts.
 
Now as to that, that is as to those facts, the evidence is there, that is that he himself did have or more correctly that she or some other person did communicate to him that word revaluation or something to that effect. Now that is not a waiver of privilege in any sense at all.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: I don't want to get involved in the argument here now whether there has been waiver or not because it's not appropriate that such an issue be determined as I see it at the moment in this Commission.
 [COUNSEL] Mr. Commissioner, it is certainly not within the provisions of the section, waiver by a person that has authority to do so. Now the form of the draft that has been provided seeks a great deal of material including contents of material that, because of the breadth of the description, but inevitably could not be covered by the discussion of that subject matter. We're not dealing with a one subject matter type exercise." ............................................................................................................
 
THE COMMISSIONER: Yes, certainly. Yes any other parties excused from this debate. ..........., can I just simply say this: I don't wish to enter into any discussion as to whether there has been waiver, or no waiver, or whether waiver is possible in these circumstances. I would hope that the record would show that I was at pains to ensure that there was no trespassing into the area of legal professional privilege and that any disclosure that occurred was a voluntary disclosure after I had indicated a position about legal professional privilege.
 
Now I think it remains for you to indicate whether or not this matter can be dealt with by a co-operation in a sense of whether there is privilege or not your client giving you instructions. If for whatever reason be it legal advice or otherwise access to the documents would be resisted then you merely state that is the position and then I think it is up to counsel assisting and myself to decide whether or not any other steps are taken.
 [COUNSEL] The first matter, Commissioner, that I should make plain is that there is no document which comprises a contemporaneous note.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: I don't want to enter into any discussion, ......, on what document exists or doesn't exist. All I want to know is shortly whether your instructions are that any documentation will be made available to the
Commission. If the answer to that is, no it won't, that is all I need to know.
 [COUNSEL] Legal professional privilege is claimed for the material set out in the schedule.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: Right. And therefore in the event of any process being issued it would be responded to by, as I understand you, production of documents but a claim made that they are protected by legal professional privilege and access to the documents resisted on that basis." 
Legal discussion then ensued between the Assistant Commissioner and senior counsel for the first defendant, and it culminated in the following further exchanges: "THE COMMISSIONER: You would understand of course that I appreciate that the documents which are referred to in the draft schedule would be documents that are normally the subject of legal professional privilege. I start from that premise. The only question is whether or not (a) your client wishes to maintain that privilege and (b) if he does, whether he is entitled to the privilege if there has been waiver? They are the issues.
 [COUNSEL] Forgetting about legal professional privilege for the moment, the privilege under subsection (5) is a particular statutory privilege and it is a particular statutory privilege for the purposes of the ICAC Act. It cannot be waived implicitly. It must be waived by person having authority to do so and, in particular when one looks at s.24(2), it does not appear to the Commission that a person consents to compliance; this seems to be over and above 24(2) as dealing with a particular situation in the Commission.
 
Now the documents that are set out in the draft schedule, albeit they wouldn't on their face necessarily cover the whole of the solicitors file in preparation for the ICAC, would of necessity be documents to which - and I am using the word "document" compendiously in the Supreme Court procedure sense, covering computers and everything - certainly would be documents that would prima facie fall clearly within subsection (5).
 
THE COMMISSIONER: They must be so.
 [COUNSEL] Yes. The only question that could possibly arise is whether or not an implicit waiver might be said to have occurred and that would require the authority of the person to do so.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: Yes.
 [COUNSEL] Now, I don't have that authority. My instructions are perfectly clear that that privilege is not waived by my client. Further, he was subject to compulsory process to answer the question. When he answers the question and says: "I told my solicitor", his attention was never drawn to subsection (5).
Indeed, as the matter proceeded he was in a situation in which what was put to him was that he had, as it were, deceived the ICAC private hearing by failing to make mention of the matter. And the implication really was whether he had knowledge on his own part of a prior evaluation not what he might speculate as to what other people may or may not have had knowledge about and in that context the hypothesis was put to him that he hadn't mentioned it in his statement or at his hearing. Now, in those situations he's not exercising a free choice or giving his authority as a free choice.
 
Normally, in fact many of the matters that are referred to in this schedule, if one was dealing with legal professional privilege, could not become the subject of tender or comment. Such things as drafts, solicitors file or file notes that the solicitor may have prepared, memoranda, correspondence, diary notes, minutes of meetings, working papers, advises and reports. Whatever the solicitor may have done himself. All of that is material that would not even in any circumstance, unless expressly disclosed and the content disclosed rather than the fact become the subject of a waiver of legal professional privilege.
 
Now, the reason I've expressed it in that fashion is that there is quite a deal of discussion in the case law and in Cross concerning whether source material ceases to be the subject of privilege or privilege in relation to source material is waived as a consequence of their use in court either by way of a pleading or quasi pleading, and I'm thinking of the claims book in
Maurice.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: Maurice's case, yes.
 [COUNSEL] And the source material does not become the subject of a waiver.
Nor does everything else on the basis that what occurred was a deliberate choice was made to file a quasi pleading. This is not even in that category.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: Well, ......., I don't want to stop you and give you the opportunity to continue if you wish but I'm not here seeking to have argument addressed to me on the question of whether there's been waiver or no waiver.
That's for another day. All I'm seeking at the moment is to, as it were, informally discuss it with you and just simply to ascertain your client's instructions --- [COUNSEL] I should indicate, I can't claim privilege for something that doesn't exist.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: Of course not.
 [COUNSEL] And that would put me in a situation where, though I might say that I do recall that in at least one case in a court of appeal counsel did claim privilege for the statements of informers who were dead, came in glass but as to this material if I do not vacate all waive privilege I can take instructions to see whether I am able to provide information to the Commission as to whether or not there is anything that might record any conversation or remark by way of note. Any contemporaneous note, for instance, of anything Mr.
Semple directly said - Mr. Cripps directly said.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: It's not you waiving privilege, we appreciate you mean your clients.
 [COUNSEL] No, my client." 
Thereafter, and on 5 June, 6 June and 7 June there were lengthy exchanges between the Assistant Commissioner, senior counsel for the first defendant, and, from time to time, senior counsel assisting the investigation, of which it is sufficient to say, in paraphrase, that they endeavoured to establish a basis upon which the Assistant Commissioner could probe, either without breaching legal professional privilege, or upon the basis of, in effect, an agreed waiver of such privilege, dealings between the first defendant and the second defendant to the extent to which those dealings touched upon knowledge in the first defendant of the fact that there had been not one, but two, re- evaluations of the relevant Senior Executive Service position. All such exchanges proved fruitless.

On 13 June the following exchanges occurred between the Assistant Commissioner and senior counsel for the first defendant: "THE COMMISSIONER: ......, that summons that was served the other day? [COUNSEL] Yes, I have that Mr. Commissioner.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: It was returnable at 10.00 a.m. this morning.
 [COUNSEL] Yes, I have that. Mr. Commissioner, we claim privilege in relation to the material referred to there. That is privilege under s.37(5).
 
THE COMMISSIONER: 37(5), yes.
 [COUNSEL] 37.(5).
 
THE COMMISSIONER: ....... then, is the position this, firstly then there are documents in answer to the summons returnable today at 10.00 a.m. and secondly in respect of all of them you claim that privilege? [COUNSEL] Yes.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: And on that basis you don't produce them.
 [COUNSEL] That's so. I should indicate, Mr. Commissioner, in relation to that, that the summons uses words such as "relating to", which would lead to a submission that it is too wide as it stands in any event. And in addition to that the first summons is still outstanding and consequently --- 
THE COMMISSIONER: Oh, yes, ......... just on that, and I have intended saying that it was probably evident from the issue of this further summons that I did not intend to take that further summons any further." 
On 20 June, the Assistant Commissioner turned his attention to the position of the second defendant. In that regard, the following exchanges took place with learned senior counsel for the first defendant: "THE COMMISSIONER: You had indicated that Mr. Allsop may be available to give evidence on those matters. What is your wish in that respect? [COUNSEL] Mr. Commissioner, I am instructed to claim privilege under section (5) of the ICAC Act.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: You've already done that in respect of the summons and that's the answer to that summons. I had noted in the transcript a couple of references by you to the fact that you, as it were, would proffer Mr. Allsop as a witness and it had not gone any further since then and I just wondered whether you want --- [COUNSEL] Indeed we did, Mr. Commissioner. You indicated that I move not because as to those simple facts of mention being made to him and he mentioning it to his solicitor and being told not to speak about it.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: That's why I've raised it now because it may be that you would prefer to have the evidence. It would be relevant evidence. I'd regard it as relevant, but it's a matter for you as to firstly, whether you wish the evidence to be called or whether you wish to have privilege claimed for it.
 [COUNSEL] We have to claim privilege for it.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: That is all right, you don't have to explain it. I mean if you called him, ........., you're foreshadowing you would claim privilege or he would claim privilege.
 [COUNSEL] Yes, because we're left with the situation of the splash effect that I explained earlier.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: I just wanted to raise it so it wouldn't be left unattended to and you'll have an opportunity to have the evidence called if you wanted it.
 [COUNSEL] Well when one looks at the inferences or hypotheses one can draw one has to look at the splash effect." 
On the following day, 21 June, the Assistant Commissioner returned to the topic of the second defendant's position as to privilege, and the following exchanges took place with learned senior counsel for the first defendant: "THE COMMISSIONER: Being the question I raised yesterday about whether you wished evidence from Mr. Allsop and you indicated you did not.
 [COUNSEL] I referred to the fact that we can't wade because of the splash effect. It's not a matter of wish or not wish.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: I should indicate to you that I would regard evidence from
Mr. Allsop on the matters that Mr. Cripps related in evidence as relevant and
I would issue a summons for Mr. Allsop to attend to give attendance because it's relevant evidence, but if to do so would be met by a claim for privilege then there's no point in going through that procedure.
 [COUNSEL] Of course.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: And I think you did make it clear that I thought I should just make it absolutely clear that whether or not a summons is issued you would resist the evidence on the grounds of - you would resist evidence being given by him on that matter or those matters on the grounds of privilege as you claimed yesterday.
 [COUNSEL] We'd resist any breach of privilege, Commissioner.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: I just wanted it clear, that's all.
 [COUNSEL] There is no way that that procedure could avoid that problem.
There may, however, be another prospect and if what you are concerned for, Mr.
Commissioner, is a matter of fact I may be able to reach some agreement as to stipulation or something of that order but I can't breach privilege.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: ......, I just wanted to get it clear on the record as to what your position was, that's all. I am not pursuing it any further but I just want to clearly understand what your position was, that's all.
 [COUNSEL] I'm thinking in particular about another mechanism available under the Act, that's all, which may avoid that complication.
 
THE COMMISSIONER: That's all I wanted to clarify on that. ......." 
Both the first defendant, and senior counsel who appeared for him before the Assistant Commissioner, have sworn affidavits which were read in the case for the defendants in this Court.

The affidavit of the first defendant, so far as is at present relevant, is in the following terms: "3. I am now aware that it is asserted by the Plaintiff or Assistant
Commissioner, Peter Hall QC that legal professional privilege has been waived by me or on my behalf as a consequence of statements referred to in the
Transcript annexed to the Affidavit sworn by Michelle Frances Huntsman on 11
July 1996.
At no time have I ever given instructions to any person or otherwise authorised any person to make any statement on my behalf waiving legal professional privilege in respect of the proceedings heard before Assistant
Commissioner Peter Hall QC which commenced on 30 April 1996. In particular, I did not instruct my Senior Counsel, ........., to waive privilege on my behalf.
At no time prior to the statements referred to in the Transcript annexed to the said Affidavit of Michelle Frances Huntsman was any statement made to me by any person explaining to me that any statement made by me could have the effect of waiving legal professional privilege or explaining to me the effect of waiving legal professional privilege.
I did not know or understand that in answering questions put to me at the Commission I might thereby be held to waive legal professional privilege." 
The first defendant was not called for cross-examination. His evidence was not contradicted or challenged otherwise. I see no reason why I should not accept the evidence quoted above, and I do accept it.

The affidavit of senior counsel, so far as is at present relevant, is in the following terms: "2. On 17 May 1996, and subsequently, the First Defendant was asked various questions by the Assistant Commissioner, Mr. Hall, in relation to his evidence that, prior to his private hearing, he had become aware in some sense of a first evaluation of Mr. Semple from a passing reference in a vague remark which may have been made by Ms Silver. No evidence as to the making of that remark has been called from any witness other than the First Defendant.
When the Assistant Commissioner at 1222.1 asked the First Defendant whether he had reported "that to anyone", the First Defendant replied: "Well certainly to my Solicitor - legal Counsel". I rose to object since the implication of the questions from the Assistant Commissioner was that the
First Defendant had been concerned not to inquire into or to report the matter and this would found an implication adverse to him. I raised the implication at 1223 seeking to refer to the fact that the First Defendant was advised not to talk about matters involved in the inquiry. I did not say, nor imply, that he was advised not to talk to the Commission. The Assistant Commissioner's question at 1223.5 had implied that the First Defendant had been advised not to talk to the Commission about this matter. The Assistant Commissioner questioned the First Defendant as to why he had not included reference to the remark in his Statement and again elicited from him that he had mentioned the matter to Legal Counsel. Again the Assistant Commissioner's questions at 2209 to 2210 returned to matters raising the implication referred to above. I made it clear to the Assistant Commissioner (at 2217) that what I was concerned about was the mistaken impression apparently held by the Assistant
Commissioner relating to concealment by the First Defendant. I objected and the Assistant Commissioner continued to ask questions as he did in subsequent exchanges (2222.5) and continued to ask questions regarding the communication to the Solicitor and the nature of the Statement. My questions at 2232 confirmed the First Defendant's earlier evidence that he brought the matter to his Solicitor's attention. The Assistant Commissioner rejected a question as to the contents of any draft. At 2233 I confirmed what the First Defendant had earlier said that his statement should express fact rather than speculation.
No question was asked as to content. At 2234 I elicited evidence that there had been no contact between the First Defendant and Ms Silver because both had received notices. The Assistant Commissioner at that point accepted that there was no need to prove the content of the questions which I had put.
At no stage was I instructed to waive my client's privilege nor did I consciously intend to waive my client's privilege.
My purpose was only to seek clarification of, and greater precision in, the evidence that had already been given in response to questions asked by the
Assistant Commissioner (to an extent over objection). The reason I wanted to do that was to deal with an implication that the First Defendant had contravened Section 80 of the ICAC Act by a supposed failure to reveal to the
Commission or its officers the fact of a prior evaluation. I also wished to make it clear that the First Defendant had not been advised not to tell the
Commission of the fact of a prior evaluation but rather that he had been advised that his Statement was to contain facts known to him, not speculation.
The Commissioner's questions had raised the implication that because shortly prior to his private hearing someone, possibly Ms Silver, had mentioned a "re- evaluation" that the First Defendant had remembered or known that there was a prior evaluation and that he had deliberately not referred to the conversation in order to conceal that memory and thus the fact of the prior evaluation." 
Senior counsel was not called for cross-examination. His evidence was not contradicted or challenged otherwise. I see no reason why I should not accept the evidence quoted above, and I do accept it.
 
Given the whole of the foregoing facts and circumstances, I reason as follows: [1] I accept the submission, put for ICAC that, it might reasonably be thought relevant to the investigation now being carried out by the Assistant
Commissioner, to know what passed between the first defendant and the second defendant as to the knowledge and belief of the first defendant, at material times, concerning the number of re-evaluations that had been carried out of the Senior Executive Service position now in question, and the results of any such re-evaluation.
 [2] I accept, also, the further submission put for ICAC, that, all other issues being resolved in its favour, it would be appropriate for this Court, in the proper exercise of its relevant discretion in that behalf, to grant declaratory relief. I adopt, with respect, the statements of principle in that regard of Mahoney JA in his dissenting judgment in Challenge Bank Ltd v
Mailman: Cour of Appeal , unreported - 14 May 1993, at 6 - 8. I do not read the majority judgments, (of Kirby P and Priestley JA), as differing from that particular exposition of principle.
 [3] Section 37(5) of the Act contains expressions that are undefined, either in the Act itself, or, so far as I can see, in the [Interpretation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/), as amended .

Of particular relevance for present purposes, are the concepts, embodied in [section (5)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/s37.html), but undefined, of: - "A privileged communication passing between a legal practitioner ( in his or her capacity as a legal practitioner) and a person for the purpose of providing or receiving legal professional services in relation to the appearance, or reasonably anticipated appearance, of a person at a hearing before the Commission; - The contingency that such privilege "is waived"; - The conditioning of any such waiver upon its being effected "by a person having authority to do so".
 [4] That being so, I take the relevant law to be as stated in the majority judgments of Priestley and McHugh JJA in Gamer's Motor Centre (Newcastle)
Pty Ltd versus Natwest Wholesale Australia Pty Ltd [(1985) 3 NSWLR 475.] 
Priestley JA states as follows, and at 483F - 484B the relevant principles: "In considering the appropriate meaning of the words in their setting it is my view that if there is one ordinary and natural meaning of the words then that meaning must be given to them, but if as is the case here the words have a range of meanings, then the construction to be given to the words used must take into account the legal as well as the 'ordinary' uses to which they have been put. No matter how hard a draftsman tries to keep the language of a statute clear and simple, the statute is a legal document. The [Sale of Goods
Act 1923](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/soga1923128/) (the
Act) is a legal instrument using words with legal significance in an overall context where all concerned with its passage through Parliament knew the past history of the words used in it and knew also that the meaning to be put upon the words in cases of such doubt as would lead to litigation would be decided by lawyers. Thus when this Court comes to consider the meaning of the words in s.28 of the Act it seems to me necessary to make the kind of survey made by
McHugh JA in his reasons. The object of the approach is not to find the legal as opposed to the 'ordinary' meaning, but to find from the range of legal and ordinary meanings, which in any event will seldom be in water-tight compartments, the meanings best suited to the statutory document as a whole." 
McHugh JA sums up as follows, and at 494B - E, his Honour's views as to relevant principle: "In any event it must be borne in mind that, in interpreting a statute, the relevant question is not how an 'ordinary citizen' would read the words but what Parliament intended by the words it has used? Parliament does not always use words in their popular sense. It may, for example, use words in their legal sense: Commissioner for Special Purposes of Income Tax versus Pemsel (at ,577, 580). In that case Lord Macnaghten said (at 580) that in 'construing
Acts of Parliament, it is a general rule ..... that words must be taken in their legal sense unless a contrary intention appears'. This passage was approved by the Judicial Committee in Ashfield Municipal Council versus Joyce [[1976] 1 NSWLR 455] at 459; [[1978] AC 122] at 134.
Parliament may, for example, also use words 'according to common commercial or trade usage' and not in their 'natural and ordinary sense' ....... ." [5] The correct application of those statements of principle to the construction of section 37(5)(b) of the Act entails, in my opinion, that the expressions and concepts to which I have referred in [3] above ought to be understood according to the settled general law with respect to those matters.
 [6] I have thought it proper, having regard to the provisions of [section (1)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/s34.html) and (1)(b)(i) of the [Interpretation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/), earlier mentioned, to examine the relevant Parliamentary debates at the Second Reading and Committee stages of the passage of the Act through Parliament.

Section 37 of the Act, as originally passed by Parliament, did not contain sub-section (5). That sub-section was added by the Independent Commission
Against Corruption (Amendment) Act 1988 No. 42.

Debate on the amending Bill was brief. The second reading speech of the
Minister sponsoring the Bill in the Legislative Council was, so far as is at present relevant, practically identical, word for word, with the corresponding speech of the Attorney-General, the Minister who sponsored the Bill in the
Legislative Assembly. (The relevant references are, respectively, in the
Parliamentary Hansard for 2 August 1988 at 2199 and 2272.) The relevant extract from the speech of the Attorney-General reads as follows: "First, the bill will authorise a person at a hearing before the commission to refuse to divulge a privileged communication passing between a legal practitioner and a person for the purpose of providing or receiving legal services in connection with a person's appearance, or anticipated appearance, before the commission. It is important to emphasize that this exception in favour of legal professional privilege will be confined to communications made for the purpose of receiving or providing legal services for appearances at hearings before the commission. Honourable members should note that in order for the new provision to apply, the communication must be one that would be privileged under the general law of legal professional privilege. The provision therefore imports the common law. For example, if the communication facilitates criminal conduct or fraud the privilege will not apply." [6] If, then, section 37(5)(b) is to be understood as embodying the relevant cognate concepts of the common law, the importance of the privilege thus conceded is, according to well entrenched principles of the common law, of the highest importance. All that needs to be said by way of general exposition in that regard is said by Kirby J in his Honour's judgment in Ampolex Ltd v
Perpetual Trustee Co. (Canberra) Ltd and ors: High Court of Australia, unreported, 22 May 1996: "The law of legal professional privilege is an important branch of the law protecting the basic rights of persons in a society such as ours. Those rights include the right to approach lawyers without concern that matters disclosed, and advice received, in confidence will ordinarily enjoy the protection of the law. Increasingly, in recent years, this court and other courts of high authority have described such rights in the language of basic civic rights.
They have also been explained as rights pertinent to the just operation of the adversarial system rather than, as they have sometimes been explained in older or other authorities, as rules of evidence or procedure. Within this court, there have been divisions of opinion on this point. However, generally speaking, I consider that the trend of recent authority supports the submission that legal professional privilege constitutes an important civic right to be defended, as such, by the law.
 
There is no doubt that legal professional privilege may be extinguished by clear statutory provision. It may also be waived by decision of the client." [7] The evidence before me is sufficient, in my opinion, to establish that, waiver apart, the first defendant is entitled to claim legal professional privilege, in terms of his entitlement in that behalf pursuant to section (5) of the Act, in respect of his dealings, whether oral or in writing, with the second defendant concerning his retainer of legal representation, and concerning, also, his obtaining of proper professional advice, assistance and preparation, in connection with his required appearance before the Assistant
Commissioner.
 [8] It is necessary, then, to come to the question whether, in the events that have happened, it is properly to be found that the first defendant has waived his proper entitlement to legal professional privilege. Such a finding would entail not only that the first defendant would be compellable to give evidence to the Assistant Commissioner as to relevant dealings with the second defendant; but also that the second defendant would not be entitled to maintain the claim, which he has made to the Assistant Commissioner, of legal professional privilege in respect of those dealings.
 [9] Once it is accepted, as in my opinion it ought to be accepted, that section 37(5) is intended by Parliament to give effect to the basic common law of legal professional privilege, then it is not difficult to identify the basic principles of law by reference to which it is to be determined whether, in a given particular case, there has been, in fact, a waiver of such privilege.

The relevant basic principles, so far as concerns the common law in force in
Australia, are as established by the majority, and joint, judgment of Deane,
Dawson and Gaudron JJ in Goldberg versus Ng <case>; [(1995) 69 ALJR 919.] 
It is there made plain that there may be an "express or intentional general waiver" of legal professional privilege; or, there may be what is described as "imputed waiver" of such privilege. As to the latter form of waiver, the basic principles are stated as follows: "The circumstances in which a waiver of legal professional privilege will be imputed by operation of law cannot be precisely defined in advance. The most that can be done is to identify a number of general propositions. Necessarily, the basis of such an imputed waiver will be some act or omission of the persons entitled to the benefit of the privilege. Ordinarily, that act or omission will involve or relate to a limited actual or purported disclosure of the contents of the privileged material. When some such act or omission of the person entitled to the benefit of the privilege gives rise to a question of imputed waiver, the governing consideration is whether 'fairness requires that his privilege shall cease whether he intended that result or not'. That does not mean, however, that an imputed waiver must completely destroy the privilege. Like an express waiver, it can be limited so that it applies only in relation to particular persons, materials or purposes." 69 ALJR, 924 
To those general propositions, I would add three considerations.

First, because of the fundamental importance which legal professional privilege has under the general law, the privilege "should not easily be lost. Its rationale is recognised as fundamental to the proper administration of justice": Hooker Corporation Ltd versus Darling Harbour Authority and ors [(1987) 9 NSWLR 538] at 135B. The point is self-explanatory from a reading of the following passage from his Honour's judgment: "The other possible source of waiver is an answer already given by ........
during cross-examination in relation to an aspect of the communications in question. However, the answer which was given, in the circumstances in which it was given, and the subsequent cross-examination do not, in my view, constitute any waiver by the plaintiff of its privilege. Certainly the cross- examiner has the benefit of the answer which was given in response to a general question as to why something happened and it may very well be that the fact that privilege is now claimed in respect of any explanatory communications corroborates the value of that answer so far as the cross- examiner is concerned. That is not the question presently before me. It is simply one of privilege and I do not consider that what has happened in cross- examination to date can be said to have constituted a waiver of privilege by the plaintiff. " 
Of course, that ruling by McLelland J cannot determine the outcome of the present particular dispute. I cite it, however, because it seems to me to offer both a general insight and a general guidance which are, at the very least, of general relevance to the particular issue of alleged waiver with which I have now to deal.

Thirdly, it needs to be borne in mind that the concept of imputed waiver, in a context such as that of the present case, cannot involve, as it does in ordinary civil litigation, a balance between what is fair from the point of view of the person claiming privilege and resisting a suggestion of waiver; and what is fair to the party to that civil litigation should the claim of privilege be held not to have been waived.

What has to be balanced for present purposes is fairness to the first defendant; and fairness to the public interest and the public trust, the proper protection of which is, by the express terms of section 12 of the Act, the "paramount" concern of ICAC.
 [10] In the present particular matter, my opinion of what has transpired thus far at the hearing before the Assistant Commissioner can be summarised as follows: 
The first defendant has given evidence of having heard M/s Silver say something to the effect that there had been, not one, but two re-evaluations of the relevant public service position.

The first defendant is imprecise as to the time at which he heard this said; but it was before his first conference with his solicitors. This conference occurred on 23 April.

When he first heard the remark, the first defendant made a mental note of it as something of possible importance in connection with the then current attempts to re-evaluate that public service position.  
He did not report the remark to anybody in proper authority within the public service or at any other appropriate level of Government or of public administration.

The first defendant does not give any explanation as to why he did not so report the matter between the time when the remark was first made, and noted by him, and the occasion of his first conference with his solicitor. He does say, however, that he was advised at that initial conference not to talk to anybody, except any proper officer of ICAC, about the remark.

Because he thought the remark to have possible significance, the first defendant recounted it to his solicitor on the occasion of his first conference with his solicitor. He was advised on that occasion, and subsequently during the preparation of his formal written statement to be submitted to ICAC, that, when making a written statement for the use of ICAC, he should stick strictly to the facts as he knew them, leaving M/s Silver to speak for herself truthfully about her knowledge of relevant matters.

His formal written statement for ICAC was prepared, therefore, in the light of that advice; and it ran through several drafts before being finally settled by and in consultation with solicitor and counsel; proof-read by him; signed by him; and forwarded to ICAC.

In my opinion, it is a reasonable inference from a fair reading of the whole of the material that I have earlier quoted from the transcript of the investigation, that the first defendant, in putting to the Assistant
Commissioner the case as I have above summarised it, was intending to head off any finding by the Assistant Commissioner that there is, or might fairly be thought to be, something untoward about his, the first defendant's, failure either to report M/s Silver's remark to some relevant person in Government or public administration; or to make reference to the remark, and to any significance that it had had for him at the time he heard it, in his formal signed statement to ICAC.
 [11] The summary that I have attempted in the paragraph immediately preceding is, obviously, an amalgam of a number of different components; first, things said by the first defendant in response to questions put directly to him by the Assistant Commissioner; secondly, things said by the first defendant in evidence and in answer to questions put to him by his own senior counsel; and thirdly, things said to the Assistant Commissioner by senior counsel for the first defendant.

It is necessary to consider, in the light of the principles that I have earlier canvassed, the practical effect of each of these three components.
 [12] As to the first component, I repeat my earlier acceptance of the affidavit evidence of the first defendant. I accept, therefore, that nothing said by him in answer to questions put directly to him by the Assistant
Commissioner was positively intended by him to waive any legal professional privilege to which he might have been entitled. Further, I am of the opinion that a reasonable view of fairness, in the Goldberg sense, would not construe those answers of the first defendant as giving rise to an imputed waiver by him of any such legal professional privilege.

Having read and re-read the relevant transcript, the impression remains with me that, had it not been for interventions by senior counsel for the first defendant, the distinct probabilities are: first, that the Assistant
Commissioner himself would have studiously avoided any possible breach of proper legal professional privilege; and secondly, that the first defendant, having heard the Assistant Commissioner disavow expressly any wish to trespass in the area of legal professional privilege, would himself have been careful not to open up that matter.

I am strengthened in these conclusions by the immediate, and , as I think, obviously spontaneous reactions of the Assistant Commissioner as noted at pages 13 and 14 of the present judgment.
 [13] As to the second component to which I have referred in paragraph 11 above, I think that the position is different.

These answers of the first defendant were given on 30 May, that is to say, some 13 days after the initial exchanges of the first defendant with the
Assistant Commissioner; and some 13 days after the first clash between the
Assistant Commissioner and senior counsel for the first defendant as to the opening up of areas protected, prima facie, by legal professional privilege.

If the affidavit evidence of the first defendant and of his senior counsel be accepted, - and, as earlier indicated, I see no reason why I should not accept it, - then it must follow that the evidence given by the first defendant to his senior counsel on 30 May was not positively intended by either of them to amount, in any way, to a deliberate waiver of legal professional privilege.

But that is not to say that the course of such evidence does not amount to conduct giving rise to an imputed waiver pro tanto of legal professional privilege.

The relevant passages in the evidence of the first defendant are set out at pages 21, 22 and 23 of the present judgment. I am wholly unable to see how a sensible reading of the questions asked of the first defendant by his own senior counsel, coupled with the answers given to those questions by the first defendant, can be regarded, on a reasonable view of what is fair in the
Goldberg sense, as anything other than conduct giving rise to an imputed waiver pro tanto of legal professional privilege. Any view to the contrary then held by the first defendant or by his senior counsel, even if held genuinely, was, in my respectful opinion, mistaken.
 [14] As to the third component to which I have referred in paragraph 11, it is necessary to deal with a threshold submission put by learned senior counsel for the defendants, namely, that senior counsel appearing before the
Assistant Commissioner on behalf of the first defendant was not, in the sense contemplated by section 37(5) of the Act, a "person having authority" to waive, on behalf of his client, the first-named defendant, any legal professional privilege to which the latter might have been, prima facie, entitled.

I do not accept this submission. I do not accept it because of my conclusion, earlier reached and explained, that it was the intention of Parliament that section 37(5) should, as it were, carry into the Act all relevant existing concepts of the general law respecting legal professional privilege. That conclusion seems to me to entail that senior counsel for the first defendant stood, in relation to his client and in respect of the latter's legal professional privilege, in exactly the same position as that in which he would have stood had he been appearing for the first defendant in normal litigation to which the general law of legal professional privilege indisputably applied.

It was submitted, further, that a contrast is to be pointed between the provisions as to legal professional privilege that are contained in, respectively, section 24(2) of the Act and section 37(5) of the Act. I agree that there is an obvious contrast to be pointed between the precise terms of the language used, respectively, in those two sections. It is, however, my opinion that, when allowance is made for the fact that sub-section (5) of section 37 was inserted by specific amendment, and that the legislative intent behind the amendment was to the effect that I have earlier canvassed, then the contrast in language does not support the conclusion sought to be drawn from it.

A further submission was put, based upon the observations of Lord Denning MR in Causton versus Mann Egerton (Johnsons) Ltd [(1974) 1 WLR 162.] The relevant passage is set out in McNicol: Law of Privilege: at 23, to which passage I was referred specifically during the course of argument. Lord Denning, in the passage cited, explains that a solicitor or counsel appearing in Court for a client has a capacity to waive on behalf of the client the latter's legal professional privilege, the legal rationale being, to use Lord Denning's words, that: "...... (counsel or solicitor) ...... has complete authority over the suit, the mode of conducting it and all that is incident to it.
Unless his client has expressly withdrawn that authority or any part of it, the other party is entitled to assume that he is acting within his authority." 
It was submitted that, in the instant case, senior counsel for the first defendant was not conducting litigation in the sense envisaged by Lord Denning in connection with the principles stated, in the above citation, by his
Lordship. And, of course, it is true that in a strict and literal sense, senior counsel representing the first defendant before the Assistant
Commissioner in the course of an investigation proceeding in accordance with the Act, was not representing a client before a Court, and in conventional civil litigation.

It is, however, my opinion that it does not follow that senior counsel appearing before the Assistant Commissioner was doing something so radically different from what is normally done by counsel representing a client before a
Court and in conventional civil litigation, as would justify a conclusion that the legal principles expounded by Lord Denning have no relevant application.
Senior counsel appearing for the first defendant before the Assistant
Commissioner was doing so pursuant to a professional retainer requiring him to do precisely the range of things that he would have been so retained to do for any client represented by him in a Court and in conventional litigation. He was there, essentially, to represent the first defendant, and to protect in every lawful way the proper interests of the first defendant. I do not perceive that there is any rational basis upon which it might reasonably be supposed that counsel, in the dutiful discharge of those professional responsibilities, did not have the full range of authority to which Lord
Denning refers.
 [15] It follows that, in my opinion, senior counsel for the first defendant was capable, by his own conduct, of waiving by imputation the legal professional privilege of his client.

So far as concerns the stance taken by senior counsel for the first defendant in his own exchanges with the Assistant Commissioner, I think that a clear dividing line can be drawn at 31 May. I think that what transpired between senior counsel and the Assistant Commissioner on and after 31 May is consistent with an intention, clearly manifested by senior counsel, to head off certain potential criticisms by the Assistant Commissioner of the first defendant, but without waiving legal professional privilege.

I think, however, that the course of the dealings between senior counsel for the first defendant and the Assistant Commissioner prior to 31 May are such that a reasonable view of what is fair in the Goldberg sense would justify a conclusion that there had been pro tanto an imputed waiver of legal professional privilege.
 [16] I have come, therefore, to the conclusion that the plaintiff is entitled to such declaratory relief as will give fair and reasonable effect to the foregoing findings. I will not grant that relief in the terms prayed in paragraphs 1 and 2 of the plaintiff's summons, because I think that the terms there suggested go far beyond what I would regard as a reasonable measure of declaratory relief giving effect to my conclusions. I will grant, therefore, a declaration in the limited terms set out hereunder.

I make, accordingly, the following orders:
I dismiss the claims for relief made in paragraphs 1 and 2 of the plaintiff's summons filed on 11 July 1996.
I grant, and as follows, the relief sought in paragraph 3 of the said summons: 
DECLARE that the first defendant has waived legal professional privilege to which he would otherwise have been entitled, but only in so far as will permit the Assistant Commissioner who is conducting the investigation referred to in
Annexure "A" to the affidavit affirmed on 11 July 1996 by Michelle Frances
Huntsman, to do the following things: to require the first defendant to give before the Assistant Commissioner oral evidence directed to the exploration of, and to the making by the
Assistant Commissioner of reasonable findings of fact as to: what M/s Silver actually said to the first defendant on the occasion which he reported to his "solicitor - legal counsel", as deposed by him in his oral evidence on 17 May 1996; what, in the course of so reporting, the first defendant told the second defendant, or any other solicitor or counsel then professionally retained by him; what the first defendant told the second defendant or any other solicitor or counsel then professionally retained by him, on any occasion, as to the matter referred to in (i) above, and as to anything done or not done by him as a result of what he was thus told by M/s Silver; what legal professional advice the first defendant was given by the second defendant, or by any other solicitor or counsel then professionally retained by him, as to the inclusion in, or as to the exclusion from, anything to be put by him, either orally or in writing, to the Independent Commission
Against Corruption, in connection with the matters referred to in (i) to (iii) above, both inclusive, or any of them.
 what other legal professional advice the first defendant was given by the second defendant or by any other solicitor or counsel then professionally retained by him, as to anything referred to in (i) to (iii) above, both inclusive, or any of them.
 to require the first defendant to produce to the Assistant Commissioner any note or memorandum in his present possession, custody or control, - and howsoever recorded and by whomsoever recorded, - and evidencing any of the matters referred to in (a)(i) to (a)(v) above, both inclusive.
 to require the second defendant to give before the Assistant Commissioner oral evidence as to any of the matters referred to in (a)(ii) to (a)(v) above, both inclusive.
 to require the second defendant to produce to the Assistant Commissioner any note or memorandum in his present possession, custody or control, - and howsoever recorded, and by whomsoever recorded, - and evidencing any of the matters referred to in (a)(ii) to (a)(v) above, both inclusive.
I make for the present no order as to costs. I direct that the parties lodge with my Associate, and exchange, and in each case not later than 5.00 p.m. on Monday 12 August 1996, brief written submissions as to any application as to costs that they might wish, respectively, to make.
The exhibits may be returned.
 
Independent Commission Against Corruption versus Kenneth George Cripps & anor /96 
Tuesday 27 August 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES ADMINISTRATIVE LAW DIVISION 
SULLY J 
JUDGMENT ON COSTS 
HIS HONOUR: This judgment should be read in conjunction with the judgment that I delivered on Friday 9 August instant. In particular, abbreviations used in that earlier judgment are used, also, in the present judgment.

I have received from the plaintiff and from the defendants written submissions on the question of costs. Both sets of written submissions will be marked for identification 1 and placed with the Court file for any necessary future reference. I need not now repeat the detail of the respective submissions: it is sufficient to note that the plaintiff seeks an order for costs, while the defendants seek an order that the parties pay, respectively, their own costs.

By section 76 of the [Supreme Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/), as amended, costs are, in all cases, but subject to the Act itself, to the Rules made pursuant to the Act, and to any other relevant legislation, in the discretion of the Court. Part 52, rule 11 and part 52A rule 11 make the following basic provision as to the entitlement of a party to costs: "If the Court makes any order as to costs, the Court shall, subject to this
Part, order that the costs follow the event, except where it appears to the
Court that some other order should be made as to the whole or any part of the costs." 
The discretion thus conferred upon the Court, although apparently unfettered, is, of course, a judicial discretion, and it must be exercised in a principled way and not arbitrarily or capriciously.

The written submissions of the parties do not refer to any decided case dealing with the making in this Court of an order for costs either in favour of, or against the ICAC. I have not been able to find for myself any such authority.

There are, however, two reported first instance decisions which seem to me to give, albeit in different particular contexts and, therefore, only in a general indicative way, assistance relevant for present purposes.

In Lyster versus Camberwell City Council [(1989) 69 LGRA 250], Cummins J of the Supreme Court of Victoria decided, in proceedings brought by the
Minister for Local Government of the State of Victoria, that certain by-laws made by the Camberwell City Council were ultra vires. The Minister sought an order for costs against the Council. Cummins J decided that no order for costs should be made. His Honour expresses as follows his reasons for that decision: "Normally I would order that costs follow the event, however in the unusual circumstances of this case I propose to make no order as to costs. That is because, although I found that both by-laws failed, the matter brought before the Court and by the City of Camberwell was by no means frivolous and has involved consideration of matters of some importance. Given that and the nature of the parties not involving an indigent private person, I consider that no order as to costs ought to be made." 69 LGRA, 260 
In Kent & ors. versus Cavanagh, Minister of State for Works & ors.
[(1973) 1 ACTR 43], Fox J of the Supreme Court of the Australian Capital
Territory refused an application for an interlocutory injunction to prevent the carrying out of some significant public works. The unsuccessful plaintiffs were, in his Honour's own description, "...... prominent citizens of
Canberra". His Honour declined to make an order for costs against the unsuccessful plaintiffs. In that regard, Fox J said this: "On the matter of costs, I think these should be borne by the parties which have incurred them. It is more usual when an interlocutory application for relief fails to order that the costs be paid by the unsuccessful party, or at least that they be the successful party's costs in the action. In the latter case he gets his costs if he succeeds in the action, but is not subjected to the risk of ever having to pay the costs of the other party in respect of the interlocutory proceedings. There is always a discretion and different considerations apply to each case.
 
In the present case the plaintiffs have succeeded on one point and have brought to notice a serious defect in compliance with statutory procedures.
But I am to some extent influenced by broader considerations. It seems to me undesirable that responsible citizens with a reasonable grievance who wish to challenge Government action should only be able to do so at risk of paying costs to the Government if they fail. They find themselves opposed to parties who are not personally at risk as to costs and have available to them almost unlimited public funds. The inhibiting effect of the risk of paying costs is excessive and not in the public interest. " 1 ACTR, 55 (20)-(40) 
I think, with respect, that there is great force in the observations of Fox J.
Implicit in his Honour's reasoning is, I believe, the proposition that there are properly to be recognised situations in which significant competing public interests justify a departure from the conventional order that costs should follow the event.

It seems to me that the present case is of such a kind. The ICAC is a high- profile public investigatory agency. Its constituent statute provides in terms that the ICAC, in the exercise of its functions, " ...... shall regard the protection of the public interest and the prevention of breaches of public trust as its paramount concerns". In aid of this high public mission, the
ICAC is invested by statute with draconian investigative powers. It is a matter of public record that it has available to it if not quite ".......
almost unlimited public funds", ready access to public funding on a scale that, to put the point without excessive sharpness, compares more than favourably with the public funding made available to the Courts of this State.
It seems to me that it is not in the public interest to establish a precedent encouraging of the view that when such a public body seeks to challenge the validity of a claim of fundamental right, - of which legal professional privilege is an especially significant example, - made by a person into whose conduct an investigation is current, the advantages otherwise enjoyed by that public body should be augmented by the threat of a costs order in the event that the person being investigated is unsuccessful, whether in whole or in part, in maintaining his claim of right.

I accept that it would not be proper to lay down any hard and fast rule that would deprive the ICAC of any entitlement in any circumstances whatsoever to claim an order for costs in litigation brought in this Court, and in which it might be successful in obtaining particular relief sought. Circumstances do, notoriously, alter cases. I think, however, that in the circumstances of the present particular case, and having especially in mind the great importance attached by our jurisprudence to legal professional privilege, a general approach of the kind outlined in the preceding paragraph would accommodate properly in principle and justly in fact the public interests now relevant.

For those reasons, I have come to the conclusion that it would be proper to order, and I do therefore order, that the plaintiff and the defendants pay, respectively, their own costs of the hearing of the plaintiff's summons.
 * * * 
