

Regina versus Windred Matter No Cca 60776/96 [1998] NSWSC 244 (17 June 1998) 
Last Updated: 4 August 1998 
REGINA versus CARROL LYNN WINDRED 
CCA 60776/96 June 1998 
Spigelman CJ, Newman J, Barr J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
SPIGELMAN CJ: I will ask Mr Justice Barr to deliver the first judgment in this matter. 
BARR J: The applicant seeks leave to appeal against sentences imposed upon her by Judge Karpin in the District Court on 5 November 1996. The applicant was convicted by a jury of eight offences committed on her daughter and was sentenced to a number of terms of penal servitude or imprisonment, some concurrent and some cumulative, the effect of which was a minimum term of four years and an additional term, during which she would be eligible for release on parole, of a further four years. 
In 1978 the applicant, then about twenty-three years old, was the mother of two children and was separated from her husband. They were later divorced.

During that year the applicant met another man and they began to live together in a caravan on some property owned by the applicant's mother. They married later on. It became clear to the applicant very early in their relationship that her husband-to-be was violent, but even so she arranged for her son and daughter to go and live with them in the caravan. Although he punched and kicked her children, the applicant made no complaint to her mother, who was nearby, and the relationship continued.

Over the next eight years her husband systematically perpetrated upon the applicant's two children a series of offences. In several instances the applicant assisted him. The offences of which she was convicted by the jury began when her daughter was about seven years old and continued until she was about fifteen years old. They were as follows: 
There were two offences of inciting her daughter to commit acts of indecency with the applicant's husband. Each charge carried a maximum penalty of imprisonment for two years. The charges represented the complainant's initiation into sexual activity with her step-father. She told the jury that she was called into the bedroom where the applicant and her husband were together in bed. She was shown the husband's penis and instructed in naming the parts of it. She was shown how to lick and suck the penis and testes. She was encouraged to put his penis so far into her mouth that she began to gag.
The applicant and her husband were amused when that happened. The events ended in the applicant sucking her husband's penis whilst the complainant licked his testes. The second count was based upon like events which took place on the following morning.

The third count was a charge of assault occasioning actual bodily harm. The maximum penalty is penal servitude for five years. Early in 1981 the applicant's husband became angry when he learned that the complainant and her brother had spoken to their father. He took a jug of boiling water and ordered the applicant to hold the child's head over the sink. As she did so he poured boiling water into the child's mouth. She told the jury that she was forced to swallow two or three good mouthfuls. It was the applicant's mother who had to take the child for the necessary medical attention on the following day.

The fourth charge was aiding and abetting her husband to have unlawful carnal knowledge of her daughter, who was then twelve years old. The maximum penalty is penal servitude for ten years. This charge was based upon the first occasion when her husband had penile vaginal sexual intercourse with the applicant's daughter. As on earlier occasions, the applicant and her husband were in the bedroom and the child was called in. After other forms of sexual activity, which had by then become routine, her husband told the child that she was a big girl and that he would do something else. During intercourse the child cried, moved about and asked the man to stop. He did not do so. At the conclusion of intercourse her husband expressed surprise that the child did not bleed and the applicant responded that it was perhaps because he had been so gentle. Her Honour found that an extraordinary remark. I agree.

The fifth count was based upon a similar occasion about six months later in which the applicant's husband had intercourse with the applicant as well as the child. The sentencing judge was satisfied that by that stage he was having full sexual intercourse with the child on a weekly basis.

The sixth count charged the applicant with aiding and abetting her husband to incite the child to an act of indecency with her. That consisted in the child sucking her breasts whilst her husband had intercourse with her and the child.
The maximum penalty is two years imprisonment.

The seventh count was one of aiding and abetting her husband to have sexual intercourse with the child. The maximum penalty is ten years penal servitude.

The eighth and final count charged the applicant with having unlawful sexual intercourse with the child, who was then fifteen years old. The maximum penalty is ten years penal servitude. On that occasion the applicant suggested to the child that they wake her husband. They went to the bedroom and did so.
The applicant and her husband had sexual intercourse and the child was instructed to lick her mother's vagina and then to position herself so that her mother could perform cunnilingus upon her. That was the act of sexual intercourse relied on.

The husband was charged with offences against this complainant but never came to trial because he committed suicide. At her trial the applicant did not deny that the events had taken place as described by the complainant, but asserted that she had only ever acted under the duress of her husband. The jury rejected that defence.

In a detailed and careful judgment the sentencing judge reviewed the relevant parts of the evidence taken at trial and on sentence. The seriousness of the case is apparent from the facts which her Honour recited and to which I have referred. Her Honour referred to the serious breach of trust constituted by the offences, the tender age of the complainant, especially at the time of the earlier offences, and to the long period of time over which they took place.

Her Honour had careful regard to the matters available in mitigation of the applicant's criminality. Although her defence of duress had not succeeded, she was entitled to recognition of the fact that her husband was a violent man who, for the most part, had instigated the criminal activity.

Her Honour recognised the complex nature of the relationship between the applicant and her husband and the violence which I have mentioned. However, as her Honour observed, the violence was directed more generally towards the children than towards the applicant. The evidence of the complainant, which her Honour accepted, was that the applicant had never said "no" to any sexual activity. She had not tried to stop her husband having sexual intercourse with the complainant and apparently enjoyed much of the activity.

Her Honour recognised the applicant's contrition as evidenced by the admissions she was ready to make when she was first spoken to by the police.
During the trial she did not attempt to suggest that the complainant was not telling the truth about what had happened.

Her Honour took into account that the offences for which she was sentencing the applicant were old. Her Honour thought that there was little need to deter the applicant herself from committing further offences but stressed the importance of general deterrence in a serious case like the present one.

Her Honour dealt in detail with the personal circumstances of the applicant, with her upbringing and the position she now found herself in, effectively deprived of her children including three children she had had by her deceased husband.

Her Honour considered that the special circumstances of the case justified the fixing of an additional term which exceeded one-third of the minimum term of the sentences she intended to impose. As her Honour made clear, the intention was to fashion a total effective term which reflected the totality of the criminality involved in all of the offences.

No criticism could be made of her Honour's process of reasoning. Some of these offences, particularly the assault in which the applicant held the complainant's head whilst her husband poured boiling water into her mouth, were among the worst of their kind and individually might attract a sentence close to the maximum. The sentences imposed were well within the discretion open to her Honour.

The substantial matter put forward to justify a grant of leave to appeal was that because of the incompetent way Mr Nazarian, her former solicitor, handled her case, the applicant was denied a reasonable opportunity to plead guilty to the charges and receive the reduction in sentence which would have followed.
Counsel sought and obtained leave to read an affidavit in which the applicant swore to the following circumstances: 
Early in the life of the case the applicant was attended by two Legal Aid solicitors and had a number of conferences with them. She instructed the second of them to enter a plea of not guilty.

In 1994 she instructed a solicitor, Mr Nazarian, who said: `You don't have to worry. We can defend these charges using the defence of battered wife syndrome.' 
In 1995 she attended two conferences with a barrister and the subject of battered wife syndrome was discussed. However, no barrister ever appeared for her.

On 28 April 1995 the applicant saw a psychiatrist, Dr Bruce Westmore, to obtain a report to use in court. Mr Nazarian told her that he would not use the report because it was not good enough.

On 11 December 1995 the applicant attended a sentence indication hearing and
Mr Nazarian represented her. The Court indicated that if the applicant pleaded guilty she would be sentenced to imprisonment for two years. Immediately afterwards Mr Nazarian told the applicant that if she accepted the sentence he would not continue to act for her or have anything to do with her again, not even speak to her. Because of that advice she instructed Mr Nazarian to reject the sentence indication and seek a hearing date. That was why the matter went for trial.

The applicant saw Mr Nazarian on two further occasions before trial and on both of them he told the applicant that he would get her off all the charges.

As the trial date approached, the applicant telephoned Mr Nazarian a number of times but he did not return her calls. About a week before the trial was due to begin she was told by Mr Hurley, who was then working in Mr Nazarian's office, that she would have to provide before trial for counsel's fees. She could not do so and that is why counsel did not appear at the trial. Mr Hurley appeared on 28 October 1996 and sought an adjournment. He was unsuccessful. He appeared for the applicant at the trial. He advised her to plead guilty but because she hardly knew him, because he did not seem familiar with the case and because Mr Nazarian had been so convincing when he told her that she would be acquitted, she rejected his advice and went on with the trial.

The Crown called evidence from Mr Nazarian after the applicant consented to a request to waive client legal privilege. Mr Nazarian's affidavit was to the following effect: 
He did not tell the applicant that if she did not get off all the charges she would not have to pay his fees or that she did not have to worry, that they could defend the charges using the defence of battered wife syndrome. They did have a discussion about her payment of his fees.

At a later conference the subject of battered wife syndrome was discussed and he told her that he could not give her a firm assessment of her prospects of success because it was a relatively new defence. He suggested a conference with counsel and the applicant said that she would think about it. That was how it came about that the applicant attended a conference with counsel.

A copy of Dr Westmore's report was available at that conference. Mr Nazarian told the applicant that the report confirmed that she had battered wife syndrome and that if Dr Westmore was willing to give evidence there was a prospect of success. He did not tell the applicant that he would not use Dr
Westmore's report because it was not good enough. In fact he tendered it before Judge Armitage QC at the sentence indication hearing.

Before that hearing the Crown served on Mr Nazarian a copy of an anniversary card said to have been sent by the applicant to her husband. The card contained a handwritten sexually explicit poem. Mr Nazarian asked the applicant whether she had sent it and she said that she had. He told her to forget about battered wife syndrome because the card implied that she was enjoying her sexual activity with her husband.

Mr Nazarian represented the applicant at the sentence indication proceedings and told her that the indicated sentence was at the lower end of the range and that if she were found guilty after her trial she would lose the benefit of a discount or a plea of guilty.

He did not tell the applicant that if she accepted the sentence he would not act for her or speak to her again. The applicant told him that she would think about it. Two days later she telephoned him and told him that she wanted to go to trial and not accept the indicated sentence.

Because of his state of health Mr Nazarian transferred the applicant's file to
Mr Hurley, an employed solicitor in his firm, in about April 1996. He gave Mr
Hurley a summary of the state of the matter. In August 1996 Mr Nazarian sold the firm to Mr Hurley.

In response the applicant read an affidavit of Mr Hurley, the effect of which was that Mr Nazarian retained conduct of the applicant's case up to October and that although Mr Hurley did some work in it before that time it was only at Mr Nazarian's request. The affidavit set out details of the transfer of interest in the practice between Mr Nazarian and Mr Hurley. The affidavit did not bear upon the conversations Mr Nazarian had had with the applicant.

The applicant and Mr Nazarian were cross-examined. The applicant substantially adhered to the version given in her affidavit. She said that she knew there was a chance that the jury might find her guilty and that she could probably go to gaol. She denied the conversation Mr Nazarian said they had had about the anniversary card. Then she conceded that she could have had that conversation but denied that he gave her the advice about the effect of it upon her proposed defence.

Mr Nazarian substantially adhered to the version given in his affidavit.
During cross-examination he was asked about some writing on a beer coaster which, on the face of it, deals with the transfer of interest in the solicitor's practice. The beer coaster bears the date 13 January 1997. There appeared two signatures on that coaster. Mr Hurley says that one of those signatures is his own and the other is that of Mr Nazarian. Mr Nazarian was asked about the matter and denied the other signature was his.

Mr Cook, counsel for the applicant, invited the Court to reject that evidence of Mr Nazarian and as a result to doubt everything that Mr Nazarian said in evidence except where it coincided with the evidence of Mr Hurley and the applicant.

The issues raised in this appeal do not make it necessary to decide whether the signature was indeed the signature of Mr Nazarian and whether he was being truthful about the answer he gave to this Court. Even if he was not being truthful about the matter his evidence on that subject would not cause me to doubt his evidence on other topics. In fact his evidence in my opinion is supported by independent objective facts.

There are several reasons why the applicant's account appears on the whole to be unreliable. The Court has had the benefit of reading Dr Westmore's report.
It is a careful and detailed report which deals with the history of the applicant and her relations with her husband and comes to a reasoned conclusion that, on the material available to Dr Westmore, the applicant suffered from battered wife syndrome.

It is not difficult to see why Mr Nazarian tendered the report before the sentence indication judge, as I think he did. I think it highly unlikely in those circumstances that he would have told the applicant that he would not use the report because it was not good enough.

Secondly, there appears no reason why he would have told the applicant that he would not charge her if she were not acquitted. I am satisfied that in April or May 1995 he rendered the applicant an account for work which he had then done and she paid it. There is no reason to suppose that he would thereafter supply his services free of charge. I do not accept the evidence of the applicant about this matter.

The Court has also seen a copy of the anniversary card. I will not set out the detail of it but there is reason to believe that the view Mr Nazarian took of it, as I accept that he did, was reasonably available. I accept that he advised the applicant that that card might have an adverse effect upon her case. I also accept that he advised her that if she were found guilty after trial rather than on a plea of guilty she would lose the benefit of a discount for a plea of guilty.

Irrespective of the precise time at which Mr Nazarian sold his practice to Mr
Hurley, about which there was much dispute in this appeal but about which there seems no ultimate reason to come to a concluded opinion, no complaint is made about the way Mr Hurley conducted the trial. As appears from her Honour's remarks on sentence, there was abundant evidence of the conduct of the deceased and the defence of duress was left for the jury's consideration. I do not think that the timing of arrangements between the two solicitors had any bearing on the advice given to the applicant or to the conduct of her defence.

What emerges is that Mr Hurley, a competent solicitor, advised the applicant to plead guilty but that she rejected that advice. I think that she had previously been advised by Mr Nazarian about the risk of pleading not guilty and about the consequence for the sentence if she did and were convicted. I think that she rejected the advice of those two solicitors because she wanted to take whatever chances she had of being acquitted. I think she acted with her eyes open. Her defence at the trial, one of duress, was consistent with such a desire.

Nothing in the material I have referred to suggests any failure by Mr Nazarian properly to conduct the applicant's case or to advise her. I think that the applicant passed up the chance of pleading guilty and obtaining any resultant reduction in her sentence on her own decision arrived at after proper advice from Mr Nazarian and Mr Hurley.

Because of the seriousness of the offences I would grant leave to appeal but I would dismiss the appeal.

SPIGELMAN CJ: I agree with Justice Barr. 
NEWMAN J: I also agree. 
SPIGELMAN CJ: The order of the Court is, leave to appeal granted, appeal dismissed. * * * 
