

Regina versus J J Henry [1996] NSWSC 570 (26 November 1996) 
REGINA versus Justin James HENRY /96 
TUESDAY 26 NOVEMBER 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
PRIESTLEY JA, SMART J, SIMPSON J 
JUDGMENT 
PRIESTLEY JA: I will ask Smart J to give his reasons first.

SMART J: Justin James Henry seeks leave to appeal against the severity of a sentence comprising a minimum term of two years and an additional term of eighteen months imposed for maliciously inflicting grievous bodily harm.

Mr Henry, who was born on 11 May 1979, entered a plea of guilty before the magistrate. At the time of the offence, on 21 May 1996, he was seventeen.

The victim was a lady aged nineteen. She and Mr Henry had had a relationship for some months, culminating in their living together from February 1996 to 20
May 1996. On the latter day she left Mr Henry, returning on 21 May 1996 to collect her belongings from the room they shared in a Petersham boarding house. She was accompanied by a much older man, who was a family friend.

On arrival at the boarding house they met Mr Henry, who prevailed upon his male friend and the older man to leave the victim alone with him in their room. Reluctantly, the older man agreed to do so. Mr Henry endeavoured to persuade the victim to remain, but she rebuffed his romantic approaches. He became teary and emotional. She began to place her belongings in a bag. Mr
Henry walked up to her and punched her with his closed fist to the right side of her face. The force of the blow knocked her back one and a half metres into an ironing board, and then to the floor. She landed on her back with her feet on the floor. Her knees were in a raised position. She was unable to move, felt hazy, and began to scream, "Don't Justin, stop it".

Mr Henry grabbed a claw hammer. He crouched over her and began wielding it.
She warded off the blows to her upper body with her hand. He hit her on both legs around the knee and shin area many times. He then began to hit her towards the head area and she put her arms up to protect her head. The blows with the hammer hit her on the left forearm area and hands. She put her right hand out to stop the head of the hammer hitting her and she put her left forearm up to protect her head. She screamed to Mr Henry to stop. She was hit about fifteen times. She heard the friend of Mr Henry tell him to stop. After
Mr Gay told Mr Henry that the police would be called, Mr Henry stopped. The police and the ambulance attended.

As might be expected, the victim suffered serious injuries. She was admitted to Royal Prince Alfred Hospital and discharged six days later.

Dr Sunner's report reads: "There was a 2.5cm wound over the left ulna with a clinically fractured ulna.
She also had a haemarthrosis of the left knee with bruising over the front of the knee, proximal tibia. Her right hand was also painful and swollen.
 ...

The patient had an operation performed on 21 May 1996 for fractured (compound) left ulna consisting of debridement, lavage of wound left forearm, open reduction internal fixation left ulna, aspiration left knee and examination under anaesthetic left knee." 
The internal fixation refers to a plate which was fitted. She had a swollen jaw and other bruising. She suffered considerable pain and nightmares. She was frightened to go out.

The gravity of the offence made it one that should be dealt with at law and not under the Children's (Criminal Proceedings) Act 1987. There is no reason to disturb the exercise of the judge's discretion.

Mr Henry appeared before the Children's Court on 9 January 1996 on two charges of assault occasioning actual bodily harm on the same victim. He was ordered on each count to carry out thirty-five hours community service, but failed to do so. On the same day, in respect of a break, enter and steal offence, he was released on probation for twelve months.

On 24 July 1995 Mr Henry was placed on a recognisance to be of good behaviour for twelve months on an offence of unlawful entry and released on probation for twelve months on an offence of stealing from a person. On 20 November 1995 he was released on probation for twelve months on a charge of stealing.

None of these milder ways of dealing with Mr Henry seems to have made any impact. He was on probation on three matters and on a recognisance on one matter at the time of the subject offence. As at 21 May 1996 the applicant was leading an unsupervised, and in some respects adult, style of life. Attempts made in April and May 1996 by the Juvenile Justice Department to contact him were frustrated. He refused to disclose his address.

The applicant made admissions of guilt during his police interview on 30 May
The judge had regard to the report of 15 August 1996 of the Juvenile
Justice Department. It appears that Mr Henry had been brought up at the 
Cherbourg Aboriginal settlement in Queensland and that he witnessed considerable violence there. There was too much alcohol there. He came to
Sydney about August 1994. His response to Departmental supervision had been poor. He had had difficulties in communicating with people. The Department felt he needed direction in anger management.

The applicant complained in his written submissions that disproportionate regard had been had to the gravity of the offence, the applicant's prior record, and his lack of acceptance of Departmental supervision, and that the judge failed to take into account the relatively few matters in the criminal antecedents - this being the applicant's first time in custody, the early plea of guilty, the applicant's contrition as shown in his record of interview, the applicant's stopping the attack on being told the police would be called, and the provisions in <case> of the Children's (Criminal Proceedings) Act. This is not a fair reading of his Honour's remarks on sentence.

The applicant did not give evidence. This made the sentencing task generally more difficult. The present attitudes of the applicant were not stated by him to the judge. The judge expressly referred to the plea of guilty at the earliest possible time.

The judge attached considerable weight to the Aboriginality of the applicant.
The judge was keenly aware of Mr Henry's youth and that rehabilitation must be considered as the main factor on the question of sentence.

While the question of rehabilitation is of great importance, the seriousness of the offence and appropriate punishment are equally of great importance.

The judge had the relevant and major considerations to the forefront of his mind and dealt with the matter with commendable restraint. The sentence is to be served in a detention centre, with all the support services which such a centre provides. There was no error on the part of the judge. The sentence which he imposed was correct.

In my opinion, the application for leave to appeal should be refused.

PRIESTLEY JA: I agree.

SIMPSON J: I also agree.

PRIESTLEY JA: The application for leave to appeal is therefore refused.
 * * * 
