

Richmond Health Service versus Fai Car Owners Mutual Insurance Co Pty Ltd
Matter No 50107/98 [1998] NSWSC 701 (11 December 1998) 
Last Updated: 15 January 1999 
RICHMOND HEALTH SERVICE versus FAI CAR OWNERS MUTUAL INSURANCE CO PTY LTD /98 December 1998 
Hodgson CJ in EQ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Commercial Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: On 24th March 1991, Jennifer Watt was injured in a motor vehicle accident at Byron Bay, New South Wales, such injury being caused by the negligent driving of Bradley Green. Mr. Green was driving a motor vehicle registered in Queensland, and was insured by the defendant, which I will call FAI, pursuant to the Motor Vehicles Insurance Act 1936 (Qld). The plaintiff was Ms. Watt's employer at the time, and has paid Ms. Watt compensation for her injuries pursuant to the [Workers' Compensation Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) . In 1995, the plaintiff sued Mr. Green in the District Court of New South Wales to recover workers' compensation paid to Ms. Watt, pursuant to [s.151Z(1)(d)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s151z.html) of the [Workers' Compensation Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/), which is in the following terms: 
Z(1) If the injury for which compensation is payable under this Act was caused under circumstances creating a liability in some person other than the worker's employer to pay damages in respect of the injury, the following provisions have effect: .....

If the worker has recovered compensation under this Act, the person by whom the compensation was paid is entitled to be indemnified by the person so liable to pay those damages (being an indemnity tot he amount of those damages).

On 10th October 1997, the plaintiff obtained judgment against Mr. Green in those proceedings in the sum of $62,007.00. That judgment has not been satisfied.

In these proceedings, the plaintiff claims that FAI is liable to it on the basis of the indemnity between Mr. Green and FAI provided pursuant to s.3(1) of the Queensland [Motor Vehicles
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/mva172/), which is in the following terms:- (a) Subject to this Act, the owner of any motor vehicle shall at all times during the registration, or as the case may be, any renewal of the registration of such motor vehicle indemnify and keep indemnified the owner and every authorised agent of the owner by a contract of insurance with the State Government Insurance Office (Queensland) or with some licensed insurer against all sums for which the owner or his estate or any such authorised agent of his estate shall become legally liable by way of damages in respect of such motor vehicle for accidental bodily injury (fatal or non-fatal) to any person (including, in respect of such injury caused by any such person, the owner himself) in any State or Territory or the Commonwealth of Australia where such injury is caused by, through, or in connection with such motor vehicle.

Liability by way of damages referred to in the first paragraph of this sub-section includes the liability (either joint or several) of an insured person - to pay or to contribute to the payment of such damages: to make contribution to any other tortfeasor under the provisions of the Law Reform (Tortfeasors Contribution, Contributory Negligence, and Division of Chattels) Act 1952; to pay damages for breach of his contract of employment evidenced by his causing such an injury.

Liability by way of damages referred to in the first paragraph of this sub-section does not include the liability of an employer incurred on or after 22nd September 1988 to pay damages on account of accident bodily injury (fatal or non-fatal) caused by, through or in connection with a motor vehicle to his employee (being a worker within the meaning of the Workers Compensation Act 1916-1988) in circumstances such as will give rise to an entitlement to the payment of compensation under the Act.

It is common ground that FAI's insurance of Mr. Green is in accordance with the terms of that section, and that if FAI is liable to indemnify Mr. Green, the plaintiff is entitled to recover from FAI the sum of $62,007.00 plus interest. The only issue is whether or not the $62,007.00 is a sum for which
Mr. Green has "become legally liable by way of damages ... for accidental bodily injury ... to any person" within s.3(1).

There are three previous cases which deal with this kind of question arising under s.3(1).

First, there is Nominal Defendant v. Butler [(1976) 1 NSWLR 546.] In that case, three persons who were injured in a motor vehicle accident in New South
Wales, caused by the negligent driving of a Queensland car, recovered judgment for damages from the Nominal Defendant under s.29(1) of the New South Wales
Motor Vehicle (Third Party Insurance) Act 1942. Section 32(1) of that Act provided that any amount properly paid by the Nominal Defendant in satisfaction of such judgment could be "recoverable... as a debt from ... the owner of the motor vehicle". Yeldham, J. in the Supreme Court of New South
Wales held that the amount of the judgments was an amount for which the owner of the motor vehicle had become legally liable by way of damages for accidental bodily injury, within s.3(1) of the Queensland Act, because those words were not limited to direct liability to the injured person, and because the substance of the owner's liability to the Nominal Defendant was a liability in damages.

Secondly, there is the case Ex Parte Tompkins, Shaw & Evans [(1984) 1
Qd.R. 642.] In that case, a person injured in a motor vehicle accident in
Victoria recovered workers' compensation for those injuries from his employer.
The motor vehicle accident was caused by the negligence of the driver of the
Queensland motor vehicle. Section 62 of the Victorian [Workers' Compensation
Act 1958](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/wca1958255/) provided that, where injury for which compensation was payable was caused in circumstances creating a legal liability in some person other than the employer to pay damages in respect thereof, the employer should be entitled to be indemnified by such person. The employer obtained judgment against the driver, and sought to recover the judgment amount against the driver's
Queensland insurer.

MacPherson, J. in the Supreme Court of Queensland held that workers' compensation was not damages, so that the driver's liability was not a liability "by way of damages" within the Queensland Act. He distinguished the earlier decision on the basis that the driver's liability in that case was by way of damages, albeit procedurally recoverable by the Nominal Defendant as a debt.

Thirdly, there is Territory Insurance Office v. Baynes <case>; [(1988) 27 MVR 456.] In that case, a person was injured in a motor vehicle accident in the Northern Territory caused by the negligent driving of a
Queensland vehicle. The plaintiff paid certain amounts to the injured person under the Northern Territory's statutory no-fault compensation scheme. The relevant Northern Territory Act provided to the effect that the plaintiff could recover such amounts as a debt from a driver who was, or but for certain exclusory provisions of the Northern Territory Act would be, liable to pay damages in respect of such an injury. Mildren, J. in the Supreme Court of the
Northern Territory held that the driver of the Queensland vehicle was legally liable by way of damages for personal injury, and that the amounts recoverable from the driver by the plaintiff were amounts for which the driver was so liable. Mildren, J. expressed the view that, in his respectful opinion, the reasoning of MacPherson, J. was unsound because it focused on the character of the remedy being sought rather than the underlying liability of the insured person.

I have been provided with comprehensive written submissions by both parties, which I will leave with the papers.

In his oral submissions, Mr. King SC for the plaintiff referred me to one of the case relied on by MacPherson, J., namely Hall Brothers v. Steamship Co.
v. Young [(1939) 1 KB 748], particularly at pp.756, 757-9. He referred particularly to the following passage at p.756: ...sum payable by way of damages are sums which fall to be paid by reason of some breach of duty or obligation, whether that duty or obligation is imposed by contract, by the general law, or legislation.

Mr. King submitted that what was being claimed by the plaintiff in this case was a sum which fell to be paid by reason of Mr. Green's breach of his duty of care, and accordingly was damages in the ordinary sense of the word. Mr. King also submitted that the workers' compensation payments can be considered as having a dual character, that is as both being compensation and an advance against damages. Finally in oral submissions, he pointed out that one other case relied on by MacPherson, J., namely Commercial Union Insurance of
Australia v. The Insurance Commissioner <case>; [(1980) VR 443], had been subsequently overruled by the Full Court in
Victoria in the case of National Mutual Fire Insurance Co. v. Insurance
Commissioner [(1985) VR 111.] 
Mr. Marshall for the defendant in his written submissions submitted that payments under the [Workers' Compensation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/wca1958255/) were not damages, but statutory compensation payments. He submitted that proceedings for an indemnity, such as that brought by the plaintiff in this case against
Mr. Green and against FAI, were not actions for damages; and he relied on
Unsworth v. Commissioner for Railways <case>; [(1958) 101 CLR 73] and Westpac Banking Corporation v. Tomassian [(1993) 32
NSWLR 207], especially at 215.

He submitted that if Ms. Watt had sued and recovered from Mr. Green, he would have been liable to her by way of damages, but that did not happen. He submitted that Mildren, J.'s decision was distinguishable, because the accident victim in that case claimed damages and the plaintiff was given the right to recover what it paid as a debt; so that the decision was similar to that of Yeldham, J., and distinguishable in the way that MacPherson, J.
distinguished Yeldham, J.'s decision.

In oral submissions, Mr. Marshall submitted that the words "by way of damages" in [s.3(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/wca1958255/s3.html) were plainly intended to limit the nature of the liability for which the insurer could be liable. The employer's liability in this case was a statutory liability for workers' compensation, not a liability for damages; and the employer's claim was a claim for indemnity which was not an action for damages.

Of the three decisions to which I have referred, the decision of MacPherson,
J. in Tompkins appears to be the most directly applicable; and if it is not been affected by the later decision of Mildren, J. in Baynes, I would consider it appropriate to follow Tompkins unless I was fully satisfied that it was wrong. However, in my opinion, the authority of Tompkins has been affected by the later decision in Baynes. I do not think Baynes can be distinguished in the same way as Yeldham, J.'s decision in Butler. As I read
Mildren, J.'s decision, in Baynes, the accident victim received payments under the Northern Territory no-fault compensation scheme, so that the character of the payments sought to be recovered was not sums as paid to the victim as damages, but rather sums paid on the basis of a no-fault statutory compensation scheme; and therefore the case appears to be analogous to the workers' compensation situation rather than to a common law liability for damages such as was considered by Yeldham, J. in Butler. Accordingly, I think I should decide this case simply on my own view as to the merits of the matter, rather than by reference to previous authority.

It is plain that the basis of the plaintiff's s.151Z claim against Mr. Green was that the circumstances created a liability in Mr. Green to pay damages in respect of Ms. Watt's injury; and that the quantum of the s.151Z claim was limited to the amount of the damages to which Mr. Green's liability extended.
It becomes necessary then to consider, in terms of s.3(1) of the Queensland
Act, what, if any, are the sums for which Mr. Green has become legally liable by way of damages for bodily injury. It is plain that "damages for bodily injury" in that expression should be given a fairly broad interpretation, reading "for" broadly as the equivalent to "in respect of": see SGIO (Qld) v.
Crittenden <case>; [(1966) 117 CLR 412.] It is plain also from the same case that the liability in question need not be to the person who actually suffers the bodily injury. In my opinion, Mr. Green's liability to the plaintiff does fall within those words on each of two alternative bases.

Firstly, in my opinion, it is a liability by way of damages because the sum in question is itself damages which fall to be paid by Mr. Green to the plaintiff by reason of a breach of duty by Mr. Green, bringing the amount within the meaning of "damages" as discussed in the passage quoted above from the Hall
Brothers case. It does not matter, it seems to me, that the breach of duty was to Ms. Watt, rather than to the plaintiff, or that the sum is quantified by reference to the plaintiff's workers' compensation payments, as well as by reference to the extent of Mr. Green's liability for damages to Ms. Watt.
Furthermore, it seems to me that the liability is a liability by way of damages for bodily injury, because the liability for damages to the plaintiff arises in respect of the bodily injury to Ms. Watt, and is limited to damages appropriate for that bodily injury.

The second alternative basis on which I think Mr. Green's liability to the plaintiff falls with the words is as follows. In my opinion, Mr. Green's liability to the plaintiff is liability "by way of damages for bodily injury" because it is based on and limited in quantum to the damages for bodily injury for which Mr. Green was liable to Ms. Watt.

That approach gives a broad meaning to the words "by way of"; but in my opinion, that general approach is justified by cases such as Crittenden.

With respect, in my opinion, MacPherson, J. was in error because he focused on the nature of the employer's liability to its employee and the nature of the employer's claim to be indemnified, whereas the focus should be on the nature of the insured's liability.

For the same reason, it seems to me that the case of Westpac Banking
Corporation v. Tomassian [(1933) 32 NSWLR 207] is inapplicable. The question there was whether a "claim for damages" in [s.40](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s40.html) of the [Motor Accidents Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/) included a claim in indemnity under s.151Z of the [Workers' Compensation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/wca1958255/). So clearly, in that case it was appropriate to focus on the nature of the claim rather than the nature of the insured's liability. As I have said previously, in this case the real question is the nature of the insured's liability.

For those reasons, in my opinion the plaintiff is entitled to the relief it seeks.

I order that the defendants pay to the plaintiff the sum of $62,007.00.

I order that the defendants pay the plaintiff's costs of the proceedings.

I give liberty to the plaintiff to apply for an order in respect of interest.
 * * * 
