

R J Bishop versus The Electricity Commission of NSW [1996] NSWSC 135 (16 May )

RONALD JEFFREY BISHOP V THE ELECTRICITY COMMISSION OF NSW /95; DC 20/90 
Thursday 16 May 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
HANDLEY JA, SHELLER JA, POWELL JA 
DAMAGES - negligence - causation - no question of principle.

The appellant worked for the Electricity Commission from 1 August 1967 until
December 1988 in a generally noisy environment without hearing protection. The trial judge found that he did not suffer appreciable deafness, but did suffer from significant tinnitus. However he held that the appellant had failed to establish a causal connection between the proved breach of duty and tinnitus.
Tinnitus is present in 50% of industrial deafness cases, but is also present in cases where there is no industrial or similar deafness. The appellant contended that the Court should find that there was such a causal connection.

HELD, dismissing the appeal: (1) Where the association in time and place is sufficiently close and dramatic a tribunal of fact may draw the inference of causation without positive scientific support: Adelaide Stevedoring Co Ltd versus Forst <case>; [(1940) 64 CLR 538]; (2) In the present case however no such association has been established.
 
JUDGMENT 
HANDLEY JA: This is an appeal by a plaintiff who failed in an action against his former employer, the Electricity Commission, to recover damages for hearing difficulties alleged to have been caused as a result of his exposure to industrial noise.

The trial judge found that the plaintiff genuinely suffered from significant tinnitus but was not persuaded that he suffered from any appreciable deafness.
He found that the Electricity Commission had employed the plaintiff continuously from 1 August 1967 until December 1988 in a generally noisy environment and had failed to take reasonable care to protect his hearing from noise-induced damage. He nevertheless found that the plaintiff had not discharged the onus of proving the necessary causal connection between the proved breach of duty on the part of the employer, and the tinnitus.

The plaintiff had been exposed to other sources of noise in his previous employment as a fitter apprentice at BHP between 1952 and 1957, as a marine engineer between 1957 and 1962, and at the Bourke Power Station, which was not then controlled by the Electricity Commission, for six months in 1963. The plaintiff was also exposed to noise in connection with his hobbies of pistol shooting and rifle shooting. However, the plaintiff's difficulties in this appeal do not relate to the difficulty of proving that one particular source of noise was the cause of his tinnitus rather than another.

The trial judge said that it was conceded: "That there is no readily available statement as to the likely causes of tinnitus, a condition undoubtedly suffered by the plaintiff." 
This conclusion has not been challenged by Mr Robison for the appellant and is amply supported by evidence given at the trial, in particular that given by Mr
Keck at pp 113 and 114 and by Mr Challis at p 172. This led his Honour to his final conclusion on causation: "I have been invited by counsel for the plaintiff, in relationship to the tinnitus, that I should, having come to the conclusion that I have already come that there is no evidence of damage occasioned by excessive levels other than symptoms of the plaintiff not demonstrable clinically, that I should come to the conclusion, as being the only rational inference to be drawn, that the tinnitus was caused by the unprotected, or merely exposure to, excessive noise on the part of the defendant towards the plaintiff. I cannot come to that conclusion. I cannot draw that inference because to do so would be, without any primary scientific evidence, to suggest that the onset of tinnitus was thus caused, other than to have the observation, which is not in itself scientific evidence, of Mr Challis that in his experience in 50 per cent of industrial deafness cases there is present tinnitus." 
Mr Robison, who said everything that could possibly be said on behalf of the appellant, faced this difficulty boldly and submitted that the relationship between the plaintiff's exposure to noise during his work with the Electricity
Commission, the proved existence of tinnitus, and the fact that a large number of persons who suffer from observable industrial deafness also have tinnitus, enabled a court to conclude judicially, on the civil onus, that the plaintiff's tinnitus was caused by his exposure to noise with the Electricity
Commission.

In my judgment this submission should not be accepted. The evidence earlier referred to indicates that tinnitus has other causes, apart from exposure to industrial noise. One common cause is the exposure to noise made by firearms, but some persons suffer from tinnitus without having any history of exposure to industrial noise, or the noise made by firearms. In these circumstances, the fact that a significant proportion of persons suffering from industrial deafness also suffer from tinnitus does not permit the Court to draw the conclusion that in this, or any case, the inference is available that proved tinnitus must have been, more probably than not, caused by exposure to industrial noise.

There is, of course, a well-established logical fallacy in that proposition known as the undistributed middle and there is also the further logical fallacy that because something follows an earlier event in time that earlier event must be the cause of what follows. In some cases, no doubt, as illustrated by Adelaide Stevedoring Company Limited versus Forst <case>; [(1940) 64 CLR 538], the association in time and place is sufficiently close and dramatic to enable a tribunal of fact to draw the inference of causation without positive scientific support. Similar views were expressed in
Tubemakers of Australia Limited versus Fernandez [(1976) 50 ALJR 720.] 
However, in the present case, the close association in time between the alleged cause and the alleged consequence, which was established in those cases, is not present. Moreover, there was expert evidence which indicated that there can be a long delay between exposure to noise and the onset of tinnitus caused by that noise. In these circumstances, in my opinion, the plaintiff failed to establish its case at the trial and there is no basis upon which this Court can properly intervene and substitute a conclusion to the opposite effect of that reached by the trial judge on this question. In my opinion, therefore, the appeal should be dismissed with costs.

SHELLER JA: I agree.

POWELL JA: I also agree.

HANDLEY JA: The orders of the Court will be as I have proposed.
 * * * 
