

Director of Public Prosecutions In The Matter of The Vessel Known As
Gemini I The Application of Leigh Diane Johnson No. 10292/95 [1995] NSWSC 66 (9 October 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COMMON LAW DIVISION
BARR AJ
HRNG
SYDNEY, 13 September 1995 #DATE 13:9:1995 #ADD 9:10:1995
ORDER
Motion dismissed
JUDGE1
BARR AJ On 2 February 1995 the Court ordered pursuant to the provisions of the [Proceeds of Crime Act, 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/poca1987160/) (Commonwealth) that a certain vessel, the "Gemini I" ("the vessel"), was not to be disposed of or otherwise dealt with by any person until 27 July 1995 and that the Official Trustee take Custody and control of it. At the same time the Court ordered that Leigh Johnson, solicitor, ("the applicant") be examined on oath about the affairs and property of Osmund Navigation Company Limited ("Osmund").
On 20 July 1995 the
Court ordered that the order enjoining disposal of or dealing with the vessel be extended until further order of the Court. The applicant now applies for orders Linder [section 48](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/poca1987160/s48.html) of the Act. The applicant formerly acted for Mr
Raymond Marshall Woodhead. On 4 August 1994 five tonnes of cannabis resin were imported into Australia at Hervey Bay, Queensland. Several people were arrested and charged under s.233B, Customs Act with having been in some way connected with the importation. One of them was Mr Woodhead, the owner, through his company Platypus Boat Company Limited, of the vessel. Mr Woodhead was accused of having brought cannabis resin in that vessel from Pakistan to a point in international waters east of Hervey Bay where the resin was transhipped to another vessel for importation into Australia. Mr Woodhead was taken to Parramatta Gaol, got in touch with the applicant's office and engaged the applicant to act for him. He had a number of conversations at the gaol, some with the applicant and some with Mr Hector Maarraoui, a legal clerk employed by the applicant. The substance and effect of the conversations have been disputed by the applicant and Mr Woodhead. It is sufficient for the moment to say that Mr Woodhead had no money to pay the applicant for the work he was asking her to undertake on his behalf Her fees were expected to be substantial.
Mr Woodhead was told that the applicant charged at the rate of $500 per hour. A discussion arose about how Mr Woodhead might assign his interest in the vessel to the applicant in order to secure for her the payment of her fees in due course. Four documents were brought into existence. The first, in handwriting, is in the following terms: - "DEED OF ASSIGNMENT 
I Raymond Marshall
Woodhead on the 3rd of September 1994 at
Parramatta in Sydney Australia being the sole owner of Gemini I, fishing vessel, registered in Limassol, Cyprus through my sole ownership of Platypus Boat Company, registered in Limassol,
Cyprus and Leopard
Shipping Ltd registered Valletta, Malta do hereby assign irrevocably the abovementioned fishing vessel,
Gemini I to my lawyers,
Leigh Johnson Lawyers of 155A Palmer
Street East Sydney NSW 2010.

SIGNED: R. Woodhead 
DATED: 3.09.84 (sic) 
WITNESSED:
H. Maarraoui"
The second is a typed or printed document in a form virtually identical to the first. It appears on the letterhead of the applicant and is in the following terms: - "DEED OF ASSIGNMENT 
I, Raymond Marshall Woodhead on 3rd September 1994 at Parramatta
Sydney Australia, being the sole owner of Gemini I, fishing vessel, registered in Limassol, Cyprus through my sole ownership of Platypus Boat Company, registered in Limassol, Cyprus and
Leopard Shipping Ltd registered Valletta,
Malta do hereby assign irrevocably the abovementioned fishing vessel, Gemini I to my lawyers, Leigh Johnson Lawyers of 155A
Palmer Street East Sydney
NSW 2010.

SIGNED: R. Woodhead 
DATED: 03.09.94 
WITNESSED: L. Johnson".
The next document, dated 13 September 1994, is a printed bill of sale. It first describes the vessel in detail and then continues as follows: - "We, Platypus Boat Company Limited (hereinafter called ("the
Transferors") having our Registered office at 284 Archbishop
Makarios III Avenue Limassol Cyprus, in consideration of the sum of AUS$150,000 paid to us by LEIGH JOHNSON LAWYERS of 155A
Palmer Street, East Sydney, 2010 (hereinafter called "the
Transferee") the receipt whereof is hereby acknowledged, transfer one hundred percent of the shares in the Ship above particularly described, and in her boats and appurtenances, to the said
Transferee.

R.W. Woodhead th September 1994 
This is the first of 2 pages dated 13 September 1994 signed before me
D. Oliveri (second page) "Further, we, the said Transferors for ourselves and our successors covenant with the said
Transferee and its assigns, that we have power to transfer in manner aforesaid the premises hereinbefore expressed to be transferred, and that the same are free from encumbrances.

Executed on the 13th day of September 1994.

By Raymond Woodhead on behalf of the Transferorsin the presence of 
Signature of witness D. Oliveri   Signature R. Woodhead
Dominic Oliveri
Public Notary 
This is the second of 2 pages signed before me on 13th September .
D. Oliveri".
The fourth document is a bill of sale in a form like the third, but instead of Leigh Johnson Lawyers, the transferee is described as Osmund
Navigation Company Limited. The document is dated 27 September 1994 and the signature of Mr Woodhead is witnessed on both pages by
Dominic Lawrence
Oliveri.
I think that Mr Maarraoui was the first person to speak to Mr Woodhead about his engagement of the applicant to act for him to defend the criminal proceedings he was facing. Notwithstanding a statement by the applicant in her affidavit of 14 August 1995 that she first met Mr Woodhead at Parramatta Gaol on 3 September 1994, I think that it was Mr Maarraoui, not the applicant, who saw Mr Woodhead in that place on that day. Mr Maarraoui had a good deal to do with Mr Woodhead, both as to his instructions on the defence of the criminal proceedings and as to the circumstances in and the intent with which the several documents concerning the vessel were brought into existence. I think that although the applicant herself dealt personally with Mr Woodhead on occasions and personally carried out a good deal of the work that was done by her office in the course of these proceedings, Mr Maarraoui played a
significant part in visiting the gaol and communicating with Mr Woodhead in order to receive his instructions both as to the defence of the criminal proceedings and otherwise in connexion with the vessel. Mr Maarraoui died in
July 1995.
Mr Woodhead had taken the vessel to a port in Milne Bay, Papua New Guinea in August 1994. It was lying there disabled with engine trouble. He had been arrested during a search of the vessel on 25 August 1994. These facts became known to the applicant on or soon after 3 September , a Friday. On Monday, September she telephoned a solicitor in the office of the Director of Public
Prosecutions, Ms Carol
Ann Webster, and said that she was acting for Mr
Woodhead. The following conversation then took place. 
Applicant: "What's happening with the boat?"
Webster: "There is no Proceeds of Crime action with respect to it".
Applicant: "What are your intentions?"
Webster: "The situation is obviously under review, I don't think I'll take that any further".
Applicant: "So as long as I have an authority from my client I can go and take it".
Webster: "From Papua New Guinea?"
Applicant: "Yes".

Webster: "Perhaps you should check with the police, I don't know if it is needed in evidence".
Applicant: "If there is no order on it that's it. It's hard to tender a boat. They'll have taken photographs of it. Do you want to take my number and keep me informed?"
Webster: "Okay".
Applicant: "360-6333. Thank you".
On the same day the applicant spoke to Sarah
Megan McNaughton, another solicitor in the office of the Director of Public Prosecutions, and asked about the matter. The following conversation took place: - 
McNaughton: "The Woodhead matter is linked to the large matter reported in the news, and there is a large brief. The matter is next in court on 26 September 1994 prior to which time we will be serving the brief".

Applicant: "What evidence is there against my client?"
McNaughton: "Mr Woodhead is alleged to be on 'the mother ship' and 'the mother ship' had links with the Australians involved in the importation".
As Ms Webster had said, the question of action under the [Proceeds of Crime
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/poca1987160/) was under review and a number of important events were taking place in
Papua New Guinea. Before his arrest on 25 August 1994 Mr Woodhead had engaged a company called Coecon Proprietary Limited ("Coecon") to repair the engine of the vessel. After the arrest of him and the members of his crew the vessel was placed in the custody of an agent for the Papua New Guinea Customs Department and the Australian
Federal Police. However, instructions continued to be given to Coecon effectively confirmng Mr Woodhead's original instructions to repair the engine. Those instructions were given by Superintendent W. Taylor of the
Police Liaison Office at the Australian High
Commission, Port Moresby.
Correspondence went on about the intended repair during October and November.
On 22 November 1994 the Australian
High Commission's cheque in the sum of
K21,420 was deposited into a bank in the place where the vessel was then being kept and I infer that it was intended for the payment of Coecon's account. On December 1994 Coecon wrote a letter to a firm of solicitors,
Warner Shand, of Boroko, who were acting on behalf of Osmund and the applicant. The letter made clear that the writer of the letter had previously spoken to Mr Frizzel or Mr Merrick of Warner Shand about the vessel and what was happening to it.
On 8 December 1994
Warner Shand filed a summons in the National Court of
Justice at Waigani in which Osmund sought against the Papua New Guinea
Commissioner of Customs and the Independent State of Papua New Guinea orders declaring Osmund to be the owner of the vessel and restraining Papua
New
Guinea from removing the vessel from Papua New Guinea territorial waters. The summons was dismissed by Sheehan J on December
On 22 December 1994 a summons was prepared in which Osmund sought orders against the Federal Government of Australia and Coecon.
On 20
January 1995 orders were made in the National Court of Justice at Waigani restraining the first defendant from interfering with or disposing of the vessel or removing it from Papua New Guinea waters until 27 January 1995 and against the second defendant that it refrain from parting with possession or control of the vessel, except to the plaintiff, without the authority of the plaintiff until 27 January 1995. A copy of the order was sent by facsimile transmission on the same day, a Friday, to Superintendent Taylor at the
Australian High Commission, Port Moresby, but by the time it arrived he had left the office and it did not come to his attention until the following
Monday morning. In the meantime the vessel was removed pursuant to a request between the Australian and Papua
New Guinea governments. At 4 o'clock a.m. on
Saturday 21 January 1995 the vessel cleared New Guinea waters on its way to
Australia.
It entered Australian waters at 6.30 a.m. on 23 January 1995. On 30
January 1995 a solicitor on behalf of the plaintiff approached a Judge of this
Court in chambers. Time for the service of documents was abridged and the matter came on for hearing on 2 February
On that day there was present counsel representing the interests of the applicant and the orders I have already summarised were made. Counsel for the applicant consented to the making of the orders.
By a notice of motion filed on 11 August 1995 the applicant sought and obtained orders Joining her and Osmund as parties and granting leave to her to make her application. She also sought an expedited hearing, and that was granted. She then sought ail order setting aside the substantial orders made on 2 February and extended on 20 July 1995, together with the following orders: - "4. The Official Trustee forthwith deliver custody and control of the property specified in the Schedule to Orders made 2
February 1995 (being the vessel known as Gemini I) to Leigh
Diane Johnson.
Further and in the alternative under [section 48(3)(c)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/poca1987160/s48.html) and [Proceeds of Crime Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/poca1987160/) (a declaration that) the said property does not include that part of the property equivalent to the sum of $59,002.74, such part of the property being the property of Leigh Diane Johnson.
Upon sale or other disposal of the property specified in the said schedule by the Official Trustee shall forewith (sic) pay to Leigh Diane Johnson the sum of $59,002.74, plus interest.
Further and in the alternative under [Section 48(1)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/poca1987160/s48.html) [Proceeds of Crime Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/poca1987160/), Order 2 made 2 February 1995 be varied as follows:
Under Section 43(2)(b) [Proceeds of Crime Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/poca1987160/) the
Official Trustee take custody and control of the property specified in the schedule and upon sale or other disposal of the property the Official Trustee pay to Leigh Diane Johnson such sum as the Court shall determine, being the reasonable legal expenses of Raymond Marshall Woodhead in defending all or any criminal charges laid by the Plaintiff arising out of the events as deposed by Nicholas Alan McTaggart in his
Affidavit sworn 23 January 1995 filed in the within proceedings".
During submissions counsel for the applicant made clear that the order setting aside the orders of 2 February 1995 and orders , 5 and 6 above were no longer sought. Substantially what was sought was an order like order no. 7 in the notice of motion but providing also for the applicant's reasonable costs and expenses of having the vessel registered in the name of Osmund and the reasonable costs and expenses of the applicant's attempts to obtain orders relating to the vessel, to obtain or retain possession of it and otherwise in connexion with it. The applicant swore affidavits, including one on 14 August , annexing a copy of an invoice addressed from her office to Mr Woodhead setting out in chronological order a list of services alleged to have been rendered and the costs thereof.
The total amount claimed by that invoice, making allowance for an amount previously paid, was $59,002.74. Three kinds of charges were set out in the invoice, namely those concerned with the defence of Mr Woodhead's criminal proceedings, those with the transfer of ownership of the vessel to Osmund and those concerning possession of the vessel. The plaintiff opposed the orders sought, though by consent no detailed examination was made of the accuracy or reasonableness of any item in the account. It was agreed that if the applicant should be held entitled to an order relating to any of the three kinds of charges she claimed to have been entitled to make, the proper amount to which she was entitled should be ascertained by agreement or assessment in a manner convenient to the parties.
The orders were sought under [s.48(3)(c)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/poca1987160/s48.html) and (g) of the [Proceeds of Crime
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/poca1987160/). The subsection is in the following terms: - "[s.48](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/poca1987160/s48.html) (3) 
Where: a person (in this subsection called the 'defendant') has been convicted of, or has been charged or is about to be charged with, an offence; a court, in reliance on the conviction, charging or proposed charging makes a restraining order against property; and a person having an interest in the property applies to the court for a variation of the order to exclude the person's interest from the order; the Court shall grant the application if: ...
in any case - the court is satisfied that it is in the public interest to do so having regard to all the circumstances, including: any financial hardship or other consequence of the interest remaining subject to the order; the seriousness of the offence; and the likelihood that the interest will be: subject to a forfeiture order; subject to [section 30](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/poca1987160/s30.html); or required to satisfy a pecuniary penalty order".
Counsel for the applicant put forward the claim upon the basis that all the work done and disbursements incurred had been done and incurred reasonably and on the instructions of Mr Woodhead. Counsel opened his submissions with a reminder that it is always open to the Court when making a restraining order to fashion it to make provision for the payment of the reasonable expenses of the person whose property it Is in defending a relevant criminal charge (vide [s.43(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/poca1987160/s43.html) of the Act). Some of the items in respect of which the applicant sought provision were of that very kind and, it was submitted, Mr
Woodhead had no objection to the Court's making an order to provide for the payment of those expenses. So, it was said, the application should at least in that respect be regarded in the same light as an application by a defendant whose property was the subject of a restraining order and who needed to defend himself Then counsel for the applicant submitted that the other two kinds of expenses the subject of the application ought to be dealt with in the same way because they were incurred on the instructions of Mr Woodhead.
During the course of the proceedings Mr Woodhead himself appeared by counsel and sought leave to file a notice of motion seeking an order under [s.
(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/poca1987160/s48.html) of the [Proceeds of Crime Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/poca1987160/) varying the restraining order made on 2
February 1995 to provide for payment of his reasonable legal expenses out of the proceeds of sale of the vessel. He was granted that leave and in support of his application filed an affidavit, sworn 29 August 1995. Although
Mr
Woodhead later withdrew his motion and consented to its being dismissed he, like the applicant, gave oral evidence and was cross-examined.
So the issues of fact about the extent of Mr Woodhead's instructions to the applicant came to be ventilated. There was agreement between the applicant and Mr Woodhead that he had instructed her to represent him in the defence of the criminal proceedings he was facing. They also agreed that Mr Woodhead had terminated the applicant's services but they disagreed about when. They disagreed about whether Mr Woodhead had agreed that the applicant should have the right to charge to him the costs of having the vessel transferred into her name or into the name of any company convenient to her or the expenses she incurred in attempting to obtain possession of the vessel or restrain others from obtaining possession of it and taking it away from Papua New Guinea. It seems to me that some resolution of these disagreements is necessary in order to ascertain in accordance with subs 48(3)(g) whether it would be in the public interest for the Court to make the orders sought.
As I have said, Mr Maarraoui died in July 1995. He was the most senior employee in the applicant's legal practice and was a close personal friend of the applicant. As the applicant informed the Court in the affidavit she swore in support of her application for an expedited hearing, she was badly affected by Mr Maarraoui's illness and death. He became gravely ill in February 1995 and was diagnosed in that month to be suffering from terminal, inoperative cancer.
The applicant became engaged almost full time in the daily supervision and care of Mr Maarraoui. In March she took him overseas for a few weeks in search of a cure. She had little time to devote to her practice and her own personal concerns. Her experience was harrowing and there is no need to repeat the tragic details. It was only after Mr Maarraoui's death on 2 July 1995 that the applicant was able to begin to pay proper attention to this matter. It is not surprising, then, that she had difficulty in remembering the detail of any of the conversations that she had had with Mr Woodhead. In her affidavit of 14
August 1995 she swore that she first met Mr Woodhead at Parramatta Gaol on 3
September 1994 when he instructed her to act on his behalf in relation to the criminal proceedings.
In paragraph 3 of that affidavit she set forth, apparently verbatim, a conversation which she said she had had with Mr
Woodhead there and then. I accept the evidence of the applicant that in stating the 3rd of September as being the date of that conversation, she was relying upon documents and had no independent recollection of that date. There exists no diary note of any visit by the applicant to Mr Woodhead on 3rd
September. In cross-examination the applicant conceded that she must have assumed that to have been the date of the conversation because she had read the two assignment documents which bore that date. Her attention was drawn to a prison record of visits, showing that Mr Maarraoui visited Mr Woodhead on rd September but that the applicant did not visit him until 12 September.
The applicant readily conceded that it must have been Mr Maarraoui alone who first saw Mr Woodhead and that that must have been on rd September. Then she must have seen him alone on 12 September.
The applicant conceded that the version of the telephone conversation between her and Ms Webster which I have set forth earlier in this judgment and which is taken from Ms Webster's affidavit was probably accurate. I think that it was, because Ms Webster took it from file notes which she appended to her affidavit. It seems clear, therefore, that it was Mr Maarraoui who took the handwritten assignment dated the 3rd September 1984. Obviously "1984" was intended to mean "1994" and subject to that error the document was correctly dated. Then the applicant, having made her enquiries of Ms Webster and Ms
McNaughton, had the document reproduced and had Mr Woodhead execute it. She witnessed his signature. I accept the evidence of the applicant that the date, September 1994, was placed there at the requirement of Mr Woodhead but I do not think that by permitting that date to be inserted the applicant regarded herself or Mr Woodhead as bound by anything said, done or written on 3rd
September. I think that the applicant did not make up her mind to enter into any arrangement to use the vessel to secure her fees until after she made her enquiries of the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions on 6 September .
There is a number of reasons why I prefer the evidence of Mr Woodhead to that of the applicant. I received the impression as Mr Woodhead gave his evidence that he had a clear recollection of the conversations which were significant in this application. He seemed forthright and to be prepared to make admissions against his own interest when the occasion required it. His evidence about the dates of conversations was supported by independent documentary evidence. He has pleaded guilty to the charge brought against him and is waiting to be sentenced.
He is in custody and expects, I suppose, to be sentenced to a period of imprisoment. He conceded having given instructions to the applicant to defend him in the first place. He has taken no steps, though he might have done, to prevent the plaintiff's continuing to have the benefit of the restraining order. He realises that the effect of [s. 30](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/poca1987160/s30.html) of the Act is that on 17 September next the vessel will be forfeited to the Commonwealth of
Australia, and is content for that to happen. He appears to have no reason to lie and no reason to give evidence the effect of which might be to deny to the applicant orders protecting her legitimate interests. It was not put to him that he was for any reason biased against the applicant. I think that he was telling the truth and I accept the accuracy of the effect of the conversations which he was able to relate. Mr Woodhead said that he remembered "perfectly clearly" terminating the applicant's services and that he never received a bill for services rendered by the applicant. The applicant said (T. 20) that
Mr Maarraoui showed Mr Woodhead a copy of a bill in December and discussed it with him. In saying so she was relying upon what Mr Maarraoui must have told her. The file contains no copy of any bill. I think that
Mr Maarraoui must have misled the applicant. Mr Woodhead's evidence is to be preferred. I accept
Mr Woodhead's evidence that after the initial conference, conferences between him and Mr Maarraoui or the applicant were almost entirely about the transfer of the vessel to the applicant. I accept that that was a source of increasing alarm and frustration for him. He said that he terminated the applicant's services by handing a letter to Mr Maarraoui. It was in his handwriting and, given the minimal facilities available to him at the gaol, he did not take a copy to keep. He said initially in his evidence that that occurred on the th, the 26th or the 27th of November 1994. He remembered the date clearly because, he said, he and Mr Maarraoui were discussing a document which bore the date 23rd November 1994 and he was struck by the closeness of the dates.
He identified the recorded visit of Mr Maarraoui to the gaol on 26 November as the occasion on which he terminated the applicant's services. A significant supporting piece of evidence in the same document is the recorded visit to Mr
Woodhead on 24 November 1994 of Mr William O'Brien, the solicitor who now represents him. Mr Woodhead said that after the sacking he had received one further visit from Mr Maarraoui and had asked him on that occasion why he was wider the Impression that he was acting for him. He identified that visit, by reference to the gaol record, as 18 December
The evidence of the applicant herself did not go directly to the conversation which took place on November 1994. Insofar as she could give evidence about it the applicant relied upon what had been told her by Mr Maarraoui. In the circumstances, while
I accept that the applicant is doing her honest best to give a proper account of what happened, I have no difficulty in accepting
Mr Woodhead's version. The applicant's file was present at Court and the plaintiff's representatives inspected such documents in it as were not subject to a claim of legal professional privilege. No letter of the kind described by Mr
Woodhead was in the file.
That might have been a matter of some concern, but it is apparent for other reasons that Mr Maarraoui's manner of recording matters in the file left something to be desired, and I draw no inference contrary to the evidence of Mr Woodhead from the absence of any dismissal letter. I am satisfied that on 26 November 1994 Mr Woodhead terminated his instructions to the applicant to act for him in the criminnal proceedings.
The second kind of work done by the applicant concerned the costs of having the vessel transferred to Osmund and registered in its name. I accept that neither Mr Woodhead nor the applicant had any firm idea on and immediately after September 1994 how much it might cost to effect a transfer. After Mr Maarraoui prepared and had Mr Woodhead sign the handwritten document called "Deed of Assignment" on 3 September 1994 he returned to the applicant's office and told the applicant what he had done. Up to that stage he had acted without the knowledge of the applicant. The assignee of the vessel at that time was "Leigh Johnson
Lawyers". After she had decided to go on with the proposed arrangement the applicant made inquiries and had conversations, either directly or through Mr Maarraoui, with Mr Woodhead. Mr
Woodhead suggested the name of a firm of lawyers in Cyprus who could be relied upon to do the work of the kind the applicant Might need to have carried out.
The next document that was brought into existence was the third one, exhibit
B, a bill of sale in which the transferee of the vessel was, as in the first two assignments, Leigh Johnson
Lawyers. The circumstances of the execution of that document are far from clear. The signature of Mr Woodhead appears on the document, witnessed by Mr Oliveri, a solicitor and public notary. No gaol visit is recorded to Mr Woodhead on 13 September. I think that the prison records must be defective. The applicant first said in cross-examination that she had been present when that document was executed, but later on she said that she could not remember whether she had been present or not. Having received advice from the
Cyprus firm of lawyers the applicant had the fourth document prepared. It was signed on 27 September 1994 by Mr Woodhead in the presence of Mr Oliveri. Again, the prison records do not record a visit by Mr
Oliveri, but it must have taken place. The record shows a visit by Mr
Maarraoui on an otherwise unidentified day between 24 September and 12
November, so he may have been present at the signing of the second of these last two documents. I think that the form of the assignments and the bills of sale was as required by Mr Maarraoui or the applicant. Mr Woodhead would appear to have had no reason to make such requirements. The manner of transfer of the vessel to the applicant's interests was one for her own convenience and concern. I accept that the applicant obtained advice from lawyers nominated by Mr Woodhead about the most convenient manner in which to effect the transfer, but I do not infer from that fact that
Mr Woodhead agreed to be responsible for the costs involved. I accept that when the first of the bills of sale was brought into existence on September 1994 the applicant and Mr Woodhead regarded the two versions of the foregoing "Deed of Assignment" as of no effect.
I also accept that still later the applicant, having received advice from Cyprus that the most convenient way of registering the vessel in the applicant's interest was to have it registered in the name of a Cyprus company, Osmund, purchased by the applicant and Mr Maarraoui and controlled by the applicant, she and Mr
Woodhead entered into the second bill of sale, once again treating all preceding documents as having no effect. Of course, it was open to the applicant to require that the forms of transfer and the details of registration of the vessel in Cyprus be set forth in a manner convenient to her, but there appears to have been no benefit to
Mr Woodhead from the way in which the applicant considered and reconsidered methods and forms of documents. I accept the evidence of Mr Woodhead that the reason why he dismissed the applicant was his increasing concern and frustration that conferences seemed to concentrate almost entirely on the manner in which the applicant should obtain her interest in the vessel, to the exclusion of the merits of the defence of the forthcoming criminal proceedings. The applicant said in crossexamination that the costs she had incurred in transferring the vessel into the name of Leigh Johnson Lawyers and then Osmund were "specifically on Mr Woodhead's instructions".
However, she could not be sure about the dates upon which those instructions had been given. It is apparent that to a significant extent the applicant, whose memory of details and dates is understandably unclear, was relying upon information given to her from time to time by Mr Maarraoui about what he and Mr Woodhead had spoken about and, presumably about what Mr Maarraoui said they had agreed about. Unfortunately, no file note appears to have been kept recording Mr Woodhead's agreement to be responsible for the expenses of transfer. hi the circumstances I accept his denial that any conversation took place between him and Mr Maarraoui or the applicant in which he agreed to be responsible for them. I do not think that he agreed to be responsible for them and I do not think that he was responsible for them.
In the same way the applicant swore in cross-examination that the costs incurred in seeking to gain or maintain control over the vessel whilst it was
Hi New Guinea were incurred specifically on Mr Woodhead's instructions. As I have said, Mr Woodhead terminated the applicant's Instructions on 26 November
The applicant drew a distinction, however, between instructions about the defence of the criminal proceedings and steps to be taken in preservation of her interest in the vessel. She maintained (T. 18) that Mr Woodhead made it "very clear when he withdrew instructions that he was withdrawing instructions only in respect to criminal proceedings because he would not have to pay Mr
O'Brien any fees" and that he instructed her to continue to maintain her efforts to retrieve the vessel. However, she conceded in crossexamination that it may have been that Mr Maarraoui had conveyed to her a conversation that he had had with Mr Woodhead on that subject. I think that that must be so. Only
Mr Maarraoui was visiting
Mr Woodhead in November. The applicant swore an affidavit in which she set out verbatim conversations on the topics important to the application but no such conversation was included. Surprisingly, no file note of the conversation was kept. In the absence of evidence from Mr
Maarraoui, unfortunate though the circumstances are, I accept the evidence of
Mr Woodhead about what was said on November and 18 December. I am satisfied that on 26 November Mr Woodhead was concerned to terminate instructions to the applicant as completely as he could. He could not terminate their arrangements completely, of course, because the bill of sale existed and the vessel, formerly his, was registered in the applicant's company's name. But even so, I do not think that Mr Woodhead authorised the applicant to take any steps in
New Guinea concerning possession of the vessel. It is true that on one view the actions taken by the applicant might have preserved any residual interest
Mr Woodhead might have in the vessel. I accept that it was understood between them that, although the bill of sale was in absolute form, they regarded the applicant as under an obligation to refund to
Mr Woodhead in due course the amount by which the value of the vessel on sale should exceed the reasonable amount of her fees. But the action taken by the applicant was, I think, very much by way of promotion of her own interests. It was action she was entitled to take but it did not need authorisation by Mr Woodhead and I do not think that he authorised it.
The power to make orders under subs 48(3) arises where a person "having an interest in the property" makes the application. The applicant herself is a party and so is Osmund, the person having the relevant interest in the vessel.
Some initial difficulty may be seen to arise because the person having the relevant interest, Osmund, makes no claim to be owed any money which would
Justify an order under the subsection.
On the other hand, the applicant herself may have no relevant interest. "Interest" is broadly defined in [s.4](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/poca1987160/s4.html) as meaning a legal or equitable estate or interest in the property or a right, power or privilege in connexion with the property.
The applicant owns 999 of the 1,000 issued shares in Osmund. The other share is owned by the estate of
Mr Maarraoui. Although the matter is not free from doubt, I am prepared to assume in favour of the applicant that her controlling interest in Osmund gives her a right, power or privilege in connexion with the vessel sufficient to constitute an interest in the relevant sense and enable her to bring this application wider subs 48(3).
The Court must be satisfied that it is in the public interest to grant an application of this kind, having regard to all the circumstances, including those set out in the sub-paragraphs under paragraph (g). In Director of Public
Prosecutions versus Saxon [(1992) 28 NSWLR 263] the New South Wales Court of Appeal considered the exercise by the Court of its discretion to attach conditions to a restraining order against a person's property to make provision for the reasonable expenses of that person in defending a criminal charge. Kirby
P remarked (271) that that case was not one where property the subject of the restraining order was the actual proceeds of a crime and really the property of persons other than the respondent. Although the manner in which the respondent accumulated the property might be a matter for speculation, he should not be deprived of the use of that property for the proper defence of criminal proceedings unless the Act obliged such a course. Relying on that case, counsel for the applicant contended that this was a case like Saxon and that the principle I have restated should apply. I think, contrary to the submission by the Crown, that the underlying facts of this case are analogous to those in Saxons case. There may well be speculation about how Mr Woodhead came by the substantial amounts of money necessary to buy and refit the vessel but although it is tainted, having been used as the means of bringing the cannabis resin conveniently close to Australian waters, it could not properly be said to be the proceeds of crime. It was not on the face of it unlawfully obtained and it belonged only to Mr Woodhead at the relevant times. However, I think that this application is different in principle from that of the respondent in Saxon's case and raises different questions of principle. This is not an application by Mr Woodhead for an order providing for his legal expenses. It is an application by a third party and the Court must in exercising its discretion have regard to the criteria set forth under subs (3)(g). Counsel for the applicant went some way towards recognising this in submitting that it was in the public interest to make the orders sought and, in particular, that subs 48(3)(g)(1) was satisfied because financial hardship would result to the applicant if the order were not made.
There are several reasons why I think that the Court should refuse to exercise its discretion in the applicant's favour. I will deal first with work done and expenses incurred by the applicant which Mr Woodhead did not authorise and was not liable to pay for. This comprises any charge made for the transfer of the vessel to the applicant or her company and the registration of that interest as well as any charge made for work done to retain or obtain possession of the vessel, including attempts to restrain persons through the National Court of Justice of
Papua New Guinea from dealing with the vessel. It also includes word done to defend the criminal proceedings on 26 November 1994.
Because the work was done without authority I do not think that the applicant has any interest which the Court can properly exclude from the restraining order in accordance with subs (3)(c). And even if she had, I do not think that it would be in the public interest to grant the application in the circumstances that the work was done without authority and without Mr Woodhead's agreement to pay for it. I would refuse the application insofar as it rests upon any of the work I have identified.
I turn now to consider the work done and expenses incurred by the applicant with Mr Woodhead's authority, namely anything done in defence of the criminal proceedings up to the date of dismissal. It does not fall to this
Court, except perhaps incidentally, to construe the agreement reached between the applicant and Mr Woodhead. I accept the evidence of the applicant that it was never her intention to do any more by taking the assignment of the vessel than ensure the full payment of the reasonable and proper amount of her fees and expenses. Although she did not so express it, she must, I think, have regarded Mr Woodhead as having an equitable interest in the vessel equal to the amount by which its value exceeded that amount. The agreement left unsaid what should happen if for any reason the applicant proved unable to lay hands on the vessel. Mr Woodhead knew that the vessel had been used to carry out a serious criminal enterprise and the applicant must have suspected it. In paragraph 5 of her affidavit sworn on 14 August 1995 she said: - "5. As my instructions are the subject of privilege, I am not prepared to reveal anything, however, my instructions from Mr
Woodhead were inconsistent with the boat being used for any importation".
When the applicant swore her affidavit she knew from what Ms McNaughton had told her that it was not being alleged by the prosecution that the vessel had been used to import the cannabis resin into Australia, but rather to rendezvous with another vessel in international waters. It was the other vessel which the Crown was saying had been used for the importation. I accept the accuracy of what the applicant swore in that paragraph, but it does nothing to remove the probability that she suspected that the vessel had been used in an unlawful manner short of an actual importation. it is not surprising that within a short time of being informed by Mr Maarraoui of what
Mr Woodhead had told him at the gaol on 3 September 1994 the applicant was telephoning solicitors in the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions asking what the intentions were about seeking a restraining order on the vessel. Yet there is no evidence of what was agreed or arranged between the applicant and Mr Woodhead if such an order should be made. What would have happened if the vessel had sunk or been otherwise destroyed or seriously damaged? A prudent person would have to regard it as being effectively uninsured, having been involved at all material times in a serious criminal enterprise.
What if the vessel were seized by the police and kept to be used in evidence in the forthcoming proceedings? There were many accused involved in several prosecutions. The enterprise, as I have said, was a very serious international conspiracy and proceedings might well have gone on in the Court for years. Ought this agreement to be regarded as one the object of which was frustrated? Are the parties to be taken to have agreed that the debt should be regarded as dissolved or was the applicant merely to have recourse to the ordinary, unsecured, rights of a legal practitioner seeking payment of a just account? I raise these questions not in order to suggest answers to them but to illustrate that this, as the applicant must have known, was a very risky security indeed.
Counsel for the applicant complained of a number of aspects of the conduct of the authorities after the arrest of Mr Woodhead. During the conversation of 6 September 1994 with the applicant Ms Webster had made a note of the applicant's telephone number and had said, or at least implied, that she would inform the applicant if there were any developments about art application wider the [Proceeds of Crime Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/poca1987160/). Yet no notice was given before the plaintiff approached this Court ex parte on 30 January 1995. In my opinion there is no just cause for complaint. The applicant was given notice before the restraining order was actually made on 2 February 1995, sufficient to enable her to have counsel at Court to consent to the making of the orders. It is true that she has sworn in her affidavit that her state of mind was so poor that she was unable properly to consider the instructions she should give counsel, but that is hardly the fault of the plaintiff. Again, any failure earlier than that to let the applicant know what the plaintiff intended to do about the vessel could have no effect upon the decision the applicant took about the security offered. Having had the conversations with Ms Webster and
Ms McNaughton on 6 September, the applicant decided that she would take whatever risk was involved in accepting the assignment of Mr Woodhead's interest in the vessel. To that end she had a fair copy of Mr Maarraoui's handwritten document prepared, went to
Parramatta Gaol and had Mr Woodhead execute it. She regarded herself then as the owner of the vessel. The developments that took place after that, including the preparation of the first of the bills of sale and the substitution of Osmund as transferee, the purchase of Osmund, a Cyprus shelf company and the registration of the vessel in its name, were really only matters of convenience for the applicant. She had crossed the Rubicon on 12 September 1994. The applicant entered into the arrangement with Mr Woodhead recognising the risk that the vessel might later become subject to a restraining order. That risk has materialised. I do not think that in those circumstances it is in the public interest for the Court now to make an order relieving the applicant of the consequences of the restraining order.
There are other matters relevant to an applicant under subs 48(3) that lead to the same conclusion. The
Crown case against Mr Woodhead is very strong. He has pleaded guilty. A number of his co-offenders have sworn affidavits and will if necessary give evidence. The property the subject of the security was central to the operation. The crime itself was a very serious one.
If, like Director of Public Prosecutions versus Saxon, this had been an application by an accused person for provision to be made out of his own property, the Court would have had to have regard to the requirements of subs (3) and (4) of the Act. Subs provides that the Court shall not make a provision of the kind referred to subs (3) unless it is satisfied that the defendant cannot meet the expense or debt concerned out of property that is not subject to a restraining order. State Drug Crime Commission of New South
Wales versus Ujka, Badgery-Parker J, 20 December 1990, unreported at 16-17. Even though this is not an application by Mr
Woodhead himself, I think that the question of his ability to pay the applicant's proper fees and expenses independently of realising money from the sale of the vessel is relevant to the exercise of the Court's discretion. The evidence on this topic was quite unsatisfactory.
acknowledge the difficulty that a third party applicant might have in demonstrating what another person's assets are from time to time or the fact that that person has no or no sufficient assets for a particular purpose but I do not regard it as appropriate on that account to relieve the applicant of the need to prove such a thing. Mr Woodhead was cross-examined by counsel for the applicant.
He might have been asked about his current assets and ability to pay the applicant's fees. In his affidavit sworn on 29 August he had said that at the time he transferred the vessel to the applicant he was "in a foreign country with no money". He said in answer to a question in cross-examination (T. 29) that at the time of the transfer he had no other assets that he could have used to meet the applicant's costs. Yet he was never asked about his assets at the time of this application. He has been held in custody during the whole of the intervening year and has obviously been unable to pursue gainful employment. There is no positive reason to think that Mr
Woodhead is in any better financial position now than he was in September 1994 but the evidence has been left in quite an unsatisfactory state and this does nothing to strengthen the applicant's case.
The applicant submitted that the failure to obtain an order of the kind sought would mean effectively that her account would not be paid, giving rise to financial hardship within the meaning of that term as it is used in subparagraph 48(3)(g)(1) of the Act. As I have said, the account covers three kinds of expenses. The appropriateness of the amounts charged is in dispute.
It seems to be common ground that the applicant or Mr Maarraoui had at least one conference with Mr Woodhead concerning the merits of the criminal charges and his defence. There may have been a number of other conferences which dealt with those topics as well. There appear to have been two court appearances, though no defended hearing was ever had or prepared for. Mr Woodhead decided to plead guilty after he became represented by another solicitor. It is impossible to know what sum of money properly represents the fees and expenses the applicant is entitled to charge Mr Woodhead concerning his defence of the criminal proceedings. I assume that it would be considerably less than the total amount claimed. But even if the amount were known I do not think that it would be possible to make a judgment about financial hardship without knowing much more than the sum of money unable to be collected. A large commercial organisation which was obliged to write off a debt exceeding $1 million would not for that. fact alone properly be said to be suffering financial hardship.
No evidence was adduced of the income or assets of the applicant or of the effect the inability to collect payment of her account, properly assessed if necessary, would have upon her. I do not think that there is any evidence in this application of financial hardship in the relevant sense. It might be argued indirectly that the applicant's success in this application would mean that she would no longer need to look to Mr Woodhead for the payment of her account. (Mr Woodhead has never disputed that he must owe the applicant an amount of money representing the proper value of the work she did for him in defence of the criminal proceedings). So the refusal of the application would leave unrelieved
Mr Woodhead's own financial hardship. In order to know whether Mr Woodhead himself is suffering from financial hardship it is necessary to know the whole of his financial circumstances. He may have no assets and no income. He may possibly have assets. There is no evidence about his position now. In all the circumstances I am not satisfied that the applicant's inability to obtain security for the payment of fees out of the vessel will add significantly to any financial hardship now being suffered by
Mr Woodhead.
For these reasons
I am not satisfied that it would be in the public interest to make the orders sought and I dismiss the motion.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/66.html  
