

Camille Edouard Dezarnaulds and Stephen Wawn versus Law Society of New South
Wales No. 11970 of 1995 [1995] NSWSC 132 (6 November 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COMMON LAW DIVISION
SPENDER AJ
HRNG
SYDNEY, 27 June 1995 #DATE 11:7:1995 #ADD 6:11:1995 
Counsel for the plaintiff:   Mr. R. Conti QC 
Solicitors for plaintiff:   Stewart Cuddy and Mockler 
Counsel for the defendant:   Mr. Donovan QC 
Solicitors for the defendant: Law Society of New South Wales
ORDER
Application granted.
JUDGE1
SPENDER AJ This is an appeal made under [section 48K(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s48k.html) of the [Legal
Profession Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/) ("the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/)") by Camille Edouard Dezarnaulds and Mr Stephen
Wawn against a decision of the Law Society of New South Wales ("the Law
Society"), by its Joint Professional Conduct Committee, refusing an application by Mr Dezarnaulds for approval to become an associate of Mr
Wawn.
Briefly put, Mr Dezarnaulds' name was removed from the Roll of Solicitors of
New South Wales by order of the Legal Professional
Disciplinary Tribunal ("the
Tribunal") made on 17 August 1994; he now seeks to be employed under stipulated conditions by Mr Wawn; the Law Society having refused that application, it is for the court to determine it.
The Law Society, by its Joint Professional
Conduct Committee, refused the application for the following reasons: 
The misgivings concerning Mr Dezarnaulds expressed in the determination of the Tribunal;
It was premature.
 [Section 48K(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s48k.html), (2), (3), (4) and (7) relevantly state: "(1) It is professional misconduct if a ... solicitor has an associate whom the ... solicitor knows to be:
A disqualified person; or
A person who has been convicted of an indictable offence and does not hold a current practising certificate.
Sub-section (1) does not apply to an associate approved by: ...
...
...
In any case - the Supreme Court on an appeal under sub-section (3).
If a council decides to refuse an application by a person for approval under this section, the person may appeal against the decision to the Supreme Court which may: confirm the decision appealed against; or approve of the associate.
An approval under this section may be subject to specified limitations or conditions.
In this section: "associate" of a solicitor ... means: a person (not being a legal practitioner) who is a partner of the solicitor ... in a business that includes the ... solicitor's practice; or a person (not being a legal practitioner) who shares the receipts of the ... solicitor's practice; or a person who is employed or paid in connection with the ... solicitor's practice; "disqualified person" means a person (other than a person who has been convicted of an indictable offence): whose name has, otherwise than at his or her own request, been removed from the roll of legal practitioners, in the Supreme Court;"
Relevantly, the
Law Society is the Council referred to in [section 48K(3).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s48k.html)
I have been informed by counsel that there is no authority on the construction of this section.
Before going to the submissions, it is necessary to refer to parts of the determination of the Tribunal, and the evidence before me, which I have read and re-read with care.
Mr Dezarnaulds began his practice in 1955 when, while studying law at
Sydney University, he became articled to his father's firm. He completed his articles of clerkship with that firm and joined it in 1960 as a solicitor. He became a partner in the firm in 1962 and remained with that firm until 1992.
Mr Dezarnaulds was a member of the Young Lawyers Committee (as it then was) with the Law Society and served as its President. He is fluent in the French language, and had an extensive French clientele. He said in his evidence before the Tribunal that he has a sound knowledge of French law and the French legal system generally; there seems no reason to doubt this. He has also had a distinguished sporting career, which is referred to by the Tribunal in its reasons, but it does not seem to me that this matters.
He has a continuing thyroid problem which was the subject of evidence before the Tribunal, and before me. The burden of the evidence is that the thyroid condition affected his judgment and what might be generally described as his personal stability as well as general health and sleeping patterns. The evidence before me shows, and I accept, that as a result of treatment which has been undertaken by Mr Dezarnaulds, that problem has stabilised and I see no reason why, so long as a proper regime of treatment and monitoring is adhered to, that there should be any relapse.
It was found by the Tribunal against Mr Dezarnaulds that breaches of [section 61](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s61.html) and [62](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s62.html) of the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/) together with misappropriation of $75,000 of clients' funds had taken place over a period of some 4.5 years, between about
February until September 1992 when the misappropriation was discovered.
The Tribunal found a pattern of behaviour by Mr Dezarnaulds which left it with the conclusion that he embarked on a carefully planned and well thought out course of events to conceal his behaviour as much as possible. It found that the "detailed steps that the solicitor took in each transaction shows that he did in fact actively endeavour to conceal the misappropriations and any suggestion to the contrary is completely without foundation and rejected ..."
An issue of causation arose, it being put for Mr Dezarnaulds that his actions were brought about by the thyroid problem which had affected his temperament and judgment. This submission was rejected: "... the Tribunal does not consider that the thyroid problem manipulated his mind to the extent that he did not know that what he was doing was wrong. It seems strange that the solicitor's practice and his personal life was otherwise relatively unaffected by this condition. He was able to engage in sporting activities with distinction and the balance of his practice and personal life seems to be unaffected." The Tribunal feared that the public would be put at risk if the solicitor were to remain on the Roll.
Mr Dezarnaulds in his affidavit in support of his application says, and I accept, that aged 60 he has had great difficulties in gaining employment, that his thyroid condition has stabilised, that the misappropriations have been repaid (with interest, I infer) by him with some help from his father, and that he is deeply ashamed of his conduct. If the application were granted he would work under a regime supervised by Mr Wawn. This is the proposed regime: 
Initially, employment three days a week.
Remuneration on the Clerks' Award, to be reviewed after three months.
Not to be a signatory to any account.
He will take leave when Mr Wawn is on vacation or closes the office.
He will not be permitted a personal business card identifying him with the office.
All mail to or from him will pass through Mr Wawn.
Mr Dezarnaulds in his affidavit referred to the advice and treatment he has been given for his thyroid problem, to the repayment with his father's assistance of an amount of $105,000 to replace monies misappropriated or other losses suffered by clients and thereby to avoid any claims on the Fidelity
Fund or other Funds, and to the absence of any assets or regular income. He has some irregular income from French lessons and tennis coaching, and some from lecturing in real estate subjects at the Crows Nest Institute of TAFE.
He said in his affidavit that he was deeply ashamed for the harm he has caused the profession, his partners, and his father, a former President of the defendant Society. He said that he has felt the full effects of the disgrace due to a person previously held in esteem who has betrayed the trust of those to whom he was obliged to be trustworthy, and those near and dear to him. He wishes to enter employment in the legal field in which he has been exclusively trained and to which he can apply his many years of experience.
This will enable him to help support his 24 year old unmarried daughter, and - I think more importantly - re-establish a capacity for effective and meaningful work.
He gave evidence and was cross-examined before me. I watched him carefully and closely while he gave evidence and I formed a very strong view that he was deeply ashamed of and contrite about his past conduct. He acknowledged that there were circumstances in this State of clerks misappropriating funds in solicitor's offices. This was later relied on by the
Law Society in its counsel's submissions.
It was submitted for him by Mr Conti, QC that the Council's decision was not to be reviewed by reference to traditional principles (of the kind which characteristically attach to a review of an administrative decision) and that the court's decision should be governed by concepts of fairness and reasonableness weighing the public interest, the interest of the profession, and the former solicitor's own interests. It was submitted that it was not immediately apparent why employment as a clerk should ever be premature (that being one of the matters relied on by the Law Society), that account should be taken of the restricted scope of employment, Mr Dezarnaulds' need to earn a living, the absence of any professional contact since around September 1992 (when he ceased practice), the evidence that his medical condition had stabilised, and that age and remorse would mitigate against re-offending.
Discipline should be tempered by mercy. Mr Dezarnaulds' financial circumstances are poor; the interest of the public and the profession would be protected by conditions which the court could formally impose.
Mr Donovan,
QC for the Law Society submitted that prima facie [section 48K](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s48k.html) acted as a bar to Mr Dezarnaulds working as a clerk, that reasons must be put forward to convince the court that he should be entitled to become an associate, that the misappropriation had been serious and the Tribunal had been critical of his frankness, that the thyroid problem was irrelevant as was the absence of any communication with clients since September 1992, and that there were no restrictions which could be imposed on him in Mr Wawn's office which could prevent him from misappropriation. The Tribunal's decision had been given only in August last year. His age and circumstances were personal to his interests and did not overcome the problem.
The medical condition could change with an effect on his temperament and judgment which he might not be aware of. Public interest must outweigh private sympathy.
In reply Mr Conti, QC placed some emphasis on the distinction between a controlled account and a trust account (which as he made clear did not come out of the Tribunal's reasons, but from his own knowledge of events as the counsel representing Mr. Dezarnaulds before the Tribunal), and which in any event I find irrelevant. Mr Dezarnaulds was not seeking to become a solicitor, but simply to get back to regular employment in the only area which age, background and experience fitted him for.
I agree with Mr Conti's submission that what the court should take account of are of the interests put by him: the public interest, the profession's interest in maintaining high standards, the personal interest of the person who seeks to reestablish himself - in this case not as a solicitor - in the profession.
The discretion which is given to the Supreme Court on the hearing of this appeal is a quite general one, but like all discretions it must be exercised judicially. In the exercise of that discretion, there will be general considerations that need to be taken into account, and particularly considerations which relate to the application at hand.
The general considerations (with some stating of the obvious) seem to me to be these: 
The discretion is entirely general. No attempt has been made to circumscribe it by reference to particular matters, or to impose any particular threshold test which must be satisfied.
There are no time limits. Theoretically, the practitioner who was struck-off could apply the next day to become an associate of a legal firm.
Those guilty of indictable offences, or who have been guilty of the most extreme offences against the proper conduct of their profession and have been disqualified for such reasons, are equally able to make an application to become an associate.
There are three levels of associateship. This is important, as it is apparent that the legislature had clearly in mind that a person who might be appropriate for one level of associateship, might not be appropriately permitted to occupy another level of associateship.
There are obvious public interests which are to be served, and which must be taken account of. These interests include:
The protection of the public.
The standing of the legal profession and the standards that are required of it.
Affording those who are disqualified, or have been found guilty of indictable offences, the chance of rehabilitation and getting paid work in the profession.
While the standing of the profession in the public eye is of great importance, and the need to maintain the integrity of the profession is of equal importance, as has been emphasised time and time again by the courts (and recently by the Court of Appeal in Law Society of New South Wales versus Bannister (1993) LPDR 24) and must be taken account of, it is necessary to bear in mind that an associate is not a legal practitioner, and depending on the particular level of associateship, may be in a position which is really no more than that of a clerk to or employee of a legal firm. One does not, as it were, translate the requirements demanded of practising members of the profession, or of those who are applying for admission to the profession, to those who are applying to become associates.
This is of course perfectly plain as the statute is dealing with situations where, a person has been disqualified from legal practice, or may never have been qualified but would otherwise be debarred from acting as an associate because of conviction for an indictable offence.
The factors which should be weighed against Mr Dezarnaulds' application being accepted were referred to by Mr Donovan, QC in his submissions, to which
I have referred, and in the Tribunal's decision, and the Law Society's rejection of Mr. Dezarnaulds' application, to which I have given careful thought.
Supporting Mr Dezarnaulds' application are the following considerations: 
A number of eminent lawyers, including Mr. Justice Ellis of the Family
Court, who supported Mr Dezarnaulds before the Tribunal, have renewed their support with knowledge of the judgment made against him. The importance of this consideration, is that the support is given with knowledge, rather than - as is so often the case - with little or no knowledge of the findings.

Mr Dezarnaulds had a long career in law and in that time came to be held in esteem. I think it right to infer - and there is nothing in the Tribunal's judgment to the contrary - that his career from 1955 until 1988 was an unblemished one.

He is deeply remorseful and contrite.

While I accept, as
I must, the Tribunal's finding concerning his thyroid condition - to which I have referred - I think some account needs to be taken of the existence of that condition throughout the time when the misappropriations took place. I hasten to add, that no great weight should be put on this matter, though it should not be entirely dismissed out of hand.

Mr Dezarnaulds is now 60 years old. Just on two years and nine months have passed since the misappropriations were discovered, and his connections with his profession effectively severed. I would accept that there are no opportunities for gainful employment for him, other than within the parameters of the kind of work he did before. Experience and commonsense tell one that a year old man who has worked in the same occupation for the whole of his working life, and is now disqualified from its practise, would have very few possibilities of gainful employment. He has given evidence of his difficulties in finding such employment; I accept that evidence.

As I pointed out, the legislation gives an opportunity for rehabilitation and redemption. Limitations and conditions ("conditions") may be attached to meet the circumstances of the case.
Mr Dezarnaulds has offended. He has offended significantly. I take account of the Tribunal's findings but I do not think that the court should deny the opportunity for Mr Dezarnaulds to work under restricted conditions in his former profession and by that means to seek rehabilitation in the profession's eyes, and in his own. He is a talented man, and it is a pity if those talents cannot be put to some use. He has reached the stage of life when work opportunities outside of his profession are sparse or non-existent. It is not socially useful to confine a humanbeing to a state of virtual unemployability, when he would then have recourse only to the social welfare system. This is not good for society, nor for the individual. In saying this, one must always take account of the circumstances of the individual case.
I have reached the view that Mr Dezarnaulds should be given an opportunity to work as an associate. In doing so, I take account of what has been put by the Law Society, and the concerns expressed that he might misappropriate again. I think that his age and shame and contrition militate strongly against that, but I take it into account in the conditions I impose.
I grant the application, subject to the following conditions: 
Mr Dezarnaulds is to attend at Mr Wawn's office no earlier than when Mr Wawn ordinarily attends, and is to stay no later than Mr Wawn's ordinary leaving time. He will take leave when
Mr. Wawn is on vacation or closes the office.
He is not otherwise to be in the office, save at times when Mr Wawn is absent for the purposes of pursuing his professional commitments; such as instructing counsel, or attending settlements. He will not be permitted a personal business card identifying him with that office.
Mr
Dezarnaulds is not to open any correspondence. All mail to him will pass through Mr. Wawn.
All correspondence sent by
Mr Dezarnaulds on behalf of the firm must be first submitted to Mr Wawn for his approval.
Mr Dezarnaulds is not to have any independent access to the office, save with Mr Wawn's express authorisation for a particular purpose.
All work is to be done by him under Mr Wawn's general supervision.
He is not to be a signatory of any office account.

He is not to have any business contact with clients of the office after hours, save on the specific instructions of
Mr Wawn.
Mr Dezarnaulds is to maintain only one cheque account, and only one savings account or some similar account. Copies of the records of these accounts are to be provided to Mr Wawn on a fortnightly basis and are to be furnished monthly to the Law Society. When so furnished to the Law Society they will be accompanied by an explanation by Mr. Dezarnaulds sufficient to identify the nature of the transactions that have gone through these accounts.
Mr Dezarnaulds is to continue with his present regime of medical supervision. At three monthly intervals the treating doctor is to provide to Mr Dezarnaulds an opinion as to his condition over the last three months period and any relevant comments as to future treatment. (Performance of this condition will, of course, depend on co-operation from the doctor concerned). Mr Dezarnaulds is to supply a copy of that report to Mr Wawn, and to the Law Society, within seven days of its receipt. Any changes in medical supervision are to be advised forthwith to Mr Wawn, who will then forthwith advise the Law Society.
Mr Wawn is to report on a three monthly basis to the Law
Society on Mr Dezarnaulds' standard of work, behaviour, and his application to his duties. I do not expect this to be a long document; simply one which sets out briefly what Mr
Wawn's opinion of Mr Dezarnaulds' application and performance is.
Initially he is to be employed three days a week on the
Clerk's Award. This is to be reviewed after three months.
If his performance over that period is satisfactory, his remuneration and hours may be changed as Mr. Wawn thinks fit, and without further application to the Law Society or this Court, but subject otherwise to these conditions.
Any such changes are, from time to time, to be advised to the Law Society.
These conditions (subject to condition (1)) are to stay in force until varied by the Law Society or this Court.
Mr Dezarnaulds is to give an undertaking to the court to abide by these conditions to the intent that, any intentional breach of any of them would constitute contempt of court.
I will hear the parties on any question concerning the efficacy or practicality of the conditions to which I have referred, or any reasonably variation of them. In the event that the parties do not wish to put any further submissions on these matters to me, short minutes should be brought in to give effect to what I have said. The plaintiff will have the carriage of the short minutes.
I am disposed to think that the ordinary consequences concerning costs should follow. That matter can be addressed by the parties in the short minutes. In the event of a dispute, I will hear submissions.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/132.html  
