

Bruce and Anor versus Ryan and Ors [1996] NSWSC 650 (23 December 1996) 
BRUCE & ANOR V RYAN & ORS /94 ED 1191/91 DECEMBER 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
PRIESTLEY JA, CLARKE JA, SHELLER JA 
CATCHWORDS: CONTRACT FOR SALE OF LAND - LOAN FROM VENDOR TO TO PURCHASER - MORTGAGE 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
CONTRACT FOR SALE OF LAND - LOAN FROM VENDOR TO PURCHASER - SECURED BY
MORTGAGE IN FAVOUR OF VENDOR - settlement of proceedings commenced on default by mortgagor - original mortgage discharged and new mortgage executed to secure a lesser amount - whether carrying out of terms of settlement constituted full repayment of moneys originally owing to the mortgagee - whether payment received by mortgagee was in settlement of obligations arising under the contract for sale or under mortgage arrangements - Held: it was the latter, and mortgagee had received repayment - appeal dismissed.
 
ORDERS 
Appeal dismissed with costs.

JUDGMENT 
PRIESTLEY JA: Towards the end of 1988 Mrs Ryan wanted to sell her house at 19 Milton Avenue, Woollahra (the Milton Avenue land) and buy a house in
Adelaide. Mr and Mrs Bruce, the shareholders and directors[1] of a company called Bristol Acceptance Corporation Pty Limited (Bristol) which owned a house at Wentworth Street, Point Piper, (the Wentworth Street land) wanted
Bristol to sell the Wentworth Street land and themselves to buy Mrs Ryan's
Milton Avenue land. Mr and Mrs Troost wanted to buy Bristol's Wentworth Street land.

Contracts were exchanged for the sale of Mrs Ryan's Milton Avenue land to the
Bruces (2 December 1988) for a price of $1,250,000 and for the sale by Bristol to the Troosts (4 January 1989) for a price of $2,500,000. Settlement of both contracts of sale took place in late July 1989.

In the interval between the making of the contracts and their completion, difficulties had arisen, chiefly because of problems the Troosts were having in arranging to pay the purchase price for the Wentworth Street land. The correspondence which came into existence prior to the time when the two contracts were completed and the evidence of oral negotiations show that the
Bruces foresaw the possibility that Bristol might never be paid in full by the
Troosts and made arrangements with Mrs Ryan having the effect that, to some extent, she would share the risk with them of the possible shortfall in payment by the Troosts to Bristol. Correspondence in June 1989 (eg a letter from Mr Meisner, the Bruces' solicitor throughout the transactions, dated 7
June 1989, to Mrs Ryan's solicitors) spoke of deferment of payment of part of the purchase price by both the Troosts and the Bruces "on a terms basis".

However, discussions about how the bargain between the Bruces and Mrs Ryan about the possible shortfall was to be implemented, and what the bargain itself should be, continued up to the date when the two contracts were settled, on 27 and 28 July 1989. The terms of the bargain finally made were agreed between Mr Bruce and Mrs Ryan's ex husband on 26 July 1989. Mr Bruce passed them to Mr Meisner, who reported to him soon after that Mrs Ryan's solicitors had confirmed the terms and agreed that Mr Meisner should prepare the mortgage from the Bruces to Mrs Ryan, which would now be substantially different from the earlier version prepared by Mrs Ryan's solicitors.

The amendments prepared by Mr Meisner did not use the language which would have been appropriate to payment of the purchase price "on a terms basis", but quite different language.

Mr Bruce asked to see the amended mortgage, which he did on 27 July 1989 when he signed it himself and under power of attorney for his wife.

The sale settled on 27 July 1989 was that by Bristol to the Troosts. Payment of $1,965,000 then lent by Bristol to the Troosts was secured by first mortgage, later registered as number Y562473, given by the Troosts to Bristol.
This was to be repaid on 21 November 1989.

Mrs Ryan's sale to the Bruces was settled on 28 July 1989. Payment of $655,000 then lent by Mrs Ryan to the Bruces was secured by first mortgage later registered as number Y575520 given by the Bruces to Mrs Ryan, in the form signed by Mr Bruce the previous day. The "possible shortfall" bargain finally struck on 27 July 1989 had been embodied by Mr Meisner in the five covenants of the mortgage as follows: "Firstly: The Mortgagors will pay to the Mortgagee the principal sum or so much thereof as shall remain unpaid on the 21st November, 1989." (This does not directly concern the possible shortfall arrangement but refers to the principal sum received by the Bruces (the significance of which I explain later) and makes the repayment date the same as the last day for payment by the Troosts of their debt to Bristol of $1,965,000.) "Secondly: The Mortgagors will pay interest on the principal sum or on so much thereof as for the time being shall remain unpaid and upon any judgment or order in which this or the preceding covenant may become merged as follows:- from the date hereof until the 6th September, 1989, free of interest; from the 7th September, 1989 until the date of repayment of the principal sum hereby secured at the rate of 12.5% per annum by equal monthly payments on the 7th day of each and every month in each and every year the first of such payments computed from the 7th September, 1989, to be made on the 7th October next and thereafter on the 7th day of every month." (Again, this does not directly concern the possible shortfall arrangement, beyond showing that it was contemplated that repayment of the principal might be delayed for some time, which would happen only if the Troosts delayed their repayments to Bristol.) 
Thirdly: In the event that Bristol Acceptance Corporation Pty Limited (a company controlled by the Mortgagors and hereinafter called `Bristol') fails on the 21st November, 1989 to obtain repayment of the principal sum advanced to Harold and Pauline Troost and secured by first Mortgage of even date over property known as 11A Wentworth Street, Point Piper (hereinafter called `the Wentworth Street loan') the due date for repayment by the
Mortgagors of the principal sum hereby secured shall be extended at the option of the Mortgagors until the 21st November, 1990 at the rate of interest of .5% per annum hereinbefore specified; PROVIDED THAT in the event of
Bristol obtaining repayment of the Wentworth Street loan prior to the 21st
November, 1990, the Mortgagors covenant to forthwith repay to the Mortgagee the principal sum plus interest accrued, hereby secured.

Fourthly: The Mortgagor will observe the provisions set forth in the
Memorandum filed in the Land Titles Office as Number Q860000, which provisions are deemed to be incorporated herein.

Fifthly: Notwithstanding the provisions of Covenants Secondly and Thirdly hereof and notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary herein contained or implied, it is agreed by the parties that in the event that
BRISTOL ACCEPTANCE CORPORATION PTY LIMITED fails to obtain repayment of the
Wentworth Street loan on or before 31st December, 1989 then the following provisions shall apply:- 
No interest shall be payable from 1st January 1990 in respect of the sum of TWO HUNDRED THOUSAND DOLLARS ($200,000.00) of the Principal Sum hereby secured; 
The said sum of $200,000 of the Principal Sum hereby secured shall only be repayable by the Mortgagors upon the repayment of the Wentworth Street loan but the balance of FOUR HUNDRED & FIFTY FIVE THOUSAND DOLLARS ($455,000.00) shall be repayable in accordance with the provisions of Covenant
Firstly hereof." 
Bristol did not "obtain repayment" on 21 November 1989 of the principal sum advanced to and owing by the Troosts. The Bruces exercised their option to extend the date for repayment by them of the amount they owed to Mrs Ryan so that that amount did not become repayable until 21 November 1990.

Bristol promptly commenced proceedings by summons number 14900 of 1989 in the
Common Law Division of the Supreme Court to recover possession of the
Wentworth Street land. (This step is frequently taken by a mortgagee against a defaulting mortgagor, with a view to the exercise by the mortgagee of power of sale of the land with vacant possession, and, the mortgagee hopes, the maximising of recovery of the amount outstanding.). The Troosts filed a cross- claim. The proceedings were listed for hearing on 22 March 1990. On that day, after lengthy negotiations, the parties agreed on a settlement. Consent orders were made accordingly, standing Bristol's summons over generally and dismissing the Troosts' cross-claim. The parties made a binding agreement which was annexed to the short minutes of the consent orders and called "heads of agreement". The first three paragraphs were as follows:
The defendants agree to pay to the plaintiff the sum of $1,900,000 in full satisfaction of all monies due to it under the contract for sale dated .1.1989 for the purchase of the property 11(a) Wentworth Street, Point Piper and in full satisfaction of all monies secured by memorandum of mortgage
Y562473." (It is common ground that the date 14.1.1989 was a mistake for 4.1.1989) "2. The said sum to be paid in the following manner: 
As to the sum of $1,500,000 within 21 says of the date hereof; 
As to the balance of $400,000 within 3 years of the date hereof.
The plaintiff agrees that on payment of the said sum of $1,500,000 and on delivery to it of the mortgage referred to in paragraph 8 it will discharge mortgage Y562473." 
Paragraph 4. made provision for interest on the $400,000 referred to in par (b). Paragraph 5., was, in part, as follows: "The defendants agree that to secure the said sum of $400,000 they will grant to the plaintiff a second mortgage over the property referred to in paragraph one on the terms and conditions herein set out together with the terms and conditions contained in the documents 1 and 2, including a provision that the principal sum secured by any prior mortgage shall not exceed $1,500,000. ..." 
Paragraph 6. provided for the dismissal of the cross-claim. Paragraph 7 provided that in the event the payment of the $1,500,000 referred in par 2(a) was made within twenty-one days then Bristol would consent to the summons being dismissed with no order as to costs.

The heads of agreement were followed out. The sum of $1,500,000 was paid in accordance with par 2 and mortgage Y562473 was then discharged. To understand the significance of the terms of the discharge it is necessary to consider the operative words of mortgage Y562473 itself. In that mortgage the Troosts were described as "Mortgagor". The operative words were that the : "... Mortgagor hereby acknowledges receipt of the principal sum of $1,965,000 covenants with the undermentioned Mortgagee that the provisions set forth in the Schedule hereto shall be deemed to be incorporated herein, and, for the purpose of securing to the Mortgagee the payment of the principal sum and interest thereon mortgages to the Mortgagee Bristol Acceptance Corporation Pty
Limited ... all the Mortgagor's estate and interests in the land ..." 
The discharge of mortgage Y562473 was dated 17 April 1990. It was in a form suitable for registration pursuant to the [Real Property
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/). It identified the land it affected, the Mortgagor, and the Mortgagee. It then said in its operative part: "RECEIVED the sum of all moneys being in full satisfaction and discharge of the abovementioned Mortgage so far as it affects the land above described." 
A mortgage dated 19 April 1990 was then given by the Troosts to Bristol by which the Troosts acknowledged "receipt of the principal sum of $400,000" and mortgaged the Wentworth Street property to Bristol, "for the purpose of securing to the Mortgagee the payment of the principal sum and interest thereon." Provision was made in the mortgage for the insertion of an as yet unparticularised mortgage as a prior encumbrance, in accordance with par 5 of the agreement of 22 March 1990. In the mortgage the Troosts covenanted to pay to Bristol the principal sum on 22 March 1993.

On 19 October 1990 the Bruces paid Mrs Ryan $455,000 which they asserted was the amount outstanding under mortgage Y575520. This assertion was based on their contention that the sum of $200,000 referred to in the covenant Fifthly of the mortgage had not become repayable by them because at that time there had been no "repayment of the Wentworth Street loan" referred to in paragraph "Fifthly (ii)". Mrs Ryan on the other hand contended that in the events that had happened Bristol had in fact obtained repayment of the principal sum of $1,965,000 referred to in covenant Thirdly of the mortgage.

In 1991 the Bruces commenced proceedings in the Equity Division seeking a declaration that Bristol had been paid or was to be treated as having been paid only $1,565,000 of the principal sum of $1,965,000. Mrs Ryan filed a cross-claim seeking in substance a declaration that the Bruces had received full repayment of the $1,965,000.

The proceedings were heard by Hulme J. No more information than I have earlier set out was put before him concerning the circumstances surrounding the making of the heads of agreement. Hulme J held in substance that the Bruces had received payment in full from the Troosts and ordered the Bruces to pay Mrs
Ryan $200,000 together with interest from 19 April 1990. The Bruces appealed.

Before this court, counsel for the appellants, the Bruces, relied on two arguments for contending that Hulme J had been wrong in holding that Bristol had obtained repayment of the principal sum advanced to it, called in covenant
Thirdly of mortgage Y575520 "the Wentworth Street loan".

The first argument was that when the Troosts paid the $1,500,000 referred to in paragraphs 2. and 3. of the heads of agreement and obtained the discharge of mortgage Y526473, that payment did not discharge the Troosts' obligation undertaken under par 1 to pay $1,900,000 in full satisfaction of all moneys due to Bristol under the contract for sale dated 4 January 1989 for the purchase of the Wentworth Street land. The argument was that the discharge of the mortgage discharged the secured obligation to pay $1,500,000 but not the balance of the moneys due under the contract for sale of 4 January 1989.

The second argument was that on a common sense approach to the meaning of the words "repayment of the Wentworth Street loan" in covenants Thirdly and
Fifthly of mortgage Y575520, it was clear that at the time of the proceedings before Hulme J no more than $1,565,000 of that loan could be said to have been repaid.

I do not agree with either of the appellants' submissions. The starting point for my opinion is the way in which the operative words of mortgage Y562473 describe the transaction between Bristol and the Troosts. The language is conventional and reflects some basic conveyancing ideas which for the practical purposes of lay people taking part in such transactions are telescoped, in ordinary language, into simpler descriptions which do not take those conveyancing ideas fully into account. The operative words in mortgage
Y562473 assume (see p 7 above) that on the completion of the contract for sale the purchaser has discharged the contractual obligation to pay the full purchase price and then, in the present case where what is commonly known as a mortgage back is being given by the vendor, further assume that the vendor, having received the full amount of the purchase price, is making a loan to the person until that moment the purchaser but now in the process of becoming the
Mortgagor. That is why in the present case the Mortgagor acknowledged receipt of $1,965,000. The Mortgagor received that money after having, in the eye of the conveyancing lawyers, paid the full purchase price of $2,500,000. At the stage when the mortgage was executed and that acknowledgment made, the purchasers in my opinion had completed the contract of purchase. The purchasers no longer owed the vendor any moneys under the contract of sale, had received $1,965,000 by way of loan from the former vendor as Mortgagee and were obliged as Mortgagor to repay that loan in accordance with the covenant in the mortgage.

This understanding of the position is precisely reflected in covenant Thirdly of the Bruces' mortgage to Mrs Ryan. What was defined as the Wentworth Street loan was the short description of what had earlier been said to be "repayment of the principal sum advanced to" the Troosts. The language is not language which shows some amount of the purchase price has remained outstanding. It is the conveyancer's language of a loan being made by a mortgagee to a mortgagor and not the remaining owing of a part of the purchase price unpaid by the purchaser to the vendor. Similarly, the proviso in covenant Thirdly speaks of "Bristol obtaining repayment of the Wentworth Street loan", not the balance of purchase price. Exactly the same language is used in covenant Fifthly.

The Bruces were fundamentally interested in both the sale by Bristol and their own purchase from Ryan. Their solicitor, Mr Meisner, drafted or approved the terms of both mortgages Y562473 and Y575520. He also witnessed the signatures of the Bruces of their mortgage to Mrs Ryan and signed mortgage Y562473 as solicitor for Bristol the Mortgagee. Thus it was neither accident nor coincidence that both mortgages were drawn on the basis that they were securing loans to a mortgagor, who had previously been a purchaser, from a mortgagee, who had previously been a vendor, and that the loans being secured by the mortgages were being made following the full discharge of the purchasers' obligations to pay the purchase price under the contracts of sale.
I therefore conclude that it was known to the legal representatives of
Bristol, the Bruces, Mrs Ryan and the Troosts that the mortgage documents were framed in the way that they were in accordance with usual conveyancing practice. There is no reason why the parties should not be bound by the form in which their transactions were cast by the conveyancers to whom they entrusted the transactions; indeed there seems to me to be strong reason for dealing with the transactions in the terms into which they were deliberately put.

Thus in my view the question whether the carrying out of the heads of agreement effected "repayment of the Wentworth Street loan" within covenants
Thirdly and Fifthly of mortgage Y562473 should be approached on the basis that the obligation of the Troosts to repay that loan was an obligation pursuant to mortgage Y562473, and not in any way an obligation still remaining to be discharged by them pursuant to the contract of sale of the Wentworth Street land to them.

Accordingly when the heads of agreement are considered, it must be on the footing that the opening words of paragraph 1., referring to an agreement by the Troosts to pay the sum of $1,900,000 in full satisfaction of all moneys due to Bristol under the contract for sale dated 4 January 1989 are surplusage and that the legally effective words of that paragraph are the concluding ones by which the Troosts agreed to pay the sum of $1,900,000 in full satisfaction of all moneys secured by mortgage Y562473. In my view the reference in the first part of the paragraph to moneys being due under the contract of sale was either a mistake, easily understandable in the circumstances of a document prepared immediately at the end of lengthy negotiations, or, if not a mistake, an insertion of words for more abundant precaution at a time when, in the urgency of getting the heads of agreement written down, there was no time for full analysis of what the pre-existing legal situation was. Whatever the true explanation of the inclusion of the words may be, it is clear, in my view, that they did not accurately reflect the pre-existing legal situation, nor, the obligations under the contract for sale having been fully satisfied at the time of settlement and the making of the mortgage arrangements and the execution of the mortgage, could they create anew obligations under the contract for sale which had previously been discharged.

It then follows that paragraphs 2. and 3. of the heads of agreement must be read as referring to the way in which the Troosts' agreement in paragraph to pay Bristol the sum of $1,900,000 in full satisfaction of all moneys secured by mortgage Y562473 was to be carried out.

The heads of agreement were then carried out on 17 and 19 April 1990 by the parties entering into the documents of those dates, the relevant parts of which I have earlier abstracted (see pp 7 and 8). The document of 17 April was the discharge of mortgage Y562473, later itself registered, which acknowledged receipt of all moneys etc as above set out on p 7. That is, pursuant to the compromise embodied in the heads of agreement, Bristol acknowledged receipt of all moneys due to it under the loan it had made as
Mortgagee to the Troosts as Mortgagor secured by mortgage Y562473. This seems to me admit there had been "repayment of the Wentworth Street loan" as defined in covenants Thirdly and Fifthly of the Bruces' mortgage to Mrs Ryan
Y575520. This seems to me to be further borne out by the same forms being repeated by the next transaction, the mortgage of 19 April 1990, by which
Bristol made a further loan of $400,000 to the Troosts, receipt of which was acknowledged in that mortgage, which secured its repayment to Bristol, subject to the Troosts' right to grant a first mortgage of up to $1,500,000 to some other lender whose security would thus have priority over that of Bristol.

I note that two further aspects of the appellant's first argument were pressed by their counsel. One involved discussion of the technicalities of the accord and satisfaction rubric and the other sought to say that the case fell into the same category as that dealt with by Kearney J in Grundy versus Ley [(1984) 2
NSWLR 467.] On the view I have taken of the form into which the relevant transactions in the present case were cast these supporting submissions do not seem to me to have any bearing on the case. In my opinion it can satisfactorily be decided without resorting to the terminology of accord and satisfaction; and Grundy is distinguishable. The decision in Grundy depended on Kearney J's view that a personal covenant to pay was not extinguished by the form of words used on a registrable discharge of mortgage.
In the present case, on my view of the events, there is no basis for finding in favour of the appellants the existence of the personal covenant essential for their argument and for the relevance of Grundy.

I therefore think that the appellants' first argument fails.

The second argument, which relied upon what was said to be a common sense approach to the meaning of "repayment of the Wentworth Street loan" in covenants Thirdly and Fifthly of the Bruces' mortgage to Mrs Ryan, in my opinion fails, for reasons already covered in dealing with the first argument.
On the approach I take to the first argument, and the views I have expressed about the way in which the various mortgages and the heads of agreement should be read, a meaning emerges of "the repayment of the Wentworth Street loan" which is quite incompatible with the meaning suggested by the appellants' second argument and has the result that the second argument must fail.

The meaning I have put upon the relevant words seems to me to be just as real as that contended for by the appellants. There is a significant distinction in law between selling land on terms that the purchase price be paid in instalments and selling land by a contract to be completed by the payment of the full purchase price followed by the "mortgage back" of the land by the purchaser to the vendor. Quite different results may flow from the two different types of sale, subject always to the precise terms of the contract.
One area of possible difference in result concerns when title to the land will pass. Another relates to the consequences of breaches of the continuing terms of the instalment type contract on the one hand and defaults under the terms of the mortgage on the other. These are practical matters to be taken into account by conveyancers in deciding which form of transaction they will adopt, a consideration which in my opinion needs to be kept in mind when giving effect to conventional and long used forms.

In my opinion, the appeal should be dismissed with costs.
 
CLARKE JA: I agree with Priestley JA.
 
SHELLER JA: I agree with Priestley JA.
 []  So described by their counsel in submissions to this court. * * * 
