

Regina versus Steven Ross [1997] NSWSC 196 (14 May 1997) 
REGINA versus Steven ROSS /97; DC 96/21/0326 
WEDNESDAY 14 MAY 1997 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
STEIN JA, STUDDERT J, LEVINE J 
CATCHWORDS: Section 5D [Criminal Appeal Act 1912](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/), Crown appeal against sentence. No error in sentencing principle found. Sentence within discretion and not manifestly inadequate in circumstances 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: EX TEMPORE 
RESULT: Appeal Dismissed 
JUDGMENT 
STEIN JA: This is an appeal by the DPP against the inadequacy of the sentence imposed by his Honour Judge Graham in the District Court at Parramatta on 13 December 1996. The respondent, Steven Ross had pleaded guilty to three charges: armed robbery with an offensive weapon on 25 August 1996 at Rosehill Bowling Club; possess shortened firearm, a sawn-off .22 calibre rifle, and shortening the firearm.

With respect to the armed robbery, his Honour imposed an overall sentence of four years structured as a two-year minimum term with a two-year additional term. The respondent was also sentenced to one year terms for each of the firearm offences to be served concurrently with the sentence for the armed robbery. Leaving aside this appeal, he will be eligible for parole on 24
August 1998.

The robbery comprised the club's day takings of close to $22,000. All moneys were recovered. His Honour's narration of the facts is not in dispute and I quote: 
The offence was a serious one, although it appears to have been carried out alone. Nevertheless, the offence was serious in the sense that there was some planning involved, including the secreting of the gun and other items in a part of the club which would make them accessible to the prisoner when he entered for the purpose of carrying out the robbery. He had, of course, also shortened the firearm and had equipped himself with a bag containing a black hooded sloppy joe, a black balaclava, black gloves, the sawn-off rifle, a pair of running shoes and a large blue sports carry bag. The gun which he used in the course of the robbery was loaded, though it was not discharged at any stage in the robbery or in the aftermath.

The prisoner had been at the club with his partner and, as it was about to close, he left with her, but then left her in the car in the car park on the pretext that he had to return to get something which he had left in the club.
The club was about to close, so he climbed into a manhole above the telephone booth and changed his clothing whilst he waited for the club to close. Once the patrons had left, he climbed out of the manhole and approached the strong room area behind the main bar. He confronted two staff members who were placing the weekend's takings into the safe. He threatened the staff members with the rifle, forcing them both to the floor of the strong room and tying them up with plastic ties. He threatened the staff that they were to remain in the strong room. One of them, for example, felt afraid when the gun was placed at his head, that he was going to be shot in the head by the prisoner.
Although he informed the victims that he did not want to hurt them, that assurance was coupled with a requirement that they do what they were told and they would not be hurt. Whether they felt able to believe that assurance, in the circumstances one would be left to contemplate.

His Honour continued later in his remarks on sentence with a further narration of the facts. He said: 
He left the club through a side entrance and was challenged by a security officer. He threatened the security officer with the firearm but again I note, although it may have been an opportunity to do so, he certainly refrained from discharging the firearm or firing at the security officer. He ran behind the club, across a nearby street and into the car park of a take-away restaurant.
As he ran to the vehicle, he tripped and dropped the bag containing the money on a roundabout in the car park. He went to the car where his partner was waiting, and he told her to drive off and to stop near the roundabout. He picked up the bag from the roundabout and it contained the money. He placed it in the front seat of the vehicle.

It has also been referred to in this appeal that upon his arrest it appears that the respondent tried to encourage the police to shoot him. They did not do so. Upon being approached by detectives after his arrest the respondent immediately agreed he had committed the offence. He elaborated on his admissions in an electronically recorded interview.

His Honour found that although the respondent's plea of guilty before the
Magistrate was bowing to the inevitable, his plea was entitled to considerable weight. It was evidence of his continuing co-operation with police which would ensure his conviction. On this appeal the Crown Advocate has questioned His
Honour's reliance on the plea. She places emphasis on the word used by the judge of `considerable' before `weight'. Ms Latham submits this was not a case where considerable weight should be placed upon the plea.

His Honour dealt with the respondent's criminal history which included convictions for assault and robbery in company (1983); armed robbery (1986); escape lawful custody and assault occasioning actual bodily harm (1987) as well as other offences, mostly drug related. Graham DCJ noted that prior to the current offences, the respondent had been released from custody in 1994 and apparently had not offended for almost two years - the longest period that he had spent out of custody since he was 19. He is now 33 years of age.

During this time (1994 to early 1996) he had obtained stable employment and embarked on a permanent relationship. However, his new-found stability began to fall apart when he became ill and lost his employment. He lapsed into depression and resumed taking drugs. His condition was exacerbated by his learning that his partner was committing acts of prostitution to support the family, including her eight-year-old daughter.

His Honour found that the respondent conceived the robbery during a major depressive episode. His Honour found that the purpose of the robbery was not simply to feed a drug habit, but to steal enough money to set himself up in a small lawn-mowing business.

His Honour acknowledged that the offence was planned and was a very serious instance of armed robbery. The seriousness included the impact of the threats on, and terror involved for the two club employees. Nonetheless, the judge accepted that the respondent had `quite strong prospects of rehabilitation' although a lengthy period of supervision and psychological assistance would be required. His Honour found that this formed a `special circumstance' which justified structuring the sentence as a two-year minimum with a two-year additional term. The judge acknowledged that the minimum term was only 50% of the overall sentence and that `two years barely reflects the objective criminality involved and does involve a significant measure of leniency'. With this statement I must agree.

In its appeal counsel for the DPP notes the serious aggravating features of the offence.
Its careful plan of execution.
The shortened firearm used in the offence and the fact that it was loaded, notwithstanding his Honour's finding that the respondent did not intend to harm anyone and refrained from using the weapon.
The respondent threatened 3 people with the firearm, including placing the gun against the back of one victim's neck.

Ms Latham also relies upon the fact that this was the third offence of like nature by the respondent in a 13 year span, much of which he had spent in prison. Ms Latham submits his Honour was in error in giving too much weight to the prospects of rehabilitation as compared to the objective features of the offences, including their gravity. She submits his Honour allowed the prospects of rehabilitation to feature too prominently in the sentencing process at the expense of the respondent's criminal history, his failure to benefit from parole on previous occasions and the seriousness of the offences.

Since this is a Crown appeal under [s
D](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5d.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) it is necessary to look for the error in sentencing principle: Griffiths versus The
Queen (1977) 137 CLR 293 at 310; Malvaso versus The Queen <case>; [(1989) 168 CLR 227] at 234-235 and more recently Everett versus The Queen <case>; [(1994) 181 CLR 295] at 299-300, as well as decisions of this Court. The DPP needs to demonstrate that the sentence imposed by his Honour is manifestly inadequate so as to display an error in point of principle.

Graham DCJ expressly acknowledged the very serious nature of the offences, including their aggravating features, indeed on more than one occasion. He also acknowledged the significant criminal record of the respondent. The Judge was well cognisant of the significant measure of leniency in the sentence he imposed. However, he considered the case to be an exceptional one deserving of leniency. He referred to certain features, for example, the motivation being not merely to feed his drug habit but to establish a business to ensure `his family situation'. This motive was consistent with what he told police after his arrest and in his electronically recorded interview. His state of mind at the time received support in the psychological assessment of the respondent and was compounded by the discovery by Mr Ross that his partner had recommenced working as a prostitute. Before His Honour there was evidence which entitled him to find that the offences were committed in the `context of a psychological crisis that really required professional intervention' and his finding that the crimes were committed at a time when the respondent was suffering from a `significant depressive episode'. It was also open on the evidence for his Honour to find that, notwithstanding his prior record, the respondent had demonstrated the capacity to live a life free of crime.

In my opinion, the sentence imposed by his Honour was within the Judge's discretionary power and has not been shown to be manifestly inadequate so as to reveal an error in principle. I propose that the appeal be dismissed.

STUDDERT J: I must say I have been troubled by this appeal because the sentence was so plainly a lenient one. 
Essentially, though, the success of the appeal depended upon the Crown establishing that in all the circumstances the sentence was manifestly inadequate. In this regard the Crown case was not assisted by sentencing statistics produced to the Court. Those statistics did not illustrate that the sentence here imposed was outside the range. Of course caution has to be used in resorting to such statistics and an appeal cannot be determined simply by reference to statistics of the nature here provided.

However, I have considered Mr Green's submissions and I am not persuaded that this Court should intervene. Accordingly, I agree with Justice Stein that the appeal should be dismissed.

LEVINE J: I agree with the order proposed by the presiding judge and his reasons for it. I also expressly agree with the observations made by Mr Justice Studdert.

STEIN JA: Accordingly, the order of the Court will be that the appeal be dismissed.
 * * * 
