

Regina versus Foster Matter No Cca 60236/97 [1998] NSWSC 317 (14 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 2 September 1998 
REGINA versus STUART MARK FOSTER `CCA 60236/97` `14 July 1998` `Smart J, Grove J, McInerney J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal` 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal from District Court (Sidis DCJ) 
FILE NO: 60236/97 
DELIVERED: Tuesday 14 July 1998 
HEARING DATE: Tuesday 14 July 1998 `PARTIES: REGINA versus STUART MARK FOSTER` 
JUDGMENT OF: Smart J, Grove J, McInerney J 
COUNSEL 
APPELLANT: In person 
RESPONDENT: M Latham 
SOLICITORS 
APPELLANT: - 
RESPONDENT: S E O'Connor 
RESULT: Appeal against sentence allowed. New sentence substituted. 
CATCHWORDS: 
CRIMINAL LAW AND PROCEDURE - SENTENCE - ISOLATED OCCASION - CARNAL KNOWLEDGE
OF STEPDAUGHTER AGED 15 YEARS 9 MONTHS. NO PARTICULAR POINT OF PRINCIPLE 
NO OF PAGES: 9 
REGINA -V- STUART MARK FOSTER 
JUDGMENT 
GROVE J: This is an application for leave to appeal against severity of sentence. The applicant appeared before her Honour Judge Sidis in the Penrith District Court where he pleaded guilty to three counts of having sexual intercourse with a person between the ages of ten and sixteen years at a time when that person was under his authority contrary to <case> of the Crimes Act. He had pleaded not guilty to three counts charged pursuant to <case>; it should therefore be noted at the outset that the reference to aggravated sexual assault in the particulars of trial is erroneous. However, that error did not attach to the sentencing Judge who made it clear in her introductory remarks that she was dealing with the counts under <case> which carried in respect of each count a maximum prescribed penalty of ten years penal servitude. 
The offences were all committed on the one occasion and the victim was the step-daughter of the applicant who was at the time aged fifteen years and nine months. Her mother was working a night shift and three younger children born to the relationship between the applicant and the complainant's mother had been put to bed. The applicant and the complainant were drinking wine. This consumption made the complainant ill and her clothes were removed, some vomit cleaned up and she went to bed naked. The applicant commenced to caress her which activity progressed to acts of digital penetration, cunnilingus and penile sexual intercourse.

The complainant did not mention the matter to her mother but about a week later spoke to a school friend. The offences had occurred on 19 August 1995.
The complainant was formally interviewed by police on 31 August 1995 and the applicant was arrested and interviewed on 1 September 1995. At that interview he made frank admissions to police and provided detail beyond that which had been the subject of complaint.

As noted by the sentencing Judge the applicant had only minor prior history.
These related to offences of entirely different character and attracted fines as penalties, the most recent of these was ten years old as at the date of the present matters. As her Honour observed those prior offences should be treated as irrelevant to the current sentencing proceedings.

The applicant was sentenced to four years penal servitude to be served concurrently on each count. Her Honour declined to find special circumstances for the purposes of [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/) and the sentences were divided accordingly into minimum terms of three years and additional terms of one year.

The applicant has appeared for himself before this Court. In response to the
Registrar's direction he has provided a handwritten submission of some seven pages and it is convenient to deal with matters which he wishes to contend by progressing through those submissions.

A proposition is advanced that too much weight was given to general deterrence and not adequate attention to subjective features of the case. In remarks on sentence her Honour had said: "The offences were so serious that considerations of general deterrence are considerable in this case. It must be made perfectly clear to the community that actions of this kind and in these circumstances will not be tolerated." 
As a generality, one could not argue against those observations nor could it be suggested that the offences were not serious, however her Honour did not elaborate other than in that general way why the offences in this particular case were so serious as to attract "considerable" considerations of general deterrence by which expression I take her to have meant a reflection more than otherwise might have been appropriate to the case.

The applicant requests that this Court view the video recording of the police interview or listen to the master tape in order to get a better indication of his regret and remorse at the time of interview. In the sentencing remarks it was noted that the applicant acknowledged that his actions were irresponsible and inappropriate and he expressed remorse in Court. Her Honour made no finding as to the genuineness of that expression. She did refer to the claim of being affected by amphetamine and alcohol use at the time of the offence in relation to the evidence of contrition. It is a little difficult to relate those matters as logically contrition is something which may follow upon an offence but would be most unlikely to be contemporaneous with its commission.

Next the applicant refers to two unreported cases in this Court which were mentioned in the District Court by the Crown Prosecutor. They were R v.
PBH, 2 May 1996 and R v. Allen 17 February 1995. The applicant mentions that he has not had access to these unreported decisions but he complains that his sentence was severer than in either of those cases and the circumstances were not as serious. The Crown Advocate has informed us this morning that yesterday she despatched copies of those unreported cases to the applicant.

R v. Allen contains a misstatement in the leading judgment in that it is said that the appellant in that case had been committed for trial under a count under <case> which carried a maximum penalty of twenty years penal servitude whereas an offence under <case> carried a maximum sentence of eight years penal servitude. Obviously the references to section have been inadvertently reversed. The Crown is noted to have accepted a plea of guilty to the lesser charge. A charge under <case> does carry a maximum penalty of eight years penal servitude but increases to ten years, as in the case of the applicant, where the victim is under the authority of the offender. However, it is a fair comment by the applicant that there was at least one factor of aggravation in that case when compared with his, namely that the offender had enticed a girl of fourteen into the back of a motor vehicle where he plied her with spirits and it was alleged that there was struggle and violence. There was, however, apparently evidence from a witness which contradicted the claim of struggle and the inference was drawn by the Court that it was probable that the Crown had accepted the plea to the lesser offence by reason of the apparently inconsistent statements. The sentence was one of four years penal servitude but was divided, to the advantage of that appellant, into minimum and additional terms of two years each. 
R v. PBH was a Crown appeal against inadequacy of sentence. The offender had had intercourse with his daughter aged fourteen years and nine months as a result of which she became pregnant and a child was born. The original sentence had been a total of three years penal servitude divided into minimum and additional terms of eighteen months each. The charge was brought under <case> and carried the maximum prescription of ten years penal servitude. The Crown appeal was allowed and a total sentence of three years and four months penal servitude consisting of a minimum term of two years and six months and an additional term of ten months was imposed. Again in that case there was a contest in terms of allegation and counter allegation concerning consent and violence and it is reasonable to assume that the Crown accepted the plea to the offence under <case> in the light of that contradictory evidence. Re-sentence would have reflected what is conveniently called double jeopardy attaching to it after successful Crown appeal. 
Every case has different factors and it is the function of this Court to supervise sentencing to the extent of ensuring that any sentence imposed is within the range of the sound exercise of judicial discretion but this is not an exercise which can be usefully undertaking by making comparisons with only selected cases. Nonetheless, in this instance at the sentencing hearing the
Crown chose to draw attention to two particular cases and insofar as the applicant advances criticism based upon comparability between his case and those, I am persuaded that his argument is of some substance.

The third matter which the applicant raises refers to a report by a psychologist, Miss Devlin. At the outset it should be noted that this report was tendered on his behalf by the solicitor then appearing for him. He observes that Miss Devlin recorded that he had pleaded guilty to three counts of "aggravated sexual assault" and, as I have earlier mentioned, that is, if intended to refer to any offence under that heading in <case> of the Crimes
Act, erroneous.

The applicant complains that the reference to the offences occurring over a span of three hours has been misinterpreted by Miss Devlin and consequently by the sentencing Judge as inferring that there was a constant sexual activity over that time. The applicant is advancing a literal construction to some words which were used in a report and in remarks on sentence and I do not accept that such construction should be given to those words. The separation of counts is itself an indication that it was not being suggested that a persistent assailment extended over three hours.

The applicant makes other detailed challenges to various statements in Miss
Devlin's report but I do not think that that argument can be entertained particularly in the light of the tender of the report on his behalf. It has not been suggested that in tendering the report the solicitor acted other than in accordance with the requirements of competent legal representation.

The balance of the applicant's submissions amount to selections of remarks made at the time of sentence and re-argument of matters which the applicant wished to advance contrary to the conclusions inherent within those remarks.
It suffices to observe that the remarks made by her Honour are not indicative of error which provokes the jurisdiction of this Court to intervene. However, one of these matters should have reference. Mention was made of the attempts by the applicant to rehabilitate himself from a drug habit and he had attended a detoxification programme. Her Honour noted that he claimed that he had been abstinent since October 1996 but this is not verified. The statement is literally accurate but it does not reveal whether a finding was being made contrary to the claim although the terminology may be taken to suggest, as the applicant argues that it does, scepticism. The claim of abstinence was unchallenged.

Although not mentioned specifically in the remarks, it ought to be observed that these three offences all occurred on the one occasion and there was no suggestion that they were representative of misconduct by the applicant towards his step-daughter on any other occasion prior or since. In cases in this category that is not infrequently the case. The events giving rise to these accounts appear to have been an entirely isolated occasion. Her Honour seems to have paid considerable regard to opinions that the applicant lacked insight into the seriousness of his offences and there is no error in so doing but in my view he was entitled to have taken into account the counter balance of the isolation of offences.

Having regard to all of the above I have reached a conclusion that the sentence imposed in these particular circumstances does represent a term beyond the upper limit of the range of discretion. I consider that this Court should intervene to re-sentence.

So far as special circumstances are concerned, there was material from which such a finding could be derived but I am unable to perceive any error in her
Honour's ultimate finding that there were none. This Court is not bound by that finding upon re-sentence. I consider that a finding should be made in favour of the applicant to reflect his attempts at rehabilitation and to reflect the contrition which he manifested for the offences which he had committed in undertaking those steps and in his candour with police to the extent that I have mentioned of exceeding the information from other sources tendered against him and his pleas of guilty which he expressly indicated were motivated by a desire to relieve the complainant of the distress of a trial.
He should benefit by extended additional parole under supervision.

Although I have commented upon the inappropriateness of simple comparisons of cases such as the applicant desired to make, it should not be overlooked that the victims in each of the cases to which the Crown chose to refer the sentencing Judge the complainants were aged fourteen years and eight months and fourteen years and nine months respectively, whereas the complainant in the current case was fifteen years and nine months, that is to say almost approaching the age which, when attained, would make <case> unavailable.

I propose the following orders:
That the application for leave to appeal against sentence be granted and the appeal allowed;
That the sentences imposed in the District Court be quashed and in lieu the applicant be sentenced on each charge concurrently to a total term of penal servitude for three years consisting of minimum terms of two years commencing on 5 May 1997 and expiring on 4 May 1999 together with additional terms of one year commencing on 5 May 1999;
That the applicant be ordered released to parole on 4 May 1999 and whilst on parole he be subject to the supervision of the Probation and Parole
Service.

SMART J: I agree. 
McINERNEY J: I agree. 
SMART J: Those will be the orders of the court. * * * 
