

Regina versus Brian Croghan [1996] NSWSC 282 (18 July 1996) 
REGINA versus Brian CROGHAN /96 
Thursday 18 July 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
STUDDERT J, SULLY J, ROLFE J 
JUDGMENT 
STUDDERT J: I agree with Rolfe J.
 
SULLY J: I agree with Rolfe J.

ROLFE J: 
The Stated Case 
On 6 March 1996 His Honour Judge Dent QC stated the following case for the determination of this Court:- "1. PROCEEDINGS 
On 21 June, 1995, I gave my reasons for judgment in relation to an appeal by Brian Croghan ('the appellant') against his conviction at Lithgow Local Court on 16 December 1994 upon an information pursuant to [Regulations 92(1)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolreg/tr186/s92.html) and 129 of the [Traffic Regulations](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolreg/tr186/) ('the Regulations'), alleging that he, on the 23 March 1994 was the driver of a vehicle, to wit, trailer No. A4721, upon a public street, to wit, Bell's Line of Road, such vehicle being then equipped with brakes which did not conform with the requirements specified in Schedule F to the Regulations made under the Motor Traffic Act, 1909 as amended.
 
A copy of the information is annexed hereto and marked with the letter 'A'.
 
For the reasons set out in my judgment I indicated that I would in due course uphold the appeal and dismiss the information. Following delivery of my reasons I adjourned the further hearing of the appeal to allow questions of law arising in the course of it to be submitted for determination.
 . FACTS 
I find the following facts: 
On the evening of the 23 March 1994 the appellant was driving trailer No. A4721, a caravan, by towing it with an 8 tonne Isuzu truck west towards Dubbo along Bells Line of Road.
 
When the appellant pulled into Bell Heavy Vehicle Checking Station it was discovered by inspectors employed by the Roads and Traffic Authority that the vacuum brakes with which the caravan was fitted were not connected to any vacuum actuating device upon the towing truck. There were no fittings upon the towing truck to which the brake hoses on the caravan could be connected.
 
The appellant at the relevant time was a person to whom a trader's plate had been issued pursuant to Regulation 35, such plate being then affixed to the caravan.
 
The appellant had purchased the caravan earlier that day at an auction at Moorebank, and was at the time of the inspection driving it to his trading premises at Dubbo for any necessary repair and sale.
 . GROUNDS FOR JUDGMENT 
In my reasons for judgment I noted that Regulation 92(1) of the Regulations states that no person shall stand or drive a motor vehicle upon a public street unless (a) it is equipped with the items of equipment appropriate thereto specified in and required by Schedule F to these Regulations, and (b) such items of equipment conform with the requirement specified in such Schedule.
 
I further noted that Clause 58 of Schedule F requires that trailers, to which class the subject caravan belongs, have (a) an efficient brake which operates on not less than two wheels and (except in the case of a trailer which is equipped with overrun brakes, which was not the case here), so constructed that it can be applied from the driver's seat of the hauling vehicle.
 
I found that the subject caravan did not have an efficient brake within the meaning of Clause 58 of Schedule F, and prima facie, was being driven contrary to the provisions of Regulation 92.
 
I then determined that the prohibition contained in Regulation 92(1) is not absolute, but subject to defined exceptions.
 
Against that background I noted that Regulation 38, which governs in part the use of traders plates, permits a trader to whom a traders' plate has been issued, to drive a vehicle to which a trader's plate is affixed for a purpose connected with its manufacture or repair, including painting or any similar process, or connected with or incidental to dealing in the vehicle.
 
I determined that this permission by implication extends to vehicles which at the time are "non conforming" within the meaning of Regulations 92(1)(a) and (b).
 
I then determined that the appellant was driving the subject caravan for a purpose connected both with its repair and with or incidental to dealing in the vehicle within the terms of Regulation 38. Accordingly I determined that the appellant had not committed any offence by reason of the subject caravan's non compliance with Clause 58 of Schedule F.
 
A copy of my reasons is annexed hereto and marked with the letter 'B'.
 . QUESTIONS OF LAW FOR DETERMINATION 
The question of law for determination is: 
Did I err in law in finding that driving a vehicle pursuant to Regulation 38 of the Regulations to the Traffic Act 1909 permitted driving that would otherwise have been in breach of Regulation 92(1)(b) of those Regulations?" 
Certain Statutory Provisions 
Regulation 92(1) of the Motor [Traffic
Regulations](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolreg/tr186/) states:- "92. (1) No person shall stand or drive a motor vehicle upon a public street unless: it is equipped with the items of equipment appropriate thereto specified in and required by Schedule F to these Regulations; such items of equipment conform with the requirements specified in such Schedule; it is so constructed and equipped that it complies with all other provisions appropriate thereto specified in such Schedule; the vehicle and its parts and equipment are suitable for safe use and are in a thoroughly serviceable condition." 
Sub-regulation (2), without limiting the liability of any other person, provides that the owner of a vehicle, which is driven in contravention of the Regulation, shall be guilty of a breach of the Regulations. Sub-regulations (3) and (4) are concerned with the obligations of employees and the owner in relation to employees, and sub-regulation (5) states:- "(5) No person shall be guilty of an offence under this Regulation in any case where the vehicle stands or is driven upon a public street under an authority, given expressly or by necessary implication, in any direction under Regulation 94B." 
Sub-regulation (5A) provides that a person is not guilty of an offence under the Regulation if a motor vehicle fails to comply "with the dimension limits" provided for in Schedule F, if the motor vehicle "is the subject of a specific or general over dimension permit for the time being in force under [Part 9A".](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolreg/tr186/index.html#p9a) 
Sub-regulations (5) and (5A), accordingly, make provision for circumstances in which a person shall not be guilty of an offence under the Regulations.

Regulation 94B(2) provides that if a named officer referred to in [Regulation ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolreg/tr186/s93.html) finds, upon inspection, that any motor vehicle is not suitable for safe use or does not comply with the requirements of the Regulations:- ".. he may direct the owner or person in charge of or having the custody of or selling or having possession for sale or otherwise the vehicle that he shall not stand or drive or permit any person to stand or drive the vehicle upon a public street at any time: after the giving of such direction; or after the expiration of the specified period, unless specified faults have been rectified so that the vehicle is suitable for safe use or it complies with those requirements and: it has been submitted at a specified place for inspection by a person authorised in that behalf by the Authority and the person has found that those defaults have been rectified; or where so authorised by the vehicle defect notice, the owner declares, by a notice in writing forwarded to the Authority, that those faults have been rectified." 
Schedule F is headed "Construction and Equipment of Motor Vehicles" and Division 1, which is headed "General", provides:- "1. Except where the context of this Schedule otherwise indicates or requires, every motor vehicle which is, or is to be, driven upon a public street must be provided with the items of equipment appropriate thereto set forth in, and conforming with the provisions of, this Schedule; and every such vehicle shall be so constructed and equipped that it will comply with all other provisions appropriate thereto specified in such Schedule." [Part 5](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolreg/tr186/index.html#p5) of Schedule F requires, inter alia, caravans to have either one efficient braking system comprising brakes capable of acting directly on all road wheels, with two separate methods of actuation, or two independent and efficient braking systems. Clause 58 requires:- "(a) An efficient brake which operates on not less than two wheels and, except in the case of a trailer which is equipped with overrun brakes, so constructed that it can be applied from the driver's seat of the hauling vehicle." 
His Honour found that the caravan did not have an efficient brake and, prima facie, was being driven contrary to the provisions of [Regulation 92.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolreg/tr186/s92.html) The question which his Honour considered then arose was whether the prohibition contained in [Regulation 92](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolreg/tr186/s92.html) is absolute or subject to defined exceptions.
 [Regulation (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolreg/tr186/s35.html) provides:- "Upon proof to the satisfaction of the Authority that any person is a manufacturer or repairer of, or dealer in, motor vehicles and has suitable premises for the purpose, the Authority may, on payment of the fee prescribed ..., issue to that person one or more trader's plates each having a distinguishing number." [Regulation ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolreg/tr186/s38.html) is headed "Purposes For Which Traders' Plates May Be Used" and provides:- "Subject to Regulation 38A, a motor vehicle to which a trader's plate is affixed may stand or be driven upon a public street only where the vehicle, or in the case of a trailer, the vehicle by which it is drawn, is conveying the trader to whom such plate is in issue or his authorised employee or the trader's agent duly authorised in writing and the vehicle is being driven: for a purpose connected with its manufacture or repair (including painting or any similar process), or connected with or incidental to dealing in the vehicle; or to the nearest convenient District Registry for registration; or for delivery at the address of a person who has acquired it from such trader." 
His Honour reasoned that as a trader's plate was affixed to the caravan that permitted a trader, which Mr Croghan was, to drive the vehicle for a purpose connected with its manufacture or repair, or connected with or incidental to dealing in the vehicle, and that this permission, by implication, extends to vehicles which at the time are "non conforming" within the meaning of Regulation 92(1). In these circumstances his Honour determined that as Mr Croghan was driving the subject caravan for a purpose connected both with its repair and with or incidental to dealing with it he had not committed any offence by reason of the non-compliance with Clause 58 of Schedule F.

Conclusions 
The two bases on which his Honour came to his conclusion were, firstly, that
Mr Croghan was driving the caravan "for a purpose connected with its repair" and, secondly, in circumstances incidental to dealing with it. I do not consider that upon a proper construction of the Regulations the existence of either of these factual circumstances takes the vehicle beyond the reach of
Regulation 92. That Regulation is obviously intended to ensure that vehicles used on a public street are roadworthy in every respect required by Schedule
F, in the sense that not only are they equipped as specified but also that such equipment is operating efficiently. The requirements of the Schedule extend to mechanical features and safety devices.

The detailed provisions in the Schedule are clearly aimed at ensuring that a vehicle is properly equipped and maintained so that it will not constitute a danger to people or property. The Regulation is of primary importance and evidences the legislative intention to which I have referred. In my opinion there is no justification, as a matter of construction, for concluding that
Regulation 38, which is directed to another subject, sweeps away the beneficial provisions of Regulation 92. This view is re-inforced by certain considerations to which I shall refer, the first of which is that Regulation provides its own exclusions: sub-regulation (5) and (5A), the former incorporating the provisions of Regulation 94B.

The matters to which I have referred are appropriate in considering a wider question than that which seems to be posed by the Stated Case. However, when one looks to the purposes set forth in Regulation 38 they do not, with one possible exception, contemplate non-compliance with Regulation 92. It is, in my opinion, unthinkable that Regulation 92 does not apply to a vehicle being driven "for a purpose ... connected with or incidental to dealing in the vehicle"; or "to the nearest convenient district registry for registration"; or "for delivery at the address of a person who has acquired it from such trader". Each of these situations demands that there should be compliance with
Regulation 92. In these circumstances it would be very strange if the "manufacture or repair" provision enabled the vehicle to be driven in breach of Regulation 92 by virtue of the trader's plate being on it. Prima facie a vehicle requiring repair to comply with Regulation 92 is the very vehicle that should not be driven on a public street. Accordingly, in my opinion, "manufacture" or "repair" must be given a construction that the vehicle can only be driven for those purposes if there is no breach of Regulation 92.

This conclusion is strengthened when one considers that the logical extension of the contrary argument, which learned counsel for Mr Croghan conceded, is that a trader's plate permits a vehicle to be driven on a public street notwithstanding that it is unroadworthy in respects which make it positively dangerous, e.g. without any operative brakes or a functioning steering wheel.
Although it was submitted that commonsense would draw a dividing line there was no suggestion as to how that occurs if the construction argument is correct, nor why a breach of Regulation 92, e.g. the absence of tail lights, may not be as dangerous, in certain circumstances, as the absence of effective brakes. I also think the view to which I have come is supported by the words "(including painting)", which equates repairs to something less than the effecting of mechanical or such like repairs relevant to the roadworthiness of the vehicle.

In the present case, however, there is no suggestion that this vehicle was being drawn, relevantly, for a purpose connected with its repair. The finding was not that the vacuum brakes with which it was fitting were in need of repair, but rather that they were not functioning because they could not be connected to an actuating device in the towing truck as it did not have the necessary fittings. Accordingly, the vehicle was not in the relevant sense being drawn for a purpose connected with repair. In those circumstances, and in so far as reliance was placed on that, the question posed must be answered "Yes".

Nextly, if a vehicle is being driven for a purpose "connected with or incidental to dealing" in it there can be no suggestion, in my view and essentially for the reasons I have given, that that can be done without compliance with Regulation 92. Therefore I consider on this ground the question asked must be answered "Yes".

These answers return one, arguably, to the more general question whether a vehicle, which does not comply with Regulation 92 may be driven on a public street by virtue of the authority of a trader's plate. I say "arguably" because the Stated Case does not raise, on one view, that general question.
However, I have considered that question and expressed my conclusion. The construction of the Regulations I favour enables a purposive interpretation to be given to Regulation 92, which is consistent with the interpretation principle stated in [s.33](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/s33.html) of the [Interpretation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/); viz it is one which promotes the purpose or object underlying the Regulations and is, therefore, to be preferred to a construction, which does not do so.

In a careful argument learned counsel for Mr Croghan referred to other sections of the Traffic Act 1909 and other Regulations. A consideration of them does not cause me to alter the view I have formed.

Order 
I propose that the question asked in the Stated Case be answered "Yes".
 * * * 
