

Pasminco Metals-Sulphide Pty Ltd versus Brambles Aust Ltd and Anor Matter No Ca /96 [1998] NSWSC 411 (25 August 1998) 
Last Updated: 7 October 1998 
PASMINCO METALS-SULPHIDE PTY LTD versus BRAMBLES AUST LTD & ANOR 
CA 40033/96 August 1998 
Spigelman CJ, Mason P, Powell JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: SUPREME COURT - COMMON LAW - 
NEWMAN J 
FILE NO/S: CA 40033/96 
DELIVERED: 25 AUGUST 1998 
HEARING DATE/S: 25 AUGUST 1998 
PARTIES: PASMINCO METALS-SULPHIDE PTY LTD V BRAMBLES AUST LTD T/AS GARDENER PERROTT PTY LTD & ANOR 
JUDGMENT OF: SPIGELMAN CJ; MASON P; POWELL JA 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: D F JACKSON QC/ R A PEPPER 
Respondent: M L WILLIAMS/ B J SHIELDS 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: RANKIN & NATHAN 
Respondent: 1. EBSWORTH & EBSWORTH . MORONEY RUTTER & MANTACH 
CATCHWORDS: 
Contracts - construction and interpretation - contractual obligation to procure insurance - meaning of "subcontractor".

EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: EX TEMPORE 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
NO OF PAGES: 9 
JUDGMENT 
SPIGELMAN CJ: I will ask Mason P to deliver the first judgment. 
MASON P: Proceedings were commenced in the Common Law Division by the second respondent (Mr Murray) against the first respondent (Brambles) as first defendant and the second respondent (Sulphide) as second defendant. Mr Murray claimed damages for personal injuries suffered at factory premises at Cockle Creek. 
It was alleged in the Statement of Claim that Sulphide was the occupier of the factory and that Brambles was in control of and had responsibility for the performance of sand-blasting work on the premises and/or was the occupier with responsibility for that part of the factory premises where the sand-blasting work was being carried out. Each defendant was sued in negligence as well as upon statutory counts.

Mr Murray did not plead that he was employed by either corporation. His evidence was that his employer was Allman Industrial Services Pty Ltd, and it was that employer who instructed him to go to the factory. After commencing work Mr Murray was injured when he struck his head on a beam obstructing a walkway on some scaffolding.

Each defendant filed a Defence. Ultimately, on 8 February 1995, Mr Murray settled his claim against Brambles for $195,000. His claim against Sulphide was discontinued.

These facts present the background to the appeal, which is concerned with a contractual dispute between Brambles and Sulphide which was litigated pursuant to the Second Cross Claim filed in Mr Murray's proceedings. Sulphide had contracted with Brambles for Brambles to carry out construction work at the factory. The Agreement is a lump sum contract dated 2 December 1988. Sulphide, by its earlier name, is referred to as "The Company" and Brambles, by its earlier name, is referred to as "The Contractor". For a consideration of about $4 million Brambles agreed to prepare for painting all steel work, apply heavy duty coatings to protect the steel work from further corrosion, inspect, test, maintain these coatings and clean up the site on completion of work, as indicated by the Specification. Details of Brambles' obligations were set out in the 47 page Agreement (containing its Specification or special conditions) and 5 Appendices. These included Appendix 1, General Conditions of Contract for Construction Contracts. Condition 3 of these General Conditions stipulated: "3 PRECEDENCE OF DOCUMENTS 
If there is any conflict between the agreement including special conditions relating thereto executed by the parties, the specifications, the drawings and these general conditions or any of them: the provisions of the said Agreement and special conditions shall be paramount;..." 
The claim propounded in the Cross Claim is based on clause 9(a) of the General
Conditions which provided: "9. INSURANCE 
The Company shall arrange `Contractors' All Risks' insurance in the names of the Company and any sub-contractors for the full Contract value from time to time of the Work done at, and Goods delivered to the Site during the period of the Contract including the period of maintenance and guarantee. This insurance shall include cover against liabilities to third parties in respect of bodily injury (including death) and damage to property to the limit of $5,000,000 for any one accident or as otherwise mutually agreed between the
Company and the Contractor, but shall not otherwise cover the plant, machinery, tools and equipment of the Contractor, his employees or sub- contractors or their employees.

The policy shall provide that the Company and the Contractor and any sub- contractors shall be regarded each as third parties to the other. Unless otherwise specified or mutually agreed the policy will provide for the following excesses: 
Fire, Explosion, third party and all other risks $5,000 and the Contractor shall be responsible for and shall indemnify the Company against all losses claims and demands below the amount of such excess...." 
The essential case of Sulphide, here and below, was that other parts of the
Agreement imposed and defined the relevant insurance - procuring obligation of Sulphide. These were clause 3.03 of the Special Conditions and clause 9(d) of the General Conditions. Each of these provisions relevantly stipulate that the Contractor, ie Brambles, shall keep itself insured: "against all claims and liabilities arising, whether at Common Law or under any statute relating to Workmen's Compensation or Employers' Liability, from any accident or injury to any person employed by the Contractor or by a sub-
Contractor on or in connection with the work...." 
The minimum cover differs between the two provisions, being $500,000 in the
Special Conditions and $200,000 in the General Conditions, but nothing turns directly on this in the present case. The higher sum prevails because of clause 3 of the General Conditions.

An essential, but not necessarily conclusive, step in Sulphide's argument was to establish that Mr Murray was an employee of Brambles or of a sub-contractor of Brambles on or in connection with the work. Unless this were shown, neither clause 3.03 of the Special Conditions nor clause 9(d) of the General
Conditions were engaged. Absent such engagement, a necessary step in
Sulphide's attempt to escape liability stemming from clause 9(a) of the
General Conditions (with its permitted $5000 excess) failed.

Newman J held that Mr Murray came to the site as the employee of Allman
Industrial Services Pty Ltd, a company that provides labour to other organisations that are engaged in a variety of industrial projects. He reported to Bramble's site supervisor, Mr McCullough. Having passed a medical examination, he was directed by Mr McCullough as to the performance of work and supplied by Brambles with the equipment and clothing necessary to do the job.

At trial Sulphide contended that this made Mr Murray a pro hac vice employee of Brambles, thereby bringing him within the scope of clause 3.03 of the
Special Conditions and clause 9(d) of the General Conditions. This submission was rejected. After citing a number of well-known Australian and English decisions, Newman J concluded that Mr Murray remained the employee of Allman
Industrial Services and that he did not become the employee of Brambles, notwithstanding that he was willing to accept Mr McCullough's orders. This finding is no longer challenged in the appeal.

Based on this finding, Newman J concluded that clause 3.03 of the Special
Conditions did not apply and that clause 9(a) of the General Conditions represented the relevant contract for the purpose of determining the Cross
Claim. In my view he was correct to do so.

The Combined Liability Policy taken out by Sulphide in purported compliance with clause 9(a) has a $50,000 excess as distinct from the $5000 excess stipulated in clause 9(a). Brambles succeeded on the basis that the $195,000 payable to Mr Murray under the Terms of Settlement was recoverable under that
Policy, less its $50,000 excess; and that such right of reimbursement was to be brought into account in Sulphide's favour. Hence the verdict on the Cross
Claim of $45,000 plus costs.

The appellant accepts that, if clause 9(a) of the General Conditions is considered in isolation, Brambles is a sub-contractor in terms of its opening words, and that the second sentence of clause 9(a) would prima facie include cover against the liability to Mr Murray.

But clause 9(a) is not to be read in isolation. It is to be read with clause (d). So much must be readily conceded. However, clause 9(d) addresses a distinct area of insurance cover, albeit one which might partially overlap with the field of clause 9(a). Clause 9(d) is concerned with liability to employees, being employees of Brambles as the Contractor or by a sub- contractor "on or in connection with the Work". The distinctive fields of clauses 9(a) and (d) are also emphasised by the absence of any provision for an excess in clause 9(d); and the limits of cover ($5 million in the case of clause 9(a), and $200,000 in the case of clause 9(d)). See also clause 9(e).

On appeal Sulphide contends that Mr Murray was employed "in connection with the Work", albeit that his employer never ceased to be Allman Industrial
Services. It is submitted that Allman was a "subcontractor" for the purposes of clause 9(d).

It is submitted that clause 9(d) should be treated as excising from clause (a) the subject matter of injuries to employees (whether of Brambles or of sub-contractors). I am not sure that one is driven to this mutually exclusive construction of clauses 9(a) and (d). But the submission goes nowhere unless
Allman Industrial Services was a "subcontractor" of Brambles. The judgment of
Newman J does not suggest that Sulphide's case was run below on this basis.
Indeed Brambles submits that this case was not put. Merely because Allman supplied labour to Brambles would not necessarily make it a subcontractor any more than the fact that a supplier of steel wool would necessarily become a subcontractor. The case was run on the basis of Mr Murray becoming Brambles' employee, and that case failed. It would not be just for Sulphide to be permitted now to run an alternative case that could turn upon unexplored evidence.

In my opinion the appeal should be dismissed with costs.

SPIGELMAN CJ: I agree. The natural and ordinary meaning of the word "sub-contractor" suggests a person or firm that performs some part of the work, rather than a person or firm that supplies services or equipment for use in the work. 
Mr Jackson directed attention to the nature of the work involved in this particular contract, specifically painting and application of heavy duty coatings to steelwork. It is clear that it does involve and assumes the use of labour.

However, in my opinion it also extends to the supply of equipment and other material required for the work.

I am of the same view that the President has enunciated and would in fact conclude that the evidence, such as it was, below was not sufficient to establish that Allman was a subcontractor within the meaning of clause 9(d).

I agree with the order proposed by the President.

POWELL JA: I agree with the reasons given by the President and the additional reasons given by the Chief Justice. 
SPIGELMAN CJ: The Court is of the view that indemnity costs are not appropriate on this occasion in view of the arguments put and, accordingly, the order of the Court will be that the appeal is dismissed with costs. * * * 
