

Pasternacki and Anor versus Correy and Ors Matter No 12342/94 [1998] NSWSC 288 (7 August 1998) 
Last Updated: 28 August 1998 
ANDREW PASTERNACKI & ANOR versus DAFNE CORREY & ORS /94 August 1998 
Hidden J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIDDEN J: The plaintiffs, Andrew Pasternacki and Krystyna Solka-Pasternacki, are the executors of an estate. In May 1994, they held about $158,000 in trust for the beneficiaries. Mr Andrew Pasternacki is a solicitor practising in partnership with Mr Gregory Smith at Campsie. On 18 May 1994 the plaintiffs lent a substantial sum of money to the first defendant, Dafne Correy, for two months. The loan was secured by a mortgage over her home at Corrimal on the south coast of New South Wales. On the same day, a guarantee of the loan was executed by the second defendant, Henry Correy, who is Mrs Correy's son. Also on the same day, Mrs Correy attended upon the third defendant, Jordan
Antonopoulos, who is a solicitor, for advice about the mortgage.

None of the principal and interest was repaid within the time required, and it remains unpaid. The plaintiffs seek an order for possession of Mrs Correy's home, or an order that she repay the principal and interest to date. They also claim repayment of the principal and interest to date from her son, Henry
Correy, as guarantor. Mrs Correy resists the orders sought on various bases, to which I shall turn in due course. In the event that their claim against Mrs
Correy fails, the plaintiffs seek damages in contract and in tort from Mr
Antonopoulos, on the basis that his advice to Mrs Correy was inadequate. In the event that the plaintiffs' claim against her succeeds, Mrs Correy seeks damages, also in contract and in tort, and other relief from Mr Antonopoulos on the same basis.

Henry Correy's whereabouts are unknown. There was no appearance for him at the trial, and an order for substituted service had been made.

Background 
Mrs Correy was born in Italy on 29 August 1928, and was sixty-five years old at the time of the events giving rise to these proceedings. She completed her schooling in that country. In the process she qualified as a primary school teacher, but she never worked as such. She trained as a nurse at an Anglo-
American hospital in Bagnoli (near Naples), and it was there that she met her husband, a doctor from Albania. While working at that hospital she learned
English.

They married in 1947 and migrated to this country a few years later. They had two sons: Henry, born in 1948, and Carlo, born in 1955. They settled on the south coast and she worked as a nurse at hospitals in that area until she was injured in a car accident in 1991. She has since been a pensioner.

The house at Corrimal is the family home and she has lived there since 1960.
Apart from an old car, it is her only asset. Her husband died in April 1993.
At the time with which I am concerned she was living in the house alone. Both her sons had married and Henry was living in the Sydney suburb of Kogarah, while Carlo lived at Unanderra, south of Wollongong. She was devoted to both of them and maintained regular contact with them.

It seems that Henry had a business interest in a popular music group which had produced a recording which sold well in Europe. He had told his mother that he anticipated profits from the sale of the recording amounting to millions of US dollars. In his absence the evidence about this matter is anything but clear, and there is no material before me from which the precise nature of his business might be determined, or its commercial viability assessed.

According to Mrs Correy, Henry paid her an unexpected visit at the Corrimal home on Sunday 15 May 1994. He asked for her help, saying that he needed to send money to a European record company "for taxation", so that he could receive his return from the record sales. He said that he had found people who would lend him the money, but he needed her to provide a guarantee. She paused before replying. She was upset as she was still affected by the loss of her husband. She said, "If your father would have been here at least I could have asked him." Henry replied, "I'm sure if Dad was here he would have helped me like he has always done in the past." He added, "If you are not going to help me I will go to a close friend of the family to ask to be a guarantor, or even the Mafia." He appeared to be desperate and she did not want him to approach someone outside the family. Accordingly, she agreed to act as guarantor and signed a document hand-written by Henry to that effect.

Mrs Correy said that she did not understand that, by providing a guarantee, she was herself undertaking any financial liability. She understood that she would merely be attesting to her son's "bona fides": "... that he was responsible, he was a genuine person, that he would pay them back ... the loan." 
The next day he rang her and asked her to provide him with the certificate of title and various other documents relating to the house, including the insurance policy, together with her husband's death certificate and will. He obtained these from her the following day (the Tuesday) and arranged to pick her up to conclude the transaction on the Wednesday. She said that she thought the documents were necessary to verify that she was the owner of the home, but had no sense that the home was to be used as security for a loan. Nor did she, she said, when a valuer came to the home at about 8.00 am on the Wednesday.

A week or so earlier, Henry Correy had attended the office of Smith &
Pasternacki and made enquiries of Mr Pasternacki about a loan. However, his only property was his own home, which was encumbered. Mr Pasternacki explained that he could be of no assistance as he could lend money only on first mortgage: <case>(f) and [s
D(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/s14d.html) of the [Trustee Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/). On Friday , or Monday 16, May a finance broker, Mr Tomazin, told Mr Pasternacki's partner, Mr Smith, that he had a client who wanted to borrow a figure of the order of $120,000 "short term". He said that the borrower's mother would guarantee the loan, providing a first mortgage over her home.

Mr Smith contacted Mr Tomazin later and said that a valuation of the home would be necessary. He discussed the proposal with Mr Pasternacki, who agreed to it provided that the mother, rather than the son, was the borrower. On
Tuesday 17 May, Mr Tomazin brought Henry Correy to see Mr Smith at the office.
Correy produced the documents which his mother had given him and paid a fee for a valuation. Asked by Mr Smith what he wanted the money for, he said it was to buy recording equipment in the United States (which is not what he had told his mother). He claimed to have "handled" some well known popular singers and, asked how he would repay the money, said that it would roll over very quickly because he had contracts in America. Mr Smith asked nothing further about the purpose of the loan and made no further enquiry of Correy about his business or his capacity to repay. He said that he hoped to have the necessary documentation prepared the next day and asked Correy to guarantee the loan.

It is not suggested that Mrs Correy was aware of any of these developments. At some stage - whether on 18 May or earlier is not clear - Henry told her that he was expecting a "cheque from overseas" in seventy-two hours whereupon "everything will be OK".

The Events of 18 May 1994 
In the morning of Wednesday 18 May 1994, Henry Correy picked up Mrs Correy and drove her to the office of Smith & Pasternacki, where they saw Mr Smith.
The mortgage secured an advance of $125,000, including interest, repayable on July 1994. The interest rate was 18 per cent per annum if repaid on time, and 20 per cent if paid late. It will be necessary to examine in some detail the evidence of what occurred that day. What is clear, however, is that Mrs
Correy signed the following documents: * The mortgage (exhibit C) which she also initialled in several places. * A notice of death in respect of her husband (exhibit N). * A letter to the insurers of the house informing them of the plaintiffs' interest as mortgagees (exhibit R1). * A form of warranty in respect of the house (exhibit R2). * A direction for payment of the sum advanced which appeared at the bottom of a letter to Mrs Correy from Smith & Pasternacki (exhibit D1), which noted that the interest rate was very high and recommended that she "look around for another loan with a lower interest rate". * A letter (exhibit 1) addressed to Smith & Pasternacki in the following terms: "Dear Sirs 
RE MY LOAN FOR $125,000.00.

I refer to my above loan application. I note that the interest rate is 18% pa and I note that you have advised me that I can look around for a better loan with a cheaper interest rate.

However I need the loan moneys very urgently for my son's business reasons and so I am happy to get this loan and pay the interest rate of 18% pa.

Because of my son's urgent business needs for the money this loan for $125,000.00 is of great benefit to me as I wish to help my son even though I understand that if the money is not repaid within 2 months I will lose my house and I will have to move out of my house and it will be sold." 
All those documents, including exhibit 1, had been prepared by Mr Smith and were presented to Mrs Correy when she attended his office. Mrs Correy gave Mr
Smith her driver's licence and he made a photocopy of it. The property was still in the joint names of Mrs Correy and her husband, and Mr Smith had her sign the notice of death so that he could effect a transfer of the title into her name alone. Henry Correy signed a deed of guarantee in respect of the loan (exhibit G).

Mr Smith told Mrs Correy that she would be the borrower, rather than the guarantor. He explained to her the terms of the loan, that is, the total amount of the advance, the period of the loan, the interest rate, and the fees involved. As observed earlier, Henry Correy had previously supplied Mr Smith with the certificate of title, the insurance policy, and other documents relating to the house. She asked that those papers be returned to her as they were valuable to her, but Mr Smith replied that she would get them back when the loan was repaid.

Mr Smith was aware that Mrs Correy was a pensioner. He did not enquire whether she had any assets apart from the home, and he assumed that it would have to be sold if the loan were not repaid. He understood that Henry did not have the capacity to borrow the money himself, and knew that Mrs Correy was being brought into the transaction only because she had an unencumbered property which could be mortgaged.

Otherwise, there is significant conflict in the evidence as to what occurred at that stage. According to Mrs Correy, she signed a number of documents without being directed to their text and without any opportunity to read them.
She said that she signed "four or five pages" which were "all printed pages".
In Mr Smith's presence and hearing she said to Henry, "I hope you know what
I'm signing because I don't." Henry enquired of Mr Smith what would happen if the loan were not repaid within the two months, and Mr Smith simply shrugged his shoulders.

Mrs Correy went on to say that Mr Smith told them that they would have to see an independent solicitor, and referred them to a solicitor on the same floor of the building. They waited for some time but that solicitor was not available. Mr Smith saw them waiting there and arranged for them to see Mr
Antonopolous.

Mr Smith's evidence is that he saw Mrs Correy first in the absence of Henry and said to her, "Now, about this loan, you realise if the monies are not paid back you are going to lose your house?" She replied, "Oh, I hope not." Henry
Correy then joined them and Mr Smith again told Mrs Correy that she would lose her house if the loan were not repaid. Before she could reply, Henry said, "Oh, don't worry Mum." 
According to Mr Smith, the only document she signed in his office was the notice of death. He gave her the mortgage and the other documents to which I have referred, and told her that she would have to see her own solicitor to have them explained to her. Henry protested that that would involve travelling back to Wollongong and there was not enough time to do that. Mr Smith suggested that they consult Mr Tomazin who might be able to refer them to a solicitor nearby. Apparently Mr Tomazin's office was on the same floor, but Mr
Smith denied that there was any other solicitor on that floor. Later he saw them at the entrance to Mr Tomazin's office and Henry showed him a piece of paper on which was written the name of Mr Antonopolous and his address.

Mr Smith denied that it was he who had arranged for them to see Mr
Antonopolous, although he knew Mr Antonopolous and had had professional dealings with him, including the referral of people requiring advice about mortgages. On the other hand, Mr Antonopolous gave evidence that Mr Smith telephoned him to ask him to see Mrs Correy, telling him that her son needed the advance that day and would be guaranteeing the loan. Mr Antonopolous made notes of this conversation, and I am satisfied that it occurred.

Before passing from this aspect of the matter, I should record that Mr
Pasternacki was at the office that morning in a room adjoining Mr Smith's. He gave evidence of hearing a woman's voice (presumably Mrs Correy's) saying quite loudly, "We don't want to see another solicitor, why can't we sign now,
I want to sign now", or words to that effect. Mr Smith himself gave no evidence that Mrs Correy said anything of the sort, and I accept that she did not.

Mrs Correy and Henry arrived at the office of Mr Antonopolous in the early afternoon of 18 May. Again, there is conflict in the evidence about what occurred, although it is common ground that Mr Antonopolous also made no enquiry of Mrs Correy about her means or capacity to repay the loan. Nor, it would seem, did he make any enquiry of either of them about Henry's business.
Mrs Correy's account is that Henry gave the mortgage and other documents to Mr
Antonopolous, who spent some time perusing them. He then asked her for her driver's licence, which she produced, and he had her initial the mortgage. He said nothing to her about the contents of the documents. However, he did say, "You realise if the loan is not paid by 18 July you may lose your home." They were running late, she was tired, and she did not ask any questions. She saw no point in doing so as the documentation had been signed.

The evidence of Mr Antonopolous is that he asked Henry to leave the room while he discussed the transaction with Mrs Correy. He took her through the letter from Smith & Pasternacki, exhibit D1, which set out the total amount of the advance and the interest rate, noting that that rate was "very high". Mr
Antonopolous himself observed that the interest rate was high, and asked her if she had made enquiries elsewhere. She said, "No, I am aware of that but I am happy with that." He ensured that she understood the memorandum of fees and disbursements set out in that letter. He then explained to her the salient terms of the mortgage itself, including the fact that the money was to be repaid within two months. She said that she was also "happy with that". He told her that if, for any reason, the amount advanced was not repaid on time, she could lose her home. It was only then that he had her sign the mortgage and initial various alterations in it.

Mr Antonopolous retained a copy of the mortgage, and later that day dictated a file note (exhibit JA3) which is consistent with his evidence. Among other things the note records that Mrs Correy "was well aware and understood that if she was in arrears, amongst other things, the mortgagees could sell her up."
He had no recollection of her signing the direction at the bottom of the letter exhibit D1 in his presence, nor of seeing the other documents (exhibits
R1, R2 and exhibit 1) at all. On the other hand, Mr Smith said that all those documents were signed when they were returned to him after the consultation with Mr Antonopolous. I accept that they were signed at the office of Mr
Antonopolous. Indeed, in final submissions, counsel for Mrs Correy conceded as much.

Later in the afternoon cheques were obtained for the amount of the advance in accordance with amended directions as to payment. There was also some conflict in the evidence about events at this stage, but nothing turns on it.

Relevant Findings 
I have already referred to the evidence of Mrs Correy that she did not understand what a guarantee entailed when the matter was first raised with her by her son. She went on to say that, when Mr Smith told her at his office that she was to be the borrower rather than the guarantor, the significance of that distinction also escaped her. More importantly, she denied that at any time on May she understood that she was making her home available as security for a loan. Even Mr Antonopolous' warning that if the loan were not paid on time she might lose her home, she said, did not "connect to" her at the time. She claimed that she realised that the house was mortgaged only later when she received in the mail an epitome of mortgage (exhibit P) under cover of a letter of 18 May forwarded to her by Mr Smith.

I cannot accept this evidence. Whatever might have been her understanding of the role of a guarantor, I am satisfied that at the time she signed the necessary documents on 18 May Mrs Correy knew that she was borrowing the sum involved on behalf of her son, and providing her home as security for that loan. Quite apart from the evidence of Mr Smith and Mr Antonopolous, there are aspects of her own evidence which lead me to that view.

She was not entirely unfamiliar with mortgages. During her husband's lifetime they had signed more than one mortgage over the family home (although I accept her evidence that it was her husband who negotiated them). Prior to the meeting with Mr Smith on 18 May, Henry had obtained from her the certificate of title and other documents relating to the home, and a valuer had come to the home. Mr Smith told her that she was to be the borrower. When Henry asked
Mr Smith what would happen if the loan were not repaid within the required time, and Mr Smith did not reply, she herself did not pursue the matter. When
Mr Antonopolous told her that she could lose the home if the loan were not repaid on time, she sought no explanation from him. Among the documents she signed that day was the letter, exhibit 1 (set out above), which acknowledged in plain language that her home was security for the loan.

Although she asserts that she understood this only when she later received the epitome of mortgage in the mail, she made no protest to Mr Smith about the matter (although she claims to have confronted her son about it). Nor did she when she later received correspondence from Mr Smith demanding payment, including a notice of demand under <case>(b) of the [Real Property
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/) (exhibit E).
Despite the revelation that she had unwittingly mortgaged her home, she was prepared to act as guarantor a week or so later in respect of another loan obtained by Henry from another solicitor for the purpose of the business. On this occasion, Henry's parents-in-law were also guarantors and no security was required.

Each of these matters, standing alone, might be explicable. The combination of them is not. In any event, I accept the evidence of Mr Smith and Mr
Antonopolous that they told Mrs Correy, before she signed the relevant documents, that she could lose her home if the loan were not repaid. It is what one would expect of both of them and neither of them stood to gain by not doing so. Particularly is this so, of course, of Mr Antonopolous. He had no interest in the transaction and his only function was to advise Mrs Correy.
Not to have informed her of the implications of the mortgage would have flown in the face of that function and would have been professionally reprehensible.

Non est factum was argued, but what I have said is sufficient to dispose of that contention. The melancholy truth is that Mrs Correy mortgaged her home for a substantial sum to help a son, to whom she was devoted, but who may well have deceived her. I accept her evidence that Henry "said that in seventy-two hours everything would have been over and fixed and I believed him." She was very confident in her son's ability to repay the amount borrowed. Despite all that had happened since, she described him in evidence as "an honest man" and "a good son". Such is a mother's love. We may never know what Henry's circumstances were in May 1994, or what has become of him since. In his absence, one must be cautious about drawing inferences against him.
Nevertheless, if there be a villain of this piece, it would appear to be Henry
Correy.

However, there are a number of other significant matters which I consider to be established by the evidence. Henry Correy applied considerable pressure to
Mrs Correy to assist him at a time when she remained emotionally vulnerable as a widow. The loan was negotiated without reference to her and she had no say in the terms of it. The transaction was completed in haste. Neither Mr
Pasternacki, Mr Smith nor Mr Antonopolous made any enquiry about the nature and profitability of Henry's business, or the prospect of his recovering the amount advanced within the time required. Mr Smith knew enough to conclude that Mrs Correy herself would be unable to repay the loan. That knowledge is attributable to Mr Pasternacki, whose evidence was that he left it to Mr Smith to make the assessments necessary to determine whether the money should be advanced. Mr Antonopolous also would have been aware of Mrs Correy's incapacity to repay the loan if he had made the appropriate enquiries, but he did not. All three men were aware that the loan was, in reality, for the benefit of Henry, not Mrs Correy.

Unconscionability 
Counsel for Mrs Correy argued that the contract was unconscionable, applying the principles enunciated by the High Court in Commercial Bank of Australia
Limited versus Amadio <case>; [(1982-3) 151 CLR 447.] Those principles were considered and applied by the
Court of Appeal more recently in Teachers Health Investments Pty Ltd versus Wynne (Court of Appeal, unreported, 16 July 1996): see the judgment of Beasley JA at pp 19-29. I find it unnecessary to determine this issue as I have concluded that Mrs Correy is entitled to relief upon the other basis argued, that is, the [Contracts Review Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/).
 [Contracts Review
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) 
There is no need to set out the relevant sections of this Act or to review the decisions relating to it, ranging from West versus AGC (Advances) Ltd [(1986) 5
NSWLR 610] to the decision in Teachers Health Investments versus Wynne itself (per Beasley JA, pp 31-3). The authorities consistently describe the
Act as beneficial legislation which should be interpreted liberally. I am mindful of the fact that a decision whether a contract is unjust is assisted, but not circumscribed, by the considerations set out in [s (2).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html) I am mindful also of the requirement to have regard to the matters referred to in [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html) and the breadth of the discretion conferred by [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s7.html) in the event that a contract is found to be unjust. In Younan & Anor v
Beneficial Finance Corporation Ltd (C of A, unreported, 21 November 1994),
Mahoney JA observed that "a contract is not to be interfered with lightly or for idiosyncratic reasons." His Honour went on: "The definition of `unjust' includes terms involving a high level of injustice. To an extent, that confirms, I think, that the reason which will justify interference must be of significant weight." 
I have already referred to the circumstances in which Mrs Correy agreed to assist her son financially and I consider them to be such as to give rise to "an equity" between them: cf Wynne at p 33. Of course, that of itself would not readily enliven the discretion to grant relief under the Act unless the plaintiffs were aware of it: Beneficial Finance Corp Ltd versus Karavas [(1991) NSWLR 256] per Maher JA at p 277. The only direct evidence of any such knowledge attributable to the plaintiffs is the occasion (referred to above) when Mr Smith reminded Mrs Correy that she would lose her home if the loan were not repaid, and Henry immediately told her not to worry before she had an opportunity to reply. However, there was some circumstantial evidence arising from the fact that, although he claimed to have a business association with some well-known names in the popular music industry, Henry was approaching a small suburban firm of solicitors for a loan for which he could not himself provide appropriate security. He was able to obtain the funds only with the assistance of his mother and only by the provision of her home as security, as she clearly could not repay the loan herself.

Certainly, it should have been clear to Mr Smith (and Mr Pasternacki) that the transaction may well have been improvident from Mrs Correy's point of view. I appreciate that this case is different from cases such as Karavas and
Wynne, where the lender had material from which the improvidence of the transaction was demonstrable. Here nothing was known about Henry Correy's capacity to meet his mother's liability, because nobody asked him. The circumstances were such as to put Mr Smith on enquiry. Indeed, I strongly suspect that it was his misgivings about this very matter which led to his drafting the letter exhibit 1. However, all he did was to refer Mrs Correy to
Mr Antonopolous for conventional legal advice about the mortgage, without suggesting that she obtain advice about her son's financial circumstances and his business. Nor did he ascertain whether she had received such advice before the transaction was brought to finality later in the afternoon of 18 May.
Indeed, it was obvious that she had not. It was apparent in this case that Mrs
Correy needed guidance as to the financial wisdom of the contract, not just its legal effect.

While acknowledging the obvious differences, there are some parallels between the circumstances here and those considered in Wynne: see the judgment of
Beasley JA, especially at pp 28-9 and 33. In my view, the plaintiffs are not assisted by evidence that Henry Correy needed the money urgently and the transaction was conducted in haste. Nor am I persuaded by the speculative submission that, even with appropriate advice as to the financial risk she was taking, Mrs Correy would have proceeded with the mortgage in any event.

For these reasons, I have come to the conclusion that the contract was unjust and that the whole of the circumstances, including the conduct of Mr
Pasternacki and Mr Smith themselves, entitle Mrs Correy to relief under the
Act. I have reached that decision only after anxious consideration. I have had regard to its consequences, as [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html) requires, particularly in the light of the fact that the money lent was held on trust for the beneficiaries under a will. I shall hear submissions from the parties as to what form that relief should take.

The Claim Against Mr Antonopolous 
It is necessary then to consider the plaintiffs' contingent claim against Mr
Antonopolous. This aspect of the matter can be dealt with briefly.

Put shortly, the claim against Mr Antonopolous is that he was in breach of a duty which he owed to the plaintiffs to advise Mrs Correy about the legal effect of the mortgage and the financial risk involved. I put to one side the question whether the relationship between the plaintiffs and Mr Antonopolous created any such duty, either in tort or contract. It is sufficient to say that, as I am satisfied that he gave Mrs Correy appropriate legal advice, Mr
Antonopolous did all that was required of him from the point of view of the plaintiffs (and, for that matter, of Mrs Correy).

As I have said, I accept that Mr Smith contacted Mr Antonopolous to refer Mrs
Correy to him. The evidence of Mr Antonopolous is that Mr Smith telephoned him and the following conversation occurred: "He said, `Hello, Jordan, it's Greg here.' We may have exchanged some further pleasantries, I don't recall exactly. He said, `I have a lady who is borrowing some money, it's $120,000.' And I asked, `Is it a first mortgage?' And he said, `Yes.' He said, `The property is at Wollongong and it's worth approximately $450,000.' I asked, `Will you need a certificate?' He said, `No.' I do recall him mentioning that the loan was - that her son needed the money that day and that the son would be guaranteeing the loan." 
Mr Smith had previously referred people to Mr Antonopolous in similar circumstances. Clearly, the referral of Mrs Correy was simply for advice about the legal effect of the mortgage. Mr Pasternacki himself said that it was the firm's practice to refer borrowers to an independent solicitor for legal advice, and he distinguished legal advice from financial advice. Certainly, he said, it was not his practice to require borrowers to obtain independent financial advice.

I am satisfied that nothing was said to Mr Antonopolous by Mr Smith or by Mrs
Correy herself to suggest that part of his retainer was to consider the providence of the transaction. In Wynne Beasley JA said (at p 29): "It is well established that it is no part of a solicitor's function to give commercial or financial advice unless retained to do so: Beneficial Finance
Corporation Ltd versus Karavas [(1991) 23 NSWLR 256] at 277 per Meagher J; Hogan versus Howard Finance Ltd [(1987) ASC 55-594]; Esanda
Finance Corporation Ltd versus Murphy (Hunt J, unreported, 17 March 1989). In my opinion, in circumstances such as these, a party cannot shelter behind an assumption that a solicitor's engagement had been extended beyond the usual retainer of a solicitor." 
See also Citicorp Australia Ltd versus O'Brien [(1996) 40 NSWLR 398], per
Sheller JA at pp 412-9.

Accordingly, the plaintiffs' claim against Mr Antonopolous fails.

Orders: 
As I have said, I wish to hear submissions from the parties about the form of the relief to which Mrs Correy is entitled under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s7.html) of the [Contracts Review
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/). I also wish to hear the parties on costs. After those matters have been considered the appropriate orders can be formulated.
 * * * 
