

Atlantis Corp Pty Ltd and Another versus Schindler and Others No. 1327/94
Patents [1996] NSWSC 16 (31 January 1996) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
EQUITY DIVISION
MCLELLAND CJ in Eq
HRNG
SYDNEY, 11-12 September 1995 #DATE 22:12:1995 #ADD 31:1:1996 
Counsel for the Plaintiffs         Mr C Evatt 
Counsel for the Defendants         Mr D Yates
ORDER
Orders made.
JUDGE1
McLELLAND CJ The first plaintiff (Atlantis) claims to be the exclusive licensee, and the second plaintiff (Mr Urriola) is the registered proprietor, of Australian Patent No 593085 (the Patent) which was sealed on 17 May 1990 under the
Patents Act 1952 (the 1952 Act), pursuant to an application accompanied by a provisional specification lodged on 9 April 1986, the complete specification having been lodged on 27 March 1987.
According to the complete specification, the invention is entitled "Drainage Cell" and "relates to the provision of adequate drainage by artificial means and has particular application in the area of landscaping gardening". After describing "(k)nown methods of draining relatively large surface areas where the funnelling of water directly into narrow diameter pipes is impractical or impossible" and various disadvantages of those methods, the specification proceeds: "According to the present invention there is provided a rigid cell structure comprising a first and second substantially parallel perforate planar members maintained in a fixed spaced relationship from each other by means of a plurality of spacer members; the perforations in the planar members comprising at least 40% of their surface area and all areas between perforations being adapted for load bearing at a loading of at least 20 kilograms per square metre; the perforate nature of both surfaces and the disposition of spacer members being such that gases or liquids may freely pass through the composite structure around the spacer means in any direction.

The present invention also teaches a method of providing drainage utilising the lastmentioned apparatus. In addition to roof-top garden applications it is envisaged that the invention may be of use to provide drainage under roadways, under embankments and elsewhere where surface erosion would otherwise be a problem." 
This is followed by a description of "(o)ne example of an article in accordance with the present invention ...
with reference to the accompanying drawings wherein:
Figure 1 is a part perspective view of a cell in accordance with the present invention;
Figure 2 is a further part perspective view of the cell of figure 1.
Figure 3 is a side elevation of the cell depicted in figures 1 and 2."
The drawings are reproduced in an appendix to this judgment. The specification further explains the drawings as follows: "Figure 1 depicts a drainage cell comprising a first planar perforate surface and a second planar perforate surface 2 maintained in parallel spaced relationship to each other by a plurality of upright spacer members 3.

The nature of perforations in the embodiment of figures 1 and may best be observed from figure 2 which clearly depicts substantially square perforate areas 4 in the first planar surface 1. It will be noted that the square perforate areas are interposed with substantially square load bearing sections such that the resulting configuration of the first planar surface 1 is checkered. In this embodiment the second perforate planar surface is of the same configuration as the first perforate planar surface except that the square perforate sections are out of register with each other such that directly beneath each square perforate section of the first perforate planar surface lies a square load bearing section of the second planar perforate surface."
The gross features of the designated structure might be roughly described as like two checker boards with spaces substituted for the white squares, separated and connected by narrow columns at the corner of each square in such a way that each black square on one board is opposite a space on the other board.
The specification goes on to describe more detailed elements of the structure and their utility.
The specification ends with twelve claims defining the invention in the following terms: "1 A rigid cell structure comprising a first and second substantially parallel perforate planar members maintained in a fixed spaced relationship from each other by means of a plurality of spacer members; the perforations in the planar members comprising at least 40% of their surface area and all areas between perforations being adapted for load bearing at a loading of at least 20 kilograms per square metre; the perforate nature of both surfaces and the disposition of spacer members being such that gases or liquids may freely pass through the composite structure around the spacer means in any direction.
 A structure in accordance with claim 1 wherein each spacer member adjoins at each end wall members in turn adjoining the ends of adjacent spacer members; the orientation of the walls being perpendicular to the plane of the parallel perforate planar members; the walls thereby serving to brace the entire structure and assist in transferring local stresses throughout the structure.
 A structure in accordance with any one of the preceding claims wherein at least twenty per cent of the total surface area of the planar surfaces is adapted to support a load.
 A structure in accordance with claim 1 wherein the spacer members are columnar in configuration and disposed substantially normally to the two parallel perforate surfaces.
 A structure in accordance with any one of the preceding claims wherein the perforate areas are formed as parallelograms interposed with load bearing sections of like configuration and dimensions in a checkered configuration; the spacer members being joined to the perforate planar members adjacent the corners of such parallelogram shaped load bearing sections and perforate areas.
 A structure in accordance with any one of the preceding claims wherein the perforate areas are of a substantially square configuration interposed with substantially square load bearing sections of similar dimensions in a checkered configuration; the spacer members being joined to the perforate planar members adjacent the corners of such square sections.
 A structure in accordance with any one of the preceding claims wherein all perforate areas of one perforate surface are out of register with the perforate areas of the opposing perforate surface.
 A structure in accordance with any one of the preceding claims where at least one of the planar perforate surfaces includes upon its internally facing side a plurality of low upstanding walls extending between adjacent spacer members defining shallow areas adapted to trap small quantities of liquid.
 A structure in accordance with any one of the preceding claims wherein the cell structure is of adequate strength to ensure that either one of the perforate planar surfaces has a load bearing capacity of at least twenty kilograms per square metre when the opposing perforate planar surface is supported by a rigid planar surface.
 A structure in accordance with any one of the preceding claims wherein the cell structure is of adequate strength to ensure that ei(t)her one of the perforate planar surfaces has a load bearing capability of between 15,000 and 90,000 kilograms per square metre when the opposing perforate planar surface is supported by a rigid planar surface.
 A rigid cell structure in accordance with any one of the preceding claims wherein there is a regular pattern of shall tongues and grooves along the peripheral edges of the structure to allow the structure to be interlocked when assembled into a mat.
 A structure substantially as hereinbefore described with reference to the accompanying drawings."
The present proceedings, which were commenced on 9 February 1994, are brought by the plaintiffs against the first defendant (Mr Schindler) and others (inter alia) for infringement of the Patent. By cross-claim Mr
Schindler seeks (inter alia) an order revoking the Patent. On 1 March 1994
Windeyer
J granted certain interlocutory injunctions against Mr Schindler and certain other defendants. On 30 June 1995 I ordered pursuant to Part 31 rule 2 of the Supreme Court Rules that seven specified questions be determined separately from and before any further trial of the proceedings. Six of those questions raise issues concerning the validity of the Patent, and the seventh is whether, in consequence of the determination of the earlier questions, an order should be made (a) revoking the Patent; and (b) discharging, or varying (and if so, in what manner) the interlocutory orders made on 1 March 1994.
The Patent was granted under the 1952
Act, which was repealed by the [Patents Act 1990](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/pa1990109/) (the 1990 Act), the commencement day of which was 30 April
Chapter 23 of the 1990 Act includes s.233 which provides in part: "233(1)Subject to this Chapter and the regulations, this Act applies in relation to a standard patent or a petty patent granted under the 1952 Act as if the patent had been granted under this Act.
 ...

Objection cannot be taken to a patent mentioned in subs.(1), and such a patent is not invalid, so far as the invention is claimed in any claim, on any ground that would not have been available against the patent under the 1952 Act."
There is nothing in the remainder of Chapter 23, or in the regulations, to affect the operation of s.233 in relation to the present proceedings. The effect of s.233 in proceedings under the 1990 Act for the revocation of a patent granted under the 1952 Act was stated by Lockhart J (with whom on this matter Northrop and Burchett JJ agreed) in N V Philips versus Mirabella <case>; [(1993) 44
FCR 239] at 253-4 as follows: "In my opinion the evident intent of <case> is to ensure that the grounds of revocation under the Act (which, though in some cases are expressed in different terms, are essentially the same as the grounds previously available under <case> of the Act) apply as the grounds for revocation of a 1952 Act patent; but with this important qualification, namely, that the elements of each ground of revocation under the 1990 Act apply only to the extent that they replicate in substance the elements that previously constituted a ground of revocation under the 1952 Act. Hence, if a ground of revocation under the Act omits an element which was a necessary part of a ground under the 1952 Act, the patentee has the benefit of it.
On the other hand, if a ground under the 1990 Act contains an element not previously present under the 1952 Act, it cannot apply in aid of revocation of the 1952 Act patent. In short, a 1952 Act patentee is not to be worse off than he would have been if the 1952 Act had continued to operate, but he may be better off if the 1990 Act treats a former element of a ground of revocation as being no longer necessary."
Of the six questions raising issues concerning the validity of the
Patent, three are directed to criteria specified in the 1990 Act and the other three are directed to the equivalent criteria specified in the 1952 Act. There is no ground of revocation the subject of any of the questions based on the Act which is not identical in substance to a ground of revocation under the 1952 Act (at least so far as they would apply to the present case) and the subject of the equivalent questions under that Act.
In these circumstances it is unnecessary to give separate consideration to the questions based on the 1952 Act (ie questions 2, 4 and 6). I will deal separately with questions 1, 3 and 5. In each case
I will state the substance of the question, including any material in the cross-claim incorporated by reference in the question.

Question 1: 
Whether the specification in the Patent does not comply with s. 40(2) and (3) of the 1990 Act, in that the claims or any (and if so which) of them: do not define the invention; are not clear and succinct; or are not fairly based on the matter described in the specification; by reason of the following matters particularised in the cross-claim: the published monopoly is for a product only and not for a drainage system as represented by the plaintiffs in the preliminary text of the specification and as represented in the title and intended to be so interpreted all 12 claims of the patent are devoid of reference to drainage, sub soil drainage or drainage system claim commenced with the words "A rigid call structure... " claim 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 100 commence with the words "A structure... " such claims being dependent on claim 1 claim 11 states "A rigid cell structure ... " which claim reverts to claim 1 claim 12 states "A structure ...
" and is a consequence of claim 1 all 12 claims are devoid of any specific or preferred end usage of the product all 12 claims are devoid of any specific or preferred method of manufacture claims 2, 4, 5, 7, 11 and 12 are the specific consequence of the injection moulding process which is not novel and is commonplace in industry and cannot be the subject of any exclusive monopoly.
Claim 1 of the Patent is broadly based and the structure as disclosed in claim 1 can be readily applied to the common place structure used throughout industry commonly referred to as a pallet used to carry or store cargo.
At the commencement of the hearing counsel for Mr Schindler informed the
Court that the contention that any of the claims are "not clear and succinct" raised in paragraph (b) of question 1 was not to be pursued.
So far as relevant to this question s.40 of the 1990 Act provides: "40...
A complete specification must: ...
where it relates to an application for a standard patent - end with a claim or claims defining the invention; ...
The claim or claims must be...fairly based on the matter described in the specification.
..."
The argument put for Mr Schindler on this question may be simply stated as follows: the invention described in the specification is clearly and expressly limited to a particular use of the designated structure, namely for the purpose of drainage. However, the claims purporting to define the invention contain no such limitation. They refer only to the structure itself and make no reference to its use, thereby claiming a monopoly far wider than the invention described in the specification, from which it follows that the claims neither define the invention described in the specification nor are fairly based on the matter described in the specification.
In my opinion it is clear that if on the true construction of the specification any claim purports to define an invention not limited to use for the purpose of drainage, then that claim is invalid. Before it assumed statutory form, as now represented in s.40 of the 1990 Act, the relevant principle was explained and applied in The Mullard Radio Valve Co versus Philco
Radio and Television Corporation of Great
Britain [(1936) 53 RPC 323], It is sufficient to refer to the following passage from the speech of Lord Macmillan (at 347): "If an inventor claims an article as his invention but the article will only achieve his avowed object in a particular juxtaposition and his inventive idea consists in the discovery that in that particular juxtaposition it will give new and useful results,
I do not think that he is entitled to claim the article at large apart from the juxtaposition which is essential to the achievement of those results. It was argued for the Appellants that if an article is new, is useful and has subject-matter, then it is necessarily patentable and entitled to protection.
But a claim may be for an article which is new, which is useful and which has subject-matter, yet it may be too wide a claim because it extends beyond the subject-matter of the invention.
The consideration which the patentee gives to the public disclosing his inventive idea entitles him in return to protection for an article which embodies his inventive idea but not for an article which, while capable of being used to carry his inventive idea into effect, is described in terms which cover things quite unrelated to his inventive idea, and which do not embody it at all. ...
 
It is undoubtedly the case that a claim may be too wide, in the sense that it claims protection for that for which the patentee is not entitled to protection, or that it gives him a wider protection than his discovery entitles him to receive. In the present instance the Patentee has claimed a monopoly of all valves with a certain feature of construction although the merit of his invention does not lie in that feature but in the utilisation in a particular and limited way of a valve containing that feature of construction. In so doing he has in my opinion over-reached himself and his claim is wider than the law will support."
This principle is applicable in the context of Australian statutory provisions relating to "fair basing" (see CCOM v Jiejing <case>; [(1994) 122 ALR 417] at and cases there referred to).
It is necessary to consider whether on the true construction of the specification of the Patent, the claims or any of them are expressly or by necessary implication limited to use of the structure there defined for the purpose of drainage. In Decor Corporation versus Dart Industries [(1989) AIPC 90-549]
Lockhart J pointed out that the function of the claims or claim in a specification "is to define clearly and precisely the monopoly claimed". His
Honour then went on to state the principles by reference to which the claim or claims should be construed in the following passage, with which I respectfully agree: "It is well established that there are no special rules for the interpretation of patent specifications, which are to be interpreted in the same way as any other written document upon ordinary principles of interpretation. The words used in a specification are to be given the meaning which the normal person skilled in the art would attach to those words, both in the light of his own general knowledge and in the light of what is disclosed in the body of the specification British
Thomson-Houston Company Ltd versus Corona Lamp Works Ltd [(1922) RPC 49] per Stephen J at p 60.

In one sense it is right to say that the specification must be read as a whole, but the specification is a whole made up of several parts and those parts have different functions. It is not legitimate to refuse or enlarge the meaning of the words of a Claim by glosses derived from other parts of the specification, or to confine the scope of the
Claims by reference to some limitation which may be found in the body of the specification but is not expressly or by inference reproduced in the Claims themselves. In ascertaining the width of a particular claim it is not permissible to vary or qualify the plain and unambiguous meaning of the Claim by reference to the body of the specification: Welch Perrin and Co Pty 
Limited versus Worrell <case>; [(1961) 106 CLR 588] per Dixon CJ, Kitto and
Windeyer JJ at p 610. However, if an expression in the Claim is not clear, it is then permissible to resort to the body of the specification in order to define or clarify the meaning of words used in the Claim without infringing the rule that clear and unambiguous words in the Claim cannot be varied or qualified by reference to the body of the specification:
Electrical and Musical Industries Limited versus Lissen Limited [(1938) 56 RPC 23] per curiam at p 69;
Interlego AG versus Toltoys Pty Limited <case>; [(1973) 130 CLR 461]
Barwick CJ and Mason J at p 479."
I would only add to this statement the proposition that, consistently with what I consider to represent the current and orthodox approach to the interpretation of written instruments by reference to their context and surrounding circumstances (see eg B and B Constructions versus Brian A Cheeseman [(1994) 35 NSWLR 227)], ambiguity or lack of clarity of an expression in a claim may become apparent from the contents of the body of the specification, even when it does not appear from the words of the claim considered in isolation.
In International Business Machines versus Commissioner of Patents <case>; [(1991) 22 IPR ], on a challenge to a decision of a delegate of the Commissioner of Patents to refuse to accept an application and specification,
Burchett J considered that by reading the specification as a whole, there was a necessary implication that the relevant claim, which was objected to as reciting and pre-empting a mathematical algorithm, was confined to the operation of computers.
In the present case, it is desirable to consider separately claims 1-11 inclusive, and claim 12. The essential features of claim 1 are incorporated by reference into each of claims 2-11. One of those elements is defined in claim as follows: "the perforate nature of both surfaces and the disposition of spacer members being such that gases or liquids may freely pass through the composite structure around the spacer means in any direction". The purpose of gas or liquids being able to freely pass through the composite structure and the spacer means in any direction is left unclear, and in my opinion this lack of clarity may legitimately be resolved by reference to the specification as a whole from which it is abundantly clear that the purpose is drainage. The mere title of the invention "Drainage Cell" is sufficient to indicate this. A somewhat analogous use of the body of a specification to elucidate a claim was made by the Privy Council in Lighting
Fastener Co versus Colonial Fastener Co [(1934) 51 RPC 349], applied by Latham CJ (at 57-9) and discussed by Dixon J (at ) in Palmer versus Dunlop Perdriau Rubber Co (1937) 59 CLR.
Claim does not incorporate the material in claim 1. The expression "substantially as hereinbefore described with reference to the accompanying drawings" incorporates so much of the body of the specification as describes the invention with reference to the drawings, as well of course as the drawings themselves. Claims in that general form have been upheld (see Raleigh
Cycle Co versus Miller [(1948) 65 RPC 141] at 91). The description in the specification is clearly expressed in terms of a drainage cell.
In my opinion, for the above reasons, the argument put for Mr Schindler on this question fails and the question should be answered in the negative.

Question :

Whether the invention the subject of the Patent is not a patentable invention in that, so far as claimed in any (and if so which) claim when compared with the prior art base as it existed before the priority date of that claim: it is not novel; or it does not involve an inventive step; within the meaning of s.18 of the 1990 Act, by reason of the following matters particularised in the cross-claim:
B (i) At a date before 9 April 1986 the second plaintiff/cross-defendant obtained the alleged invention indirectly from one or more persons or parties at 10 Myall
Avenue, Vaucluse.
At a date before 9 April 1986 one or more parties other than the second plaintiff/cross-defendant invented or contributed to the invention the subject of the Patent.
The second plaintiff/cross-defendant did not invent the invention the subject of the Patent but commissioned drawings and drafting of specifications for the Patent describing a piece of a plastic object found in the grounds of 10 Myall Avenue, Vaucluse shortly prior to 9 April 1986
On or before 26 April 1986 the second plaintiff/cross-defendant instructed Ted Burton of Burton
Plastics Pty Limited Brookvale to commission a metal mould for injection moulding purposes to enable production to take place of finished plastic product in accordance with the sample.
Upon manufacture of the mould in or about July 1986 the company Burton Plastics Pty Limited went into commercial production of the product on behalf of the first and second plaintiff in the second half of 1986
C (i) The provisional specification as filed by the second plaintiff/cross-defendant on 9 April 1986 is silent as to: area percentage of perforations in the planar members load capabilities of the cell structure.
These characteristics (a and b above) were first contemplated in the complete specification filed 27 March .
The second plaintiff/cross-defendant had since 1986 and prior to 27 March 1987 exposed the product known as
Drainage Cell in the public domain and had commercialised same.

So far as relevant to this question, s.18 of the 1990 Act provides: "18(1)... a patentable invention is an invention that, so far as claimed in any claim: ...
when compared with the prior art base as it existed before the priority date of that claim: is novel; and involves an inventive step; ..." 
Section 43 of the 1990 Act relevantly provides: "43 ...
The priority date of a claim is: the date of filing of the specifications; or where the regulations provide for the determination of a different as the priority date - the date determined under the regulations.
..."
Under regulation 23.18, the priority date of each claim of the specification of the Patent is to be determined under s.45 of the 1952 Act.
So far as presently relevant, s.45 of the 1952 Act provides as follows: "45(1) Subject to this Act, the priority date of a claim of a complete specification is the date of lodgement of that complete specification.
...
the priority date of a claim of a complete specification received after a provisional specification, being a claim fairly based on matter disclosed in the provision specification, is the date of lodgement of that provisional specification.
 ..."
Section 7 of the 1990 Act provides as follows: "7(1) For the purposes of this Act, an invention is to be taken to be novel when compared with the prior art base unless it is not novel in the light of any one of the following kinds of information, each of which must be considered separately: prior art information (other than that mentioned in paragraph ) made publicly available in a single document or through doing a single act; prior art information (other than that mentioned in paragraph (c)) made publicly available in 2 or more related documents, or through doing 2 or more related acts, if the relationship between the documents or acts is such that a person skilled in the relevant art in the patent area would treat them as a single source of that information; prior art information contained in a single specification of the kind mentioned in subparagraph (b)(ii) of the definition of "prior art base" in Schedule 1.
For the purposes of this
Act, an invention is to be taken to involve an inventive step when compared with the prior art base unless the invention would have been obvious to a person skilled in the relevant art in the light of the common general knowledge as it existed in the patent area before the priority date of the relevant claim, whether that knowledge is considered separately or together with either of the kinds of information mentioned in subsection (3), each of which must be considered separately.

For the purposes of subsection (2), the kinds of information are: prior art information made publicly available in a single document or through doing a single act; and prior art information made publicly available in 2 or more related documents, or through doing 2 or more related acts, if the relationship between the documents or acts is such that a person skilled in the relevant art in the patent area would treat them as a single source of that information; being information that the skilled person mentioned in subsection (2) could, before the priority date of the relevant claim, be reasonably expected to have ascertained, understood and regarded as relevant to work in the relevant art in the patent area." .
Schedule 1 of the 1990 Act includes definitions of "prior art base" and "prior art information" as follows: "" prior art base" means: in relation to deciding whether an invention does or does not involve an inventive step: information in a document, being a document publicly available anywhere in the patent area; and information made publicly available through doing an act anywhere in the patent area; and where the invention is the subject of a standard patent or an application for a standard patent - information in a document publicly available outside the patent area; and in relation to deciding whether an invention is or is not novel: information of a kind mentioned in paragraph (1); and information contained in a published specification filed in respect of a complete application where: if the information is, or were to be, the subject of a claim of the specification, the claim has, or would have, a priority date earlier than that of the claim under consideration; and the specification was published after the priority date of the claim under consideration; and the information was contained in the specification on its filing date and when it was published.
 "prior art information" means: for the purposes of subsection 7(1) - information that is part of the prior art base in relation to deciding whether an invention is or is not novel; and for the purposes of subsection 7(3) - information that is part of the prior art base in relation to deciding whether an invention does or does not involve an inventive step."
Two separate arguments were put for Mr Schindler on this question. The first depends upon whether the priority date of the respective claims in the
Patent was 27 March 1987 (the date of lodgement of the complete specification) or 9 April 1986 (the date of lodgement of the provisional specification), on the basis that between those two dates information disclosing the invention was made publicly available by Mr Urriola. The priority date will be 9 April in respect of claims in the Patent which are fairly based on matters disclosed in the provisional specification. It has been argued for Mr
Schindler that the claims of the complete specification include as essential features of the invention, the requirement that the perforations in the planar members of the structure comprise a minimum percentage of their surface area and that all areas between perforations be adapted for load bearing at a loading of at least 20 kilograms per square metre, and that the provisional specification is wholly silent on these matters.
In Re Cooper's Animal
Health <case>; [(1987) 76 ALR 429] Fox J (with whom Spender J agreed) said (at 436): "The phrase "fairly based" is not a term of art (F Hoffman-Le Roche and
Co AG versus Commissioner of Patents <case>; [(1970) 123 CLR 529] at 538-9; see also the decision in
Stauffer Chemical Co's Application ((1977) RPC 33) at ,52,61). Where the holder of the provisional specification proceeds with a complete specification with a view to the grant of a patent, it is recognised that greater definition, as a result of further experimentation or otherwise, may be achieved before the later step is taken and the result expressed therein. Some generality of expression in the provisional specification is accepted. In language which he would not have used as a definition, but is nevertheless a guide, Lloyd-Jacob J in Imperial Chemical Industries Ltd (Clark's) Application [(1969) RPC 574] at 583 said of the function of a provisional specification that it is: "...
a description of the general nature of the invention, its field of application and the anticipated result"."
In CCOM versus Jiejing (supra) at 437, the Court cited with approval the following passage of the judgment of Buckley LJ in Stauffer Chemical Co's
Application (Supra) at 54: "If a new feature were a development along the same line of thought which constitutes or underlies the invention described in the earlier document it might be that that development could properly be regarded as fairly based on the matter disclosed in the earlier document, and that the new process described in the later document which incorporates that development could as a whole be regarded as fairly based upon the matter disclosed in the earlier document. If, on the other hand, the additional feature involves a new inventive step or brings something new into the combination which represents a departure from the idea of the invention described in the earlier document, it could not, I think, be properly described as fairly based upon the earlier document."
The Court also pointed out that in Societe Des Usines Chimiques
Rhone-Poulenc versus Commissioner of Patents (1958) 100 CLR5 at :
 "... Fullagar J emphasised that disclosure without claim is enough. Hence, it is wrong to proceed as if testing for infringement and to seek to isolate in the body of the complete specification, or in the provisional specification, "essential integers" or "essential features" of an invention disclosed therein and to ask whether they correspond with the essential integers in the claim in question; cf Coopers Animal
Health Australia Ltd versus Western Stock Distributors Pty Ltd [(1986) 67 ALR 390] at 406, the decision at first instance.
Nor would it be applying the statute to ask whether the earlier specifications fairly described the essential features of the invention disclosed in the later specification; cf Yamazaki (Mazak Corp <case>; [(1992) AIPC 90-879)] at 93, 97. Fullagar J also pointed out that the requirement of "fair basing" on matter disclosed in an earlier specification would be senseless if what was required was that the subject matter of the claim must have been actually claim in the earlier specification; rather, there must be "a real and reasonably clear disclosure". This passage was adopted and applied by Gibbs
J in Hoffman-La Roche at 119, where the claims were for chemical compounds forming part of a very large class disclosed in the basic application." (See generally Sartas (No 1) versus Koukourou and Partis <case>; [1995 AIPC 91-121] at -4 per Gummow J.)
Most of the provisional specification is devoted to a description of a drainage cell constructed from two planar members with circular opposing openings separated and connected by alternating series of interlocking pins and sockets.
The final paragraph reads as follows: "It will thus be appreciated that this invention at least in the form of the embodiment described provides an exceptionally novel and unique drainage cell which is suitable in a wide variety of applications. Clearly however the particular example disclosed is only one form of this invention and a wide variety of modifications may be made without departing from the scope of this invention. For example the shape, number and orientation of the apertures and spacer means may be varied according to the application or design preference or alternatively the cell may be constructed in a unitary fashion as depicted in figures -10 hereof. Figure 11 depicts one possible application of the drainage cell in accordance with figures 6-10 hereof.'
Figures 6-11 illustrate a structure practically identical to that later appearing in the complete specification. The verbal description in the provisional specification makes no reference either to a minimum area of the surface of the planar members for perforations, or to the adaptation of areas between the perforations for load bearing, to any particular degree. However, matter may for relevant purposes be disclosed in a provisional specification otherwise than in verbal description: in particular it may be disclosed in accompanying drawings or in a combination of verbal description and drawings.
(cf Sartas (No ) supra at 39133).
It is clear from the nature of the system described in the provisional specification (a) that the perforations in the planar surfaces would require some minimum area for effective drainage, and (b) that the structure would be required to carry soil and other material placed on top of it, and, as indicated in figure 11, of considerable depth and therefore weight, requiring some minimum load bearing capacity. In my opinion the inclusion in claim 1 (incorporated in claims 2-11) of the complete specification of minimum areas of perforations and minimum load bearing capacity cannot be said to preclude those claims from being regarded as fairly based on the provisional specification. Similar considerations apply to claim 12.
Accordingly, in my view, all the claims in the Patent have a priority date of 9 April 1986.
The second argument put for Mr Schindler on this question is based on uncontradicted evidence that there existed in the public domain prior to 9
April 1986 a manufactured article embodying a structure practically identical with that depicted in figures 6-10 inclusive in the provisional specification, and with that described and illustrated in the complete specification. That article was a plastic paddle bat, the blade of which had a structure substantially similar to that of the drainage cell described in the complete specification. Mr Urriola had found a piece of such a bat lying in a heap of rubbish at Vaucluse in or about January or February 1986 and adapted the design of the blade structure for the contemplated drainage cell, which he had conceived in or about January 1984 and had been working on from time to time thereafter. A major problem had been to create a three dimensional design which was capable of being manufactured using plastic injection techniques from a manufactured mould. Until Mr Urriola found the piece of bat, his projected designs for the drainage cell had the openings in the two flat surfaces opposite each other, the manufacture of which would have required the welding or joining together of the two surfaces with the separating and connecting columns. The piece of bat gave him the idea of positioning the openings in the two surfaces so that each opening on one surface was a rectangle corresponding with a closed rectangular area on the opposing surface. The advantage of this design was that it could be manufactured by a single injection moulding without the necessity for any welding or joining, thus being much cheaper and much stronger. It was to incorporate this idea that the description of the alternative mode of construction of the drainage cell in a unitary fashion, and figures 6-11, were added to the (then) draft provisional specification which was ultimately lodged on 9
April 1986.
This second argument in support of the absence of novelty or an inventive step was based upon the premise that on the true construction of the complete specification the claims were for nothing more than a particular structure, which structure, it was said, was substantially identical to that embodied in the piece of bat found by Mr Urriola. My conclusions earlier expressed on the question of construction remove the foundation of this argument. The pre-existence of the bat is not inconsistent with novelty and an inventive step subsisting in the finding of a new adaptation of the structure so as to serve a new purpose, namely drainage, which was in no degree analogous to its use in a bat (cf National Research Development Corporation versus Commissioner of
Patents <case>; [102 CLR 252] at 235), it could not be said that the use of the structure in question in a bat would, if the Patent were valid and limited to the purpose of drainage, constitute an infringement. Nor could it be said that the use of the structure in question in a bat would "enable the notional skilled addressee at once to perceive and understand and be able practically to apply" the structure for drainage "without the necessity of making further experiments" (cf Nicaro Holdings versus Martin
Engineering <case>; [91 ALR 513] at 517 per Lockhart J).
In my opinion both arguments fail and this question should be answered in the negative.

Question :

Whether the Patent was obtained by fraud, false suggestion or misrepresentation, within the meaning of s.138 of the 1990
Act by reason of the following matters particularised in the cross-claim:
B (i) At a date before 9 April 1986 the second plaintiff/cross-defendant obtained the alleged invention indirectly from one or more persons or parties at 10 Myall
Avenue,
Vaucluse.
At a date before 9 April 1986 one or more parties other than the second plaintiff/cross-defendant invented or contributed to the invention the subject of the Patent.
The second plaintiff/cross-defendant did not invent the invention the subject of the Patent but commissioned drawings and drafting of specifications for the Patent describing a piece of a plastic object found in the grounds of 10 Myall Avenue, Vaucluse shortly prior to 9 April 1986
On or before April 1986 the second plaintiff/cross-defendant instructed Ted Burton of Burton
Plastics Pty Limited Brookvale to commission a metal mould for injection moulding purposes to enable production to take place of finished plastic product in accordance with the sample.
G (ii) application for Patent dated 7 April 1986 of Humberto
Urriola which states inter alia "The actual inventor(s) of the said invention is/are ... Humberto Urriola"
Declaration in support of application for Patent entitled "Drainage Cell" and dated 24 October 1989 which states: "3 I am the actual inventor of the invention " signed by
Humberto Urriola. The representation was made with specific knowledge of the existence of the prior art.
Such misrepresentation was made ftaudulently, and constituted a false suggestion and a misrepresentation to the Australian
Patents Office.
 .
The suggestion that the Patent was obtained by fraud, false suggestion or misrepresentation depends upon it being established that
Mr Urriola was not the inventor of the invention the subject of the Patent as he claimed. In support of this, reliance is placed on the same considerations as have already been dealt with in respect of questions 1 and 3. My conclusions in relation to those questions require a negative answer to this question.

Question 7: 
It follows from my determinations in relation to questions 1, 3 and 5 that it has not been shown that the Patent should be revoked or that the interlocutory orders should be discharged or varied, and this question should also be answered in the negative.
The orders of the Court are as follows: The Court records, pursuant to Part 31 rule 5 of the Supreme
Court Rules that the separate questions ordered on 30 June 1995 to be determined separately, are decided as follows: 
Question 1: No; 
Question 2: Unnecessary to decide; 
Question 3: No; 
Question 4: Unnecessary to decide; 
Question 5: No.

Question 6: Unnecessary to decide; and 
Question 7: No.
 The Court orders that the cross-claimant pay to the cross-defendants their costs of so much of the proceedings as relate to the determination of the separate questions, and of the notices of motion filed by one or more of the defendants on 8 March 1995 and May 1995.
 The Court orders that the notice of motion filed by the cross-defendants on 25 August 1995 be dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1996/16.html  
