

Aitc Pty Limited and Anor versus NSW Rugby League Ltd and Anor [1998] NSWSC 999 (31 January 1998) 
AITC PTY LIMITED & ANOR versus NSW RUGBY LEAGUE LTD & ANOR /95 February 1997 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMERCIAL DIVISION 
ROLFE J [Jurisdiction of Courts (Cross-Vesting) Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/joca1987427/) 
Proceedings cross-vested from Supreme Court of New South Wales to Federal Court of Australia pursuant to [s.5(1).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/joca1987427/s5.html) 
Only basis for opposition to the order that the Further Amended Cross-Claim disclosed no arguable case as to the existence of a fiduciary relationship.

Hospital Products Limited versus United States Surgical Corporation & Ors <case>; [(1984-85) 156 CLR 41]; 
General Steel Industries Inc versus Commissioner for Railways  <case>; [(1964) 112 CLR 125]; and 
Wickstead versus Browne [(1992) 30 NSWLR 1] applied.
 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
Introduction 
By a Notice of Motion filed on 4 February 1997 the applicants, New South Wales
Rugby League Limited and Australian Rugby Football League Limited, which are the defendants and cross-claimants in these proceedings and for which Mr R.J.
Weber of Counsel appeared, seek orders that the proceedings be transferred to the Federal Court of Australia, New South Wales District Registry, General
Division, pursuant to the [Jurisdiction of Courts (Cross-Vesting) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/joca1987427/), and for consequential relief. The respondents, AITC Pty Limited and News Limited, which are the plaintiffs and cross-defendants and for which Mr T.D. Castle of
Counsel appeared, opposed the making of those orders.

To understand the basis of this opposition it is necessary to recount some of the history of the proceedings. On 16 August 1996 Giles CJCommD noted that the proceedings had been settled, although there was some dispute whether this had occurred "in part or in whole", and his Honour said:- "I record that the dispute earlier mentioned is in essence upon whether anything remains in the cross-claim as a result of the settlement presently documented, and the parties are in agreement that that can be left until the date flowing from paragraph 7 as the result on which that date turns may make it irrelevant to decide.
 
I stand the proceedings over for directions on 20 December 1996, to be re-listed earlier in accordance with paragraph 7 of the terms of settlement by the parties applying to the Commercial List Clerk." 
It is unnecessary to refer to all the terms on which the matter was settled. In paragraph 1 there was judgment, by consent, for the applicants "on the causes of action alleged in the further amended points of claim dated 2 February 1996".

Paragraph 7 stated:- "Proceedings on the further amended cross-claim dated 16 February 1996 are by consent to be stood over until the fourth Friday after delivery by the Full Federal Court of reasons for judgment in proceedings NG 213 of 1996 in that Court upon the clear understanding between the parties that: the cross-defendants admit no liability under any of the claims or causes of action pleaded in paragraphs 19 - 32 (inclusive) of the said further amended cross-claim; and the cross-defendants reserve the right to argue that by reason of the judgment referred to in paragraph (1), the claims or causes of action referred to in sub-paragraph (a) of this paragraph do not disclose a reasonable cause of action or are frivolous, vexatious or an abuse of process." 
The proceedings in the Full Court of the Federal Court to which reference was made was the hearing of the appeal from Burchett J in the Super League case, which for present purposes will identify it sufficiently, and in which judgment was given by the Full Court on 4 October 1996. In general terms, and once again I think sufficiently for present purposes, the Full Court upheld the appeal.

On 20 December 1996 these proceedings came before Giles CJCommD again and his
Honour noted:- "If anything remains in the proceedings, and there is dispute over that, it is the cross-claim. The cross-claimant wishes to obtain advice from counsel involved in the well-known rugby league case in relation to applying to cross-vest the cross-claim to be dealt with together with the remaining issues in that case. The cross-defendant is agreeable to the matter being adjourned so that advice can be taken and, if so advised, the cross-claimant may apply. As well as that, it seems desirable to bring to a head whether the cross-claim remains to be dealt with." 
To achieve this his Honour gave certain directions.

The Notice of Motion was supported by the affidavit of the solicitor for the applicants, Mr Ian Stuart Wylie, sworn 4 February 1997. Mr Wylie set out the history of the proceedings and, after referring to the judgments at first instance and on appeal in the Federal Court, he deposed that there is a substantial overlap between the remaining claims of the applicants in these proceedings and the remaining claims awaiting hearing and determination in the
Federal Court before Burchett J, and that he has been advised by Senior
Counsel:- "... that there is a likelihood of substantial overlap of issues and witnesses in each case resulting in a real likelihood of duplication of costs and time of the Court and the parties if the remaining claims in these proceedings are not heard concurrently with the remaining claims in the Federal Court proceedings, and that both claims are likely to occupy considerable Court time when they proceed to hearing." 
In paragraph 12 Mr Wylie referred to further advice from Senior Counsel about the issues arising under the Further Amended Cross-Claim substantially overlapping with the proceedings to go forward in the Federal Court.

The assertions made by Mr Wylie as to the relationship between the proceedings arising under the Further Amended Cross-Claim and the balance of the proceedings to be heard in the Federal Court were not in issue. It was agreed between the parties that if the respondents' submission that there was no content left in the Further Amended Cross-Claim was not correct then, subject to my being satisfied that this is an appropriate matter in which to make a cross-vesting order, such an order should be made. The substantial issue, accordingly, was whether there was any content in the Further Amended Cross-
Claim and, hence, whether there was anything to cross-vest.

The Submissions Made 
The respondents submitted that by reason of the judgment entered in favour of the applicants on 16 August 1996, the Further Amended Cross-Claim "no longer discloses any maintainable cause of action". It was submitted that it has always been common ground between the parties that a contractual arrangement existed from 1985 to either the end of 1994 or 31 January 1995 for the licensing of certain rugby league intellectual property, and that the central issue raised by the Points of Claim was whether the applicants had granted a further licence to the respondents in relation to the intellectual property for the period from 1 February 1995 until 31 January 1998 with a further two year option. It was submitted that as judgment was entered for the respondents on the causes of action alleged in the Points of Claim there were, relevantly, two consequences, namely:- "(a) There was no 1995 Licensing Agreement for licensing the intellectual property from 1 February 1995 until 31 January 1998 as alleged by the cross-defendants; 
The contractual arrangements between the parties for licensing the intellectual property ended in 1994." 
It was further noted in the submissions that to give effect to the matters to which I have just referred paragraphs 2 to 5 of the Terms of Settlement provided for the respondents to pay certain specified sums to the applicants and to deliver up to them property.

The submissions then turned to deal with the Further Amended Cross-Claim and, in relation to the claim for breach of fiduciary duty, asserted that it is a claim which "must fail" because even if such a duty existed, which is denied, "that duty was coterminous with the contractual arrangement said to have given rise to" it. In this respect it was said that the duty terminated in 1994 and that no further duty arose because there was no contractual arrangement between the parties thereafter.

On behalf of the applicants it was submitted that it is correct to state that:- ".. the only live issue remaining to be litigated in the proceedings are those relating to the breach of fiduciary duty claim which is pleaded within paragraphs 19 - 32 of the further amended cross claim." 
It was submitted that the assertions by the respondents that the fiduciary duty was coterminous with the licensing agreement, which concluded at the end of 1994, and that "the breaching conduct" occurred on or after 31 March 1995 were both flawed. The submission continued:- "The first proposition seems to proceed from an assumption that equity only protects a beneficiary from the unconscientious use of fiduciary duty which is contractually based, during the currency of the contract concerned. This is clearly not the case as a consideration of the relationship of solicitor and client and director and company would readily demonstrate." 
It was further submitted that the fiduciary duty sued upon is expressed in paragraph 25 to be "ongoing" and that the applicants submit that the second plaintiff's actions "in planning and establishing the so called Super League were contrary to that continuing fiduciary duty".

The submission continued that the breaching acts were not confined to those which occurred on or after 31 March 1995, which was said to be the date on which the second plaintiff's "hitherto secret operation to set up Super League began to be made public". It was submitted:- "The long term planning to set up the Super League competition which constituted breaches of fiduciary duty commenced well into 1994 as is described in the judgment of Burchett J ..." 
The oral submissions before me ranged around points concisely raised in counsel's written submissions. In the end it became clear that the real matter in issue was whether the Further Amended Cross-Claim failed to disclose a cause of action for the reasons asserted by the respondents such that it should be struck out. Accordingly, the respondents undertook, in opposing the cross-vesting application, the obligation of establishing that the Further Amended Cross-Claim, in the paragraphs to which I have referred, did not disclose an arguable cause of action so that, conformably with the principles laid down in Dey versus Victorian Railways Commissioners <case>; [(1949) 78 CLR 62] the proceedings should be dismissed. The principles are so well known as to hardly require any repetition in this judgment. Suffice it is to say that in Webster Mason CJ, Deane and Dawson JJ said at p.602:- "It is important to note at the outset that the issue before the learned Master on the application for summary judgment was not whether Mr and Mrs Webster would probably succeed in their action against Sergeant Lampard. It was whether the material before the Master demonstrated that that action should not be permitted to go to trial in the ordinary way because it was apparent that it must fail. The power to order summary judgment must be exercised with 'exceptional caution' and 'should never be exercised unless it is clear that there is no real question to be tried'." 
As Kirby P pointed out in Wickstead & Ors versus Browne [(1992) 30 NSWLR 1] these principles apply with even greater force when there are other matters to be tried between the parties, which is the position in the present case. This reasoning did not find favour with the majority but, on an application for special leave to the High Court, that Court granted such leave and allowed the appeal, essentially for the reasons set out by his Honour.

Mr Castle took me through the relevant allegations in the Further Amended
Cross-Claim with thoroughness and care to seek to satisfy me that it did not disclose an arguable cause of action based on breach of fiduciary duty. In addition to the submissions to which I have referred he noted that in paragraph 20 the allegation related to the period "on and from at least 31
March 1995". There was some dispute as to whether this pleading allows the applicants to look at conduct occurring before that date. In the view I take it probably does, but in considering the matter overall I do not think that this is a determinative point.
 
The Nature Of The Fiduciary Duty 
Mr Castle submitted that a fiduciary duty is coterminous with a contract, and that it cannot exceed beyond the existence of any contract if it arises in circumstances where the relationship between the parties depends upon a contract. He relied in particular upon the statement of Mason J in Hospital Products Limited versus United States Surgical Corporation & Ors <case>; [(1984-1985) 156 CLR 41] at p.97.

In my opinion this is too narrow a view to take of the existence of a fiduciary duty where the parties are also in a contractual relationship and I do not consider that a reading of the judgments in Hospital Products, including the whole of the judgment of Mason J, supports the submission to the extent that it can be said that the existence of a contract determines not only the existence of a fiduciary duty, but the content and extent of that duty. In my opinion Hospital Products shows that those matters must be decided after considering all the facts and circumstances of each case. Hence it is not possible to say that the Further Amended Cross-Claim does not disclose a cause of action. At p.68 Gibbs CJ said:- "The authorities contain much guidance as to the duties of one who is in a fiduciary relationship with another, but provide no comprehensive statement of the criteria by reference to which the existence of a fiduciary relationship may be established." 
After referring to various categories where it is recognised that there is a fiduciary duty, his Honour said:- "There is no reason to suppose that these categories are closed. However, the difficulty is to suggest a test by which it may be determined whether a relationship, not within one of the accepted categories, is a fiduciary one." 
At p.59 his Honour doubted whether it was fruitful to attempt to make a general statement of the circumstances in which a fiduciary relationship will be found to exist and, at p.70, he continued:- "On the other hand, the fact that the arrangement between the parties was of a purely commercial kind and that they dealt at arm's length and on an equal footing has consistently been regarded by this Court as important, if not decisive, in indicating that no fiduciary duty arose ..." 
On the facts of that case his Honour was satisfied that such an arrangement did not exist and, at p.72, he said:- "The test suggested by the Court of Appeal in the present case seems to me not inappropriate in the circumstances, although it must be remembered that any test can only be stated in the most general terms and that all the facts and circumstances must be carefully examined to see whether a fiduciary duty exists .." (My emphasis.) 
Mason J, at p.97, said:- "That contractual and fiduciary relationships may co-exist between the same parties has never been doubted. Indeed, the existence of a basic contractual relationship has in many situations provided a foundation for the erection of a fiduciary relationship. In these situations it is the contractual foundation which is all important because it is the contract that regulates the basic rights and liabilities of the parties. The fiduciary relationship, if it is to exist at all, must accommodate itself to the terms of the contract so that it is consistent with, and conforms to, them. The fiduciary relationship cannot be superimposed upon the contract in such a way as to alter the operation which the contract was intended to have according to its true construction." 
This was a passage upon which Mr Castle placed heavy reliance. However, at p.98, after considering certain specific situations, Mason J said that there may be "a more limited fiduciary relationship for it is well settled that a person may be a fiduciary in some activities but not in others ..". His Honour was of the view that in considering whether a "best efforts" clause gave rise to a fiduciary duty it was necessary to consider the particular facts of the case and, at p.99, he said:- "The difficulty of deciding under the contract when the fiduciary is entitled to act in his own interests is not in itself a reason for rejecting the existence of a fiduciary relationship, but it may be an element in arriving at the conclusion that the person asserting the relationship has not established that there is any obligation to act in the interests of another." 
At p.100 his Honour said:- "But it is altogether too simplistic, if not superficial, to suggest that commercial transactions stand outside the fiduciary regime as though in some way commercial transactions do not lend themselves to the creation of a relationship in which one person comes under an obligation to act in the interests of another. The fact that in the great majority of commercial transactions the parties stand at arm's length does not enable us to make a generalisation that is universally true in relation to every commercial transaction. In truth, every such transaction must be examined on its merits with a view to ascertaining whether it manifests the characteristics of a fiduciary relationship." (My emphasis.) 
At p.102 his Honour observed:- "The categories of fiduciary relationships are infinitely varied and the duties of the fiduciary vary with the circumstances which generate the relationship." 
At p.118 Wilson J said that the relationship of manufacturer and sole distributor was not one "which would ordinarily be productive of a fiduciary duty". He continued, subsequently:- "In a commercial transaction of the kind here under consideration, where the parties are dealing at arm's length and there is no credible suggestion of undue influence, I am reluctant to import a fiduciary obligation. The courts have often expressed a cautionary note against the extension of equitable principles in the domain of commercial relations, so as 'not to strain (them) beyond (their) due and proper limits' .. " 
It is clear that his Honour was not excluding the existence of a fiduciary duty in circumstances where there was a contract, nor seeking to confine that duty only to the extent of the contract.

At p.123 Deane J stated that the conclusion that the relationship between the parties was not fiduciary did not preclude the possibility that, within or arising from that relationship, a more restricted fiduciary relationship might exist. He continued:- "Indeed, the continuing relationship of manufacturer and distributor might well provide a context in which it would be easier to imply an undertaking by one party to act as a fiduciary in relation to a particular matter than would be the case if that relationship did not exist." 
At p.137 Dawson J, in examining the nature of the fiduciary relationship, said:- "The fact of that agreement is no necessary bar to the existence of a fiduciary relationship between the parties to it whether or not the agreement imposed obligations of a fiduciary nature but its terms are obviously of significance in determining what their relationship was." 
At pp.141-142 his Honour said:- "Notwithstanding the existence of clear examples, no satisfactory, single test has emerged which will serve to identify a relationship which is fiduciary. It is usual - perhaps necessary - that in such a relationship one party should repose substantial confidence in another in acting on his behalf or in his interest in some respect. But it is not in every case where that happens that there is a fiduciary relationship. ..." 
Subsequently, at pp.142-143, his Honour continued:- "No doubt it was necessary to look to the contract as part of an inquiry whether the relationship between the parties was of such a kind that equity would impose fiduciary obligations in addition to those imposed by the contract. However, as I have said, I can discern no basis for the implication of a term such as was found to exist and it follows that in my view there is absent from the relationship between the parties any fiduciary character which may have been derived from such a term. Of course, the relationship between the parties to a contract may be defined not only by the contract itself but may also arise from the circumstances in which the contract is made. But, just as the common law does not allow the implication of a term merely to remedy the inadequacy of the parties' contractual arrangements, so too does equity decline to readjust the balance of a relationship which does not of its very nature place the parties in an unequal position." 
His Honour came to the conclusion that there was "no special feature of the distributorship agreement ... which distinguished it from any ordinary commercial arrangement of its type": p.147.

It seems to me that all of these statements make it clear that whilst it is possible to determine whether and to what extent a fiduciary relationship exists when one has regard to the particular facts of a case, and irrespective of whether the parties' relationship is also governed by a contract, it is not possible to determine the nature and extent of any fiduciary relationship without examining all the facts and circumstances of each case. Once that is accepted it cannot be said that the allegation of a contract and a fiduciary duty, notwithstanding that the allegation provides for a close connection between the two, leads to a situation that there cannot be a fiduciary duty once the contractual obligation is determined. The determination of the issue will depend on all the facts as ultimately found and the matter cannot be disposed of by a summary strike out application. Of course nothing I have said is intended to suggest that the allegations made in the Further Amended Cross-
Claim will succeed once all the facts have been ventilated.

Conclusion 
In the result the only opposition to the making of the cross-vesting order fails. Notwithstanding the agreement of the parties that if that should happen the matter should be cross-vested I have considered this matter for myself.
The evidence of Mr Wylie, to much of which I referred, satisfies me that this is an appropriate case in which to make the order the applicants seek. The respondents' opposition to the orders sought in the Notice of Motion having failed I consider they must pay the applicants' costs.

Orders 
I make an order in terms of paragraph 1 of the Notice of Motion filed on 4
February 1997.

I order the respondents to pay the applicants' costs.

I order the Exhibits be returned.
 * * * 
