

Avenhouse and Anor versus The Council of the Shire of Hornsby Matter No Ca /95 [1998] NSWSC 188 (15 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 10 June 1998 
AVENHOUSE & ANOR versus THE COUNCIL OF THE SHIRE OF HORNSBY 
CA 40485/95; CL 14473/84 May 1998 
Mason P, Priestley JA, Sheller JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Common Law Division - Spender AJ 
FILE NO/S: CA 40485/95; CL 14473/84 
DELIVERED: 15 May 1998 
HEARING DATE: 5, 6, 9 February 1998 
PARTIES:AVENHOUSE & ANOR versus THE COUNCIL OF THE SHIRE OF HORNSBY 
JUDGMENT OF: MASON P, PRIESTLEY, SHELLER JJA 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: MD Young/A McInerney 
Respondent: PW Taylor SC/SA Gregory 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: Wight & Strickland 
Respondent: Phillips Fox 
CATCHWORDS: STATUTORY INTERPRETATION - cl 3 (b) of Ord 32 under Local Court Act 1916 imposes a statutory duty 
NEGLIGENCE - duty of care - proximity 
COSTS - costs agreements in other proceedings 
DAMAGES - vexation 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Allowed 
NO OF PAGES: 88 
AVENHOUSE & ANOR versus COUNCIL OF THE SHIRE OF HORNSBY 
Summary of Facts 
The appellants entered into a contract to purchase a property on Fraser Road in Cowan with the intention of subdividing it. The vendor of the land had obtained conditional approval for a two stage subdivision from the Council of the Shire of Hornsby dated 14 May 1975. The plan accompanying the approval indicated that both stages one and two were for three lot subdivisions. The appellants' purchase and subsequent plans for subdivision went ahead on this basis.

On 3 September 1979 the vendor began proceedings in the Equity Division for a declaration that the contract for sale had been validly terminated pursuant to a special condition therein (the first equity proceedings). The basis for the purported termination was that the subdivision had not been registered as a deposited plan within the time period specified. The appellant filed a cross claim seeking specific performance. These proceedings were completed by the issuing of consent orders on 20 October 1980. After the issue of these orders the appellants pressed the Council to effect the subdivision as soon as possible.

On 3 February 1981 the Shire Clerk wrote to the appellants informing them that the delineation between the boundaries of stages one and two was incorrectly shown on the 1975 approval and the correct delineation should have shown stage one as a two lot subdivision. In December 1981 the appellants began proceedings in the Land and Environment Court to appeal against the Council's refusal to grant a twelve month extension to the approval of subdivision.
Separate proceedings were also commenced for a declaration that the Council's approval was in accordance with the map attached to the 1975 approval. On 30
September 1982 consent orders were issued including an order that the approved subdivision was the same as shown in the map accompanying the original 1975 approval.

Meanwhile, the vendor was pursuing proceedings, which were ultimately unsuccessful, in the Equity Division for a declaration the contract of sale had been brought to an end (the second equity proceedings).

By the time the Council approved the re-lodged plans in March 1983, the appellants were of the opinion that it was no longer economically feasible to proceed with the development.

Judgment Below 
The appellants sued the Council in negligence for its failure to process the plan of subdivision with due diligence and within a reasonable time. Spender
AJ gave judgment for the Council. His Honour was satisfied that there was sufficient foreseeability of damage, reliance and proximity for the Council to owe the appellants a duty of care. The Council's failure to process the post- approval steps diligently and within a reasonable time was held to be a breach of that duty. On the question of damages, his Honour held that the appellants could not recover for vexation because no physical injury or damage to property had occurred. His Honour also disallowed the claims for loss of profits, the costs of the first equity proceedings and the Land and
Environment Court Proceedings.

Appeal 
The appellants submitted that they were entitled to damages for: (i) loss of profits from the sub-division not proceeding; (ii) the legal costs of the first equity proceedings and the Land and Environment Court proceedings; and vexation.

The Council entered a notice of contention that contended the trial Judge had erred in finding that: (i) the Council owed a duty to certify an approved linen plan of sub-division; and (ii) the Council had breached any relevant duty of care owed to the appellants. The Council also cross-appealed on the basis that the Trial Judge had erred in failing to allow it to re-open its case to tender an engineer's report of the proposed sub-division.

Held:
The ordinary meaning of Clause 3 (b) of Ordinance 32 under the Local
Government Act 1919 imposed a duty on the Council to return the original plan of subdivision to the applicant if the conditions specified therein were satisfied. The nature and effect of an approval supports this conclusion. A common law duty of care does not necessarily follow from this statutory duty.
The Council's failure to certify and return the linen plan of sub-division was an omission in the course of positive conduct. This omission did not fall into any of categories immune from liability in negligence stipulated in
Sutherland Shire Council versus Heyman <case>; <case>; [(1998) 72 ALJR 152].
Once Council had approved the sub-division it had a responsibility to take the formal steps to give effect to that approval. This responsibility placed a duty upon the Council to perform the post approval steps with due diligence and within a reasonable time.
The transactions between the Council and the appellants were such to create the requisite relationship of proximity.
The Council owed the appellants a duty at common law to process the plan of sub-division, including the certification of the linen plan of subdivision, with due diligence and within a reasonable time. Coshott versus Woollahra
Municipal Council [(1988) 14 NSWLR 675] distinguished because approval in this case had been granted.
The trial Judge did not err in the exercise of his discretion by not allowing the Council to re-open its case.
The appellants' failure to provide inter-allotment drainage was due to the
Council's delay in approving the drainage plans. Once the subdivision was approved, the vendor's withdrawal of consent for the application could not affect the validity of the approval. Therefore, the Council's assertion that its failure to process the post-approval steps with due diligence and within a reasonable time was due to these matters was no answer to breach of duty.
The trial Judge was correct in holding that the Council was in breach of its duty to process the subdivision application within a reasonable time.
There was no evidence to show that the vendor would not have commenced the first equity proceedings if the sub-division had been processed diligently and the appellants had been able to complete the purchase in late September 1979.
The trial Judge was correct in refusing to award damages for the costs of the first equity proceedings.
The appellants had agreed that there should be no order for costs in the
Land and Environment Court proceedings. They can not go behind that agreement by claiming those costs in this appeal: Berry versus British Transport Commission [[1962] 1 QB 306] per Devlin LJ.
Damages for vexation may be allowed if they are consequent on pecuniary loss arising from a tortious act: Brickhill versus Cooke [[1984] 3 NSWLR ],
Campbelltown City Council versus Mackay [(1989) 15 NSWLR 501], Spartan & Steel Alloys versus Martin & Co <case>; [[1973]
QB 27],
Lynch versus Knight <case>; [[1961] 9 HLC 577], [11 ER 854], Baltic Shipping Company versus Dillon <case>; [(1993) 176 CLR 344.] If the appellants are successful in recovering damages for loss of profits they are entitled to have a fresh assessment of their claim for vexation.

Per Priestley JA: 
The authorities to date show that the position of the law in relation to whether a duty of care exists has returned to (or at least recognised the continuing applicability of) the law immediately after the decision in
Donoghue versus Stevenson <case>; [[1932]
AC 562.]
The question that arises in every tort case when determining whether a duty of care exists is whether the contemplated relationship between the parties is so close that a duty of care arises: Donoghue versus Stevenson per
Lord Atkin.

Alec Finlayson Pty Limited versus Armidale City Council <case>; <case>; <case>; [(1993) 176 CLR 344] 
Bardsley versus Batemans Bay Bowling Club (Court of Appeal, unreported, 25
November 1996) 
Berry versus British Transport Commission  <case>; <case>; [(1957) 97 CLR 202] 
Caledonian Railway Company versus Mulholland [[1898] AC 216] 
Caltex Oil (Australia) Pty Limited versus the Dredge "Willemstad" <case>; <case>; [(1844) 13 M&W 47]; <case>; [[1932]
AC 562] 
Eaton & Sons Pty Limited versus Warringah Shire Council <case>; <case>; <case>; <case>; [[1807] 1 Camp 151]; <case>; [[1995] 2 AC ]

Hill versus Van Erp [(1997) 188 CLR 159] 
In re 56 Denton Road, Twickenham <case>; [[1961] 9 HLC 577], <case>; [[1991] AC ]

National Parks and Wildlife Service versus Stables Perisher Pty Limited [(1990) NSWLR 573] 
Nielsen versus Kamloops (City) (1984) 10 DLR (4th) 641 
Northern Territory of Australia versus Deutscher Klub (Darwin) [(1994) ATR -275](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281994%29%20ATR%2081%2d275 "View LawCiteRecord" )

Oliver versus Saddler & Co [[1929] AC 584] 
Parramatta City Council versus Lutz [(1988) 12 NSWLR 293] 
Pearson versus Leichhardt Municipal Council [(1997) 93 LGERA 206] 
Perry versus Sidney Phillips & Son <case>; <case>; <case>; [(1986) 162 CLR 340] 
Spartan & Steel Alloys versus Martin & Co <case>; <case>; <case>; <case>; [(1842) 10 M & W 109] 
X (Minors) versus Bedfordshire County Council <case>; [[1995] 2 AC ]

ORDERS
Appeal allowed with costs;
Set aside order 1 made by Spender AJ on 27 June 1995 giving judgment for the defendant and order 2 in so far as it ordered that the plaintiffs pay the defendant's costs of the proceedings;
Direct a new trial limited to damages quantified as the profits on the development of the land contained in the sub-division lost as a result of the
Council's breach of duty and, if such damages are proved, damages for vexation;
Cross-appeal dismissed with costs.

JUDGMENT 
MASON P: I agree with Sheller JA. 
PRIESTLEY JA: I agree with the conclusions reached by Sheller JA on the issues in this appeal, all of which he particularises and deals with in his reasons. I also agree with his reasons for his conclusions. 
In regard to the duty of care issue I wish to add something for myself. To do so I return to Donoghue versus Stevenson <case>; [[1932]
AC 562.]
This has become the foundational case for all modern consideration of the duty of care in Anglo-Antipodean law. The House of Lords was divided by three to two in holding in that case that, on the supposed facts, a duty of care existed.

Lord Atkin was the first of the majority. He began his discussion of the duty of care with the proposition that "... in order to support an action for damages for negligence the complainant has to show that he has been injured by the breach of a duty owed to him in the circumstances by the defendant to take reasonable care to avoid such injury." (at 579) 
He then remarked how hard it was to find authoritative statements of general application "defining the relations between parties that give rise to the duty" (at 579).

He pointed out that courts had to deal with "the particular relations" before them in each case and that all that need be done in each case was to say whether the duty existed in the circumstances of the case. He then referred to the fact that from a great many decided cases it had become possible to classify particular classes of case in which a duty of care had been established. He continued: "In this way it can be ascertained at any time whether the law recognises a duty, but only where the case can be referred to some particular species which has been examined and classified. And yet the duty which is common to all the cases where liability is established must logically be based upon some element common to the cases where it is found to exist. To seek a complete logical definition of the general principle is probably to go beyond the function of the judge, for the more general the definition the more likely it is to omit essentials or to introduce non-essentials.
 ...

At present I content myself with pointing out that in English law there must be, and is, some general conception of relations giving rise to a duty of care, of which the particular cases found in the books are but instances. The liability for negligence, whether you style it such or treat it as in other systems as a species of `culpa', is no doubt based upon a general public sentiment of moral wrongdoing for which the offender must pay. But acts or omissions which any moral code would censure cannot in a practical world be treated so as to give a right to every person injured by them to demand relief. In this way rules of law arise which limit the range of complainants and the extent of their remedy." (at 580) 
He then himself discussed the "general conception of relations giving rise to a duty of care". He stated his own view of that conception by adopting, subject to a significant explanatory qualification, what had been said by A.L.
Smith LJ in Le Lievre versus Gould ([1893] 1 QB 491 at 504), that "the principle" was "that a duty of care did arise when the person or property of one was in such proximity to the person or property of another that, if due care was not taken, damage might be done by the one to the other" 
Lord Atkin's explanatory qualification was: "I think that this sufficiently states the truth if proximity be not confined to mere physical proximity, but be used, as I think it was intended, to extend to such close and direct relations that the act complained of directly affects a person whom the person alleged to be bound to take care would know would be directly affected by his careless act." (at 581, underlining added) 
Later in his reasons Lord Atkin observed: "There will no doubt arise cases where it will be difficult to determine whether the contemplated relationship is so close that the duty arises." (at , underlining added) 
Later again, in supporting his view that there was no difficulty in finding a duty in the class of case then in question he said: "It will be found, I think, on examination that there is no case in which the circumstances have been such as I have just suggested where the liability has been negatived. There are numerous cases, where the relations were much more remote, where the duty has been held not to exist. There are also dicta in such cases which go further than was necessary for the determination of the particular issues, which have caused the difficulty experienced by the Courts below. I venture to say that in the branch of the law which deals with civil wrongs, dependent in England at any rate entirely upon the application by judges of general principles also formulated by judges, it is of particular importance to guard against the danger of stating propositions of law in wider terms than is necessary, lest essential factors be omitted in the wider survey and the inherent adaptability of English law be unduly restricted. For this reason it is very necessary in considering reported cases in the law of torts that the actual decision alone should carry authority, proper weight, of course, being given to the dicta of the judges." (at 583-4) 
The last sentence in the foregoing passage emphasises the importance of developing the law by analogy based on the facts of earlier cases. This is the way in which classification of cases into categories inevitably proceeds. The facts are of greater importance than the reasons, which however, themselves remain important.

The underlined sentences in the earlier citations above seem to me to be particularly useful in attempting to understand the reasoning side of the law of negligence. They highlight, in a general form, the question which, in my view, Lord Atkin saw as arising in every case: is the contemplated relationship so close that the duty arises? 
In the remainder of his opinion Lord Atkin examined a number of earlier cases.
In doing so, he from time to time made observations which in my opinion confirm the view that the question underlined in the preceding paragraph was basic to his thinking.

Two of the cases were Hawkins versus Smith (1896) 12 Times LR 532 and Elliott v
Hall [(1885) 15 QBD 315.] Lord Atkin noted that the liability which had been found in those cases was sometimes said to have depended upon an invitation by the defendant to the plaintiff to use the chattel which caused the damage.
Lord Atkin disagreed; he thought the supposed invitation a fiction "and merely a form of expressing the direct relation between supplier and user which gives rise to the duty to take care" (at 585, underlining added).

In regard to another case, Oliver versus Saddler & Co [[1929] AC 584], where a duty of care had been held to exist, Lord Atkin found no trace of the doctrine of invitation but said "that the direct relations established, especially the circumstances that the injured porter had no opportunity of independent examination, gave rise to a duty to be careful." (at 586, underlining added) 
In Winterbottom versus Wright ((1842) <case>; [10 M & W 109] a defendant had contracted with the Postmaster-General to put a coach in good repair. The defendant was held not liable to the plaintiff who, because of the dangerous condition of the coach, had been injured while driving it. Lord
Atkin said: "the duty of the defendant under the contract with the Postmaster-General ...
could not have involved such direct relations with the servant of the persons whom the Postmaster-General employed to drive the coach as would give rise to a duty of care owed to such servant." (at 589, underlining added) 
It may be that a duty would today be held to exist in such a case, but that is irrelevant for present purposes; the point simply is that here is another example of Lord Atkin saying that whether or not the duty arises depends upon the directness of the relations between the plaintiff and the defendant.

When dealing with Caledonian Railway Company versus Mulholland [[1898] AC ], he stated what seems to me to be the same idea slightly differently. The reason why there was no duty in that case, he said, was because "The relations were not proximate" (at 597). This seems to me to be quite clearly another way of saying, that the relationship was not so close that the duty arose (to use the words previously cited from 582).

The last case he mentioned was MacPherson versus Buick Motor Co [(1916, 217 NY ).] He said that Cardozo J had in that case stated the principles of the law as he should desire to state them; he was however not sure that the principle affirmed by Cardozo J would apply to the particular facts of MacPherson should they arise in England. His doubt arose because: "It might be that the course of business, by giving opportunities of examination to the immediate purchaser or otherwise, prevented the relation between manufacturer and the user of the car being so close as to create a duty." (at 598-9, underlining added) 
The other members of the majority were Lords Thankerton and Macmillan. Lord
Thankerton said of Lord Atkin's judgment that he entirely agreed with it (at ).

Lord Macmillan asked for himself "What, then, are the circumstances which give rise to this duty to take care?" (at 619). His answer, although less explicit than Lord Atkin's, was along the same lines "... the law can refer only to the standards of the reasonable man in order to determine whether any particular relation gives rise to a duty to take care as between those who stand in that relation to each other." (at 619) 
Numberless cases have since relied on Donoghue versus Stevenson. Particular attention has been paid to what Lord Atkin said. The classification of categories of negligence has continued: see Torts, Commentary and Materials,
Morison and Sappedein 8th edn 1993, at 293. In Australia, a general duty of care has become recognised: Australian Safeway Stores versus Zaluzna [(1987) 162
CLR 479.] 
It would not now be difficult for Lord Atkin to find in the English (and
Australian) authorities statements of general application defining the relations between parties that give rise to a duty of care. I will mention only a few of the best known examples.

In England, Anns versus Merton London Borough Council <case>; [[1978] AC ] laid down a general approach, which I call for short foreseeability subject to policy. In Australia, in one line of authority, the High Court examined the idea of general reliance, a high point of which was Bryan versus Maloney (1995) CLR 609. Another line of authority elaborated the idea of "proximity" prominent in Lord Atkin's speech in Donoghue versus Stevenson. This concept, in a refined form, was taken, for a time, to be the touchstone of a duty of care: see Gala versus Preston <case>; [(1991) 172 CLR 243], and a note of the sequence of cases in Northern Territory of Australia versus Deutscher Klub (Darwin) (1994) ATR [81-275] 61,328 at 61,344.

The modern abundance of authority would not however make Lord Atkin much wiser. The statements of general application have relied on different ideas.
In Bardsley versus Batemans Bay Bowling Club (Court of Appeal, unreported, 25
November 1996) Mahoney JA described the difficulties in the law of negligence as it stood in November 1996. By that time, the Anns approach had been abandoned in Australia (Sutherland Shire Council versus Heyman <case>; <case>; [[1991] AC 398).] Since 1996 two cases in the High Court, Pyrenees Shire
Council versus Day <case>; [(1998) 72 ALJR 152] and Romeo versus Conservation Commission of the Northern
Territory (1998) 72 ALJR 208 appear to have undermined both general reliance and proximity as possible criteria. I think it can now be said that no single formulation has gained general acceptance other than what Lord Atkin said (as set out at page 3 above) which for reasons earlier given I think resolves into the question, "is the contemplated relationship so close that the duty arises?"(page 4 above). As Lord Atkin foresaw, cases continually arise where it is difficult to determine how that question should be answered. Of these cases it has been said, in the ninth edition of Fleming, "The Law of Torts" , at 151: "No generalisation can solve the problem upon what basis the courts will hold that a duty of care exists." 
Courts nevertheless decide, in case after case, whether or not a duty of care exists in new situations. Consideration of all the cases of authority to date leads me to the view that the position in Australia, at least in May 1998, has returned to (or recognised the continuing applicability of) what it was immediately after the decision in Donoghue versus Stevenson; that is, that the courts make decisions by first asking the question "is the relationship between plaintiff and defendant in the instant case so close that a duty arose?" and then answering "yes" or "no" in light of the court's own experience-based judgment. It is the difference in the experience base of each deciding judge and the further differences of view judges inevitably have about how much of that experience base should be taken into account in a particular case that lead to Fleming's statement on the previous page. I think that what he says is true, except that I do not think what he is describing is a problem to be solved; rather that it is a situation to be recognised.

In the present case Sheller JA has examined the duty issue by reference to the various formulations that have been considered by the High Court from time to time and has come to the conclusion, after taking them all into consideration, that there was a duty in the present case. As I have earlier said, I agree with his reasons for this conclusion.

Further, however, in light of my view of the current state of the authorities, and given that the actions of the Council here did not fall within the policy area (see Sheller JA at 28), I can say in a shorter way why it seems to me in the present case, as it seemed to Lord Atkin in Donoghue versus Stevenson, that no difficulty arises in finding the existence of the duty.

First, taking into account the various ways of approach that have been suggested over the period since 1932, it seems to me that none of them rules out the conclusion that in the present case the relationship is so close that a duty arose. Second, disregarding all formulations except that of Lord Atkin and simply asking myself the question whether in the present case the relationship between Mr Avenhouse and the Council was so close that a duty of care upon the Council arose, the answer, to the best of my judgment, is yes.

In my opinion the court should make the orders proposed by Sheller JA.

SHELLER JA: Johannes Albertus Avenhouse and Gerda Avenhouse (Mr and Mrs Avenhouse) sued the Council of the Shire of Hornsby (the Council) to recover damages for the Council's alleged breach of a duty of care to process a plan of sub-division, including the certification of the linen plan of sub-division, with due diligence and within a reasonable time. On 27 June 1995 Spender AJ gave judgment for the Council. While his Honour was satisfied that the Council owed the duty of care claimed and was in breach of its duty, he was not satisfied that Mr and Mrs Avenhouse had suffered any damage. Mr and Mrs Avenhouse have appealed. The Council has filed a notice of contention that it did not owe the duty of care alleged and, if it did, was not in breach of it and has cross-appealed against his Honour's refusal to allow it to re-open its case to tender a report of the Council's engineer. 
FACTUAL BACKGROUND 
On 12 December 1978 Mr and Mrs Avenhouse entered into a written contract with
John Carlyle to purchase Lots 2, 1, 3 and 4 in a proposed plan of sub- division, annexure `A'. The lots were described as part of the land contained in Portion 325 in a plan catalogue and in Certificate of Title Volume 12746
Folio 167. The annexed plan showed a rectangular block of land with its northern boundary facing Fraser Road, Cowan. The block was divided into five lots of which two, 1 and 5, faced Fraser Road and the other three, 2, 3 and 4, extended south behind 1 and 5 each facing on to an unmade road which intersected Fraser Road at right angles and ran south along the eastern boundary of the block. The property sold was known as 19 Fraser Road. The purchase price was $15,000. A house stood on the unsold lot 5. The other lots were vacant.

Special condition 24 provided for rescission in the event of Council non- approval of the proposed sub-division or non-lodgment of the plan for registration and was, so far as presently material, as follows: "This agreement is subject to and conditional upon the purchaser obtaining the consent of the Council of the Shire of Hornsby to the proposed subdivision of the whole of the land in Certificate of Title Volume 12746 Folio 167 in accordance with the plan annexed hereto and marked with the letter `A' within a period of six (6) months from the date hereof. In the event of the said
Council not approving the proposed plan of subdivision on substantially the same terms as the approval held by the vendor within the said period of six months then either party shall be entitled to rescind this agreement by giving to the other written notice in writing and [sic] whereupon the provisions of condition 20 hereof shall apply. In the event of the purchaser obtaining the approval of Council to the proposed subdivision upon the terms and conditions substantially the same as held by the vendor then the purchaser shall immediately and forthwith lodge the said plan of subdivision for registration as a deposited plan at the Land Titles Office of the Registrar
Generals Department of NSW and will do everything necessary to effect such registration within a period of three (3) months from the date of Council's approval provided however that if the said plan has not been lodged for registration as a deposited plan within the said period of three (3) months from the date of Council's approval or within such further period as may be mutually agreed upon by the parties, the vendor may at any time thereafter by notice in writing given to the purchaser rescind this contract whereupon all monies paid to the vendor hereunder shall be refunded to the purchaser and thereafter neither party shall have any action right claim or demand against the other arising out of such rescission. ......" 
The special condition acknowledged a previous approval held by Mr Carlyle and anticipated the need for Mr and Mrs Avenhouse to obtain further Council approval.

Special condition 30 granted to Mr and Mrs Avenhouse an option to purchase the whole block in certain circumstances and was as follows: "That notwithstanding anything to the contrary hereinbefore contained in the event of the purchaser being unable to obtain the registration of the plan of subdivision as a deposited plan within the aforesaid period of nine (9) months from the date hereof and has [sic] otherwise complied in all respects with the terms and conditions of this agreement then the vendor hereby grants unto the purchaser the option to purchase the whole of the land in Certificate of Title
Volume 12746 Folio 167 including the improvements erected thereon for or at a consideration of $25,000.00 twenty five thousand dollars provided that the purchaser completes such purchase within thirty (30) days from the date of the expiration of the said period of nine (9) months and gives to the vendor notice of his intention to exercise such option prior to the expiration of the said period of nine (9) months. The said sale price will include all fixed floor coverings blinds light fittings and stove." 
On the eastern side of the unmade road was another block of land of approximately the same dimensions as the sub-divided land and known as 15
Fraser Road. On 2 November 1978 either Mr Avenhouse or Mr and Mrs Avenhouse entered into a contract to purchase 15 Fraser Road for $20,000. This sale was completed in December 1978.

Mr Avenhouse had been introduced by a real estate agent to Mr Carlyle in about
May 1978. Mr Carlyle's land interested Mr Avenhouse. Mr Carlyle showed him a letter from the Council signed by the Shire Clerk and dated 14 May 1975 together with an annexed plan of sub-division. The letter was as follows: "Re Subdivision Portion 325, (Nos 19/21) Fraser Road, Cowan.

J Carlyle 
With reference to the proposed subdivision of the above property, I have to advise that approval was granted on 8th May 1975, to subdivide the land in two stages subject to final plans being submitted and the following conditions:- 
STAGE 1
No trees being removed without the prior written approval of Council;
The Metropolitan Water, Sewerage & Drainage Board certifying that it has no objection to the subdivision proceeding so far as water and sewerage requirements are concerned;
The disposal of sewage, sullage, stormwater, swimming pool water, etc., on any lots upon which a structure exists, complying with Council's health requirements to the satisfaction of the Chief Health Surveyor;
The payment of a cash contribution in lieu of the dedication of land for public reserves within the subdivision, and in this respect, the plan be forwarded to the Valuer General for a valuation in accordance with Council's policy. This valuation is to be as at the date of approval and is to remain current for two (2) years from that date. Further, the applicant be informed that the percentage of the valuation required as contribution is:- (0.98 x Number of Additional Lots) (Total Area of Subdivision in Hectares) this being the cash equivalent of 0.0098 hectares (98.m2) of public reserves per each additional allotment;
Provision and piping of inter-allotment drainage;
Provision of 5m splay corners.

STAGE II
No trees being removed without the prior written approval of Council;
The Metropolitan Water, Sewerage & Drainage Board certifying that it has no objection to the subdivision proceeding so far as water and sewerage requirements are concerned;
The disposal of sewage, sullage, stormwater, swimming pool water, etc., on any lots upon which a structure exists, complying with Council's health requirements to the satisfaction of the Chief Health Surveyor;
The payment of a cash contribution in lieu of the dedication of land for public reserves within the subdivision and, in this respect, the plan be forwarded to the Valuer General for a valuation in accordance with Council's policy. This valuation is to be as at the date of approval and is to remain current for two (2) years from that date. Further, the applicant be informed that the percentage of the valuation required as contribution is:- (0.98 x Number of Additional Lots) (Total Area of Subdivision in Hectares) this being the case equivalent of 0.0099 hectares (98 m2) of public reserves per each additional allotment;
Construction of half width of the unnamed road adjoining the subdivision to the east to Council's normal subdivision requirements;
Three (3) copies of engineering plans, specifications, sections, etc., in accordance with Ordinance 32, being submitted to and approved by Council before work commences. (In this regard, please contact Council's Subdivisions
Engineer before proceeding.) 
It should be noted that under Section 335 of the Local Government Act, 1919 (as amended), this approval to Stage II will lapse on 8th May 1977.

Further, any easements or restrictions intended to be created pursuant to
Section 88B of the Conveyancing Act, 1919-1967, shall, in addition to the necessary statements of intention, be further identified by additional words on the plan, such as - `and as set out in the accompanying Instrument signed by the Council Clerk.' (Where the Instrument comprises a number of sheets, each component sheet shall be so identified.) 
With regard to Condition No 4 of both approvals, Council is communicating with the Valuer General's Department and you will be further advised in due course.

One copy of the approved layout is returned herewith, together with an application form for submission by you to the Water Board. Council is also submitting a copy of the plan to the Board in accordance with the Act." 
The layout of the annexed plan was similar to the plan annexed to the contract but drawn to scale. Hand printed on the left hand side of the plan was the following: "TENATIVE [sic] PLAN OF PROPOSED SUBDIVISION OF LOT 325 FRASER ROAD, COWAN BY
J CARLYLE IN TWO STAGES" 
Above this and indeed slightly above the plan was typed: "STAGE I - edged in green 
STAGE II - edged in blue" 
The whole of the area of the land, the subject of the sub-division, was edged with a red ink line. The two northern lots, 1 and 5, were edged in green pencil and the three southern lots, 2, 3 and 4 were edged in blue pencil.
"STAGE ONE" was hand printed under the figure 1 in a circle in the left hand lot which fronted on to Fraser Road. A rectangle was drawn with the word "HOUSE" inside it above the figure 5 in a circle in the right hand lot which fronted on to Fraser Road. Hand printed across lots 2 and 3, were the words "STAGE TWO". On the back of the plan was typed: "SHIRE OF HORNSBY 
This is the approved layout referred to in 
Council's letter of 14.5.75 to Mr J Carlyle re Fraser Road, Cowan - 
J Carlyle" with the Shire Clerk's signature underneath. Below and to the left was stamped the date and numbers: "75 APR 29 05908" 
Not surprisingly, when Mr Avenhouse saw this letter he understood it as showing that the Council had approved a two stage development of the land.
Stage one allowed the property to be sub-divided in a way which excised lot 5, the lot retained by Mr Carlyle, and at the same time divided lot 1 from the residue consisting of lots 2, 3 and 4. Stage two was the sub-division of the residue into those three remaining lots. Apparently, the Council thought likewise. In accordance with s331A (1) of the Local Government Act 1919 (the
LG Act 1979 ) on 14 May 1975 the Shire Clerk wrote to the Metropolitan
Water, Sewerage & Drainage Board to apply for a certificate under s34B of the Metropolitan Water, Sewerage & Drainage Act 1924 in respect of the sub-division of Portion 325, Fraser Road, Cowan. That letter stated that approval had been given to the abovementioned sub-division into "Stage I - three (3), Stage II - three (3) lots". On the same day the Shire Clerk wrote to the Valuer General describing the sub-division as "Stage I - two (2), Stage
II two (2) additional lots". Spender AJ read this as meaning that Stage I was to comprise two additional lots, ie additional to the existing undivided lot making three lots in all; Stage II was to comprise two additional lots, ie two additional lots carved out of the residue making three lots in all. No one has challenged this interpretation of the letter.

Six months later, on 12 November 1975, after receipt of a letter from the
Valuer General dated 20 October 1975 giving the fair value of the subject parcels as follows: "Stages I & II (edged red on attached plan) $24,000 
Stage II (edged blue on attached plan) $6,000" the Shire Clerk wrote to the Valuer General advising "that the plan supplied with Council's letter of 14 May, 1975, was incorrectly marked as to the stages of the sub-division." Further copies of the plan were enclosed "showing the correct information". The accompanying plan was not attached to the letter in evidence. Spender AJ inferred that it was identical to exhibit C, itself identical to the plan forwarded by the Council to Mr Carlyle in May 1975 with the following differences: "The words `STAGE I - edged in green' and `STAGE II - edged in blue' have been ruled through. The words `STAGE II' are marked in blue and straddle lots 5 and
There is an explanatory note in these terms: `STAGE I, lot 1 and residue' and `STAGE II, lots 2, 3,4 and 5'." 
The blue markings were made in pencil and the hand printed words "STAGE II" appeared to be in writing different from that of Mr Carlyle on the plan he submitted to the Council.

On 28 December 1978 Mr Avenhouse wrote to the Shire Clerk referring to the purchase of Portion 326 (15/17 Fraser Road) and Portion 325 (19/21 Fraser
Road) and advised that he and his wife wished to apply for re-approval of permission "to sub-divide, according to the latest linen plans as submitted to you previously by", relevantly, Mr Carlyle. On 19 January 1979 the Shire Clerk (not the same person who had written the 1975 letters) wrote back to Mr
Avenhouse as follows: "With reference to the proposed subdivision of the above property, and further to your letter of 28th December, 1978 I can advise that re-approval to the subdivision in two stages was granted on 11th January, 1979 subject to the conditions of the original approval of 8th May, 1975 with the exception that
Condition No 4 for each stage is amended to the following: `Payment of a cash contribution in lieu of the dedication of land for public reserves within the subdivision, in accordance with Council's policy, this being the cash equivalent of 0.0098 hectares (98m2) of public reserves per each additional allotment'." 
On 1 May 1979 Mr Carlyle's solicitors wrote to the solicitors for Mr and Mrs
Avenhouse stating that since a period of three months had lapsed from the date that Council approved the plan "the Vendors would be entitled to rescind the
Agreement for Sale if the Plan of Sub-division had not been registered as a
Deposited Plan." On 2 May 1979 Mr and Mrs Avenhouse purported to exercise the option to purchase the whole of the land in Certificate of Title Volume 12746
Folio 162 pursuant to special condition 30. On 4 May 1979 Mr Carlyle's solicitors stated that the vendors exercised their rights under special condition 24 to rescind the contract and denied there had been any valid exercise of the option. On 23 May 1979 Mr Avenhouse's surveyor, Mr Sunter of the firm of WG Hunt, Sunter & Co, consulting surveyors, wrote to the
Council as follows: "With reference to your approval of the above sub-division, we now forward herewith four (4) copies of our design for inter-allotment drainage to Stage 1 of the above sub-division. We would be obliged if you would approve the design in order that we may proceed with the construction of the line as soon as possible.

Also enclosed is our Surveyor's Plan of sub-division together with eight (8) copies. The Section 34B Certificate has not yet been issued by the MWS &
DB, but we will advise as soon as it is received.

We would be obliged if you would advise us of the Public Reserves Contribution applicable to the sub-division and also of any fees due for payment prior to release of the plan." 
The Stage I plan annexed, which was dated 11 May 1979, showed three lots in the sub-division, lot 1 the house block, lot 2 the other block fronting on to
Fraser Road and lot 3 the balance.

Spender AJ accepted Mr Avenhouse's evidence that in late May 1979 he went to the Council and spoke to an officer in the Building and Planning Section who showed him the plans of sub-division lodged by Mr Sunter. Mr Avenhouse said in evidence that these had been stamped as approved. On 6 June 1979 Mr Carlyle purported to withdraw his consent to the sub-division. On 11 July 1979 the s34B certificate was lodged. On that date the Shire Clerk wrote to Mr
Avenhouse as follows: "Re: Subdivision Portion 325 Fraser Road, Cowan - J Carlyle 
I refer to the submissions made by your consultant, W G Hunt, Sunter & Co.
on 23rd May, 1979 with regard to the above subdivision.

According to Council's records the subject land is owned by J Carlyle and Mr
Carlyle has specifically cancelled previous subdivision authorities.
Consequently, the matter cannot proceed.

I await your advice with regard to the linen plan of subdivision currently held by Council's Subdivisions Section." 
On 3 September 1979 Mr Carlyle began proceedings in the Equity Division for a declaration that the contract for sale had been validly terminated (the first equity proceedings). Mr Avenhouse filed a cross-claim seeking specific performance. On 20 October 1980 consent orders were made. The short minutes of order noted that: (i) the contract should continue in force as varied by the agreement; (ii) that Mr and Mrs Avenhouse would purchase lots 1 to 4 in the annexed plan and should pay for the land $10,000 "in addition to the releases referred to below"; and (iii) special conditions 24 to 34, both inclusive, should not apply. On 24 October 1980 the solicitors for Mr and Mrs Avenhouse sent the consent orders to the Council and asked that sub-division be effected as soon as possible. A Council officer told the solicitors sometime shortly before 19 November 1980 that Stage I needed to be re-approved but would only take a short time.

On 3 February 1981 the Shire Clerk wrote to the solicitors for Mr and Mrs
Avenhouse as follows: "Upon investigation of Council's records, it is considered that the current owner of the property, Mr J Carlyle, has never given his consent in accordance with Section 333 (1) [sic] of the Local Government Act, 1919 (as amended) for
Mr J A Avenhouse to act as the applicant for the subdivision of Portion 325
Fraser Road, Cowan and consequently the conditional approval granted by
Council on the 11th January, 1979 is invalid.

Council is in receipt of a letter dated the 26th November, 1980 from W G Hunt,
Sunter & Co (Consulting Surveyors), to whom Mr J Carlyle has given authority to act, indicating that you act as their agents in this matter and to take delivery of any releases.

Council considers that the only currently valid approval to subdivide is for
Stage I of which Mr J Carlyle was notified by Council on the 14th May, 1975.
Stage II subdivision approval of that date lapsed on the 8th May, 1977 and will require a new application to be submitted.

With reference to the approved plan accompanying the two stage approvals, it now becomes evident that the delineation between the Stage I and Stage II boundaries was incorrectly shown and should have shown Stage I as Lot 1 fronting Fraser Road with a large residue lot containing the existing residence and Stage II excising the existing residence on Lot 5 and creating
Lots 2, 3 and 4 fronting the unnamed road. A copy of the plan is attached for your information.

Consequently it is considered that the linen plan and eight copies for Stage I submitted by W G Hunt, Sunter & Co on the 28th May, 1979 and the engineering plans from that same consultant received by Council on the 28th
November, 1980 are unsatisfactory in that the incorrect lot layout has been shown." 
Between February 1981 and the end of the year the solicitors and the surveyor unsuccessfully tried to change the Council's view. On 1 June Mr Carlyle's solicitors wrote to the solicitors for Mr and Mrs Avenhouse pressing for completion and foreshadowing court proceedings. On 28 October Mr Carlyle's solicitors issued a notice to complete and on 27 November forwarded a notice of termination.

In December Mr and Mrs Avenhouse began proceedings in the Land and Environment
Court appealing against the Council's refusal to give an extension of twelve months to the approval of sub-division and separate class 4 proceedings for a declaration that the approval granted by the Council "on 14 May, 1975 for the sub-division of land being Portion 325" was in accordance with plan 05908 (the number stamped on the back of the layout plan which accompanied the letter of May 1975 to Mr Carlyle) and sub-divided the land into three allotments. The proceedings were consolidated. On 30 September 1982 consent orders were made in the Land and Environment Court including an order that the application for sub-division of the land was approved as shown on Mr Sunter's plan of 11 May
Order 3 was "No order as to Costs".

Meanwhile, Mr Carlyle was pursuing separate proceedings in the Equity Division which Helsham CJ in Equity dismissed on 9 November 1982 (the second equity proceedings). His Honour refused Mr Carlyle's application for a declaration that the contract had been brought to an end and held that it was still on foot. Mr Carlyle was ordered to pay Mr and Mrs Avenhouse's costs. The Chief
Judge referred to Mr Carlyle's application to sub-divide the land and said: "On 8th May 1975 approval had been given to that subdivision and approval had been given to subdivide in two stages. In order to understand the stages it is necessary to indicate that the plan envisaged two lots being carved out of the land, both fronting on to Fraser Road, Cowan, described as Lots 1 and 5 in the proposed plan of subdivision, with three lots behind as it were those two, each of them facing on to a proposed road that would have to be constructed in order to give them access. The two lots 1 and 5 facing on to Fraser Road were on the northern side of the land which ran from Fraser Road south to its extremity. No 5 was the easternmost lot of the two northern lots and on that was erected a house, or a house is shown as being situated on that lot. The western lot of the two fronting on to Fraser Road, Lot 1, was vacant land and, as I have said, the three lots on the southern side of the land faced on to an unmade road.

Stage 1 provided for the subdivision of Lot 1, that is the undeveloped lot on the western side of the two lots facing on to Fraser Road. Stage 2 was a subdivision of the balance of the four lots, Lots 2, 3, 4 and 5, of course, was the lot shown as having the house situated upon it." 
In March 1983 the Council approved the re-lodged plans by which time Mr
Avenhouse said it was no longer economically feasible to proceed with the envisaged development. In the same month the CBC Bank withdrew a bill facility he had with it and recommended that he seek finance from a finance company. On May 1983 Mr and Mrs Avenhouse agreed to sell lot 3 of 19 Fraser Road, that is to say, lots 2, 3 and 4 in the original sub-division for $55,000. On 26 May they agreed to sell lot 1, in the original sub-division, for $29,000.
Both these contracts were completed in due course.

JUDGMENT BELOW 
In determining whether there was a duty of care owed by the Council to Mr and
Mrs Avenhouse his Honour held first that it was reasonably foreseeable that damage would be caused to a holder of a sub-division approval, if after granting it, the Council failed to process the matter with reasonable diligence. Simply put, an applicant for a commercial sub-division was engaged in an activity to earn profit. Once everything had been approved, the holder of the approval might do the work himself, might delegate it to other contractors or might sell the property with the approval that went with it.
But in all cases, he would seek to make a profit. This was self-evident.
Hence, it was reasonably foreseeable that failure by a Council to process the matter post-approval may cause damage to such a person.

The trial Judge held that there was a relationship of proximity between the holder of an approval, in the situation of Mr and Mrs Avenhouse, and the
Council. He described it as circumstantial or causal proximity and of an intimacy comparable to that examined in Kyogle Shire Council versus Francis [(1988) 13 NSWLR 396]. His Honour regarded the case as one within the class of cases where a failure to act might give rise to a duty of care and referred to
Parramatta City Council versus Lutz [(1988) 12 NSWLR 293]; Alec
Finlayson Pty Limited versus Armidale City Council <case>; [(1994) 51 FCR 378] and Kyogle Shire Council versus Francis. The trial Judge regarded reliance as a necessary part of a cause of action against the
Council. He seems to have had in mind general reliance and in particular Alec
Finlayson Pty Limited versus Armidale City Council. He did not regard the existence of other remedies, such as an order in the nature of mandamus, as excluding the existence of the duty of care.

Having concluded that such a duty existed, his Honour was satisfied that a breach had been proved. To be more specific, he said that Mr Sunter submitted the linen plan of sub-division and the inter-allotment drainage plan on 23 May
He did so without submitting a s34B certificate. This certificate was submitted on 11 June 1979. Spender AJ said: "Once this occurred the Council was under an obligation to process the post-approval steps with due diligence and within a reasonable period. That, in my opinion, was the duty of care imposed on it." His Honour continued: "The Council's delay may in part be explained by Mr Carlyle's withdrawal of consent. But this is no justification for its actions, or failure to act, as
Mr Carlyle was not the holder of the approval. It follows that the Council should not have relied on Mr Carlyle's purported cancellation of an approval by his letter of 6 June 1979, an approval not necessary in law. It further follows that the delay between 11 June 1979 (when the Council received the s34B certificate) and 16 December 1980 (when the Council received Mr Carlyle's consent to the application after the settlement of the first equity proceedings) was unjustified in law, and the Council's actions in refusing or failing (it does not matter which) to act was in breach of its duty to act with reasonable diligence in processing the post-approval steps, and legally unjustified. Its failure to act after December 1980, its volte face of 3
February 1981 and its forcing the Avenhouses to take it to court - which was the practical effect of its conduct - was a continuance of the same kind of unreasonable and unjustified behaviour. It seems to have forgotten that it was there to serve - and not to obstruct - those who legitimately called on it to discharge its statutory charter." 
The trial Judge accepted that it was not possible to lay down with exactitude what would be a reasonable time in the circumstances for approving the linen plan and the inter-allotment drainage plan. However, he could say with more confidence on which side of a hypothetical line a particular act or failure to act fell.
 "The plans were lodged on 23 May 1979; the Section 34B certificate was lodged on 11 June 1979. For the purposes of approval of the plan of sub-division all that was needed to check and see was that the plan was in accordance with the
January 1979 approval. That this was a simple exercise is borne out by the evidence of Mr Avenhouse, which I have accepted: that he was shown plan of sub-division stamped as approved, and that a Council officer said words to that effect but noted that the plan(s) could not be issued because Mr Carlyle had withdrawn approval. Mr Sunter gave evidence, to which I have referred, to a similar effect.

Dealing with these kinds of matters with reasonable diligence is obvious. More complicated matters would, on Mr Sunter's evidence which I accept, take up to two months (see T420). Bearing in mind the statutory provision which exists in respect of processing of applications for sub-division - forty days - and the matters to which I have referred, it seems to me that a reasonable outer time limit for the Council to approve the linen plan of sub-division (and the inter-allotment drainage plan) was in the order of ten weeks. In my view, anything beyond that constitutes unreasonable delay.

Consequently, I hold the Council was in breach of its duty to process the post-approval stage of the sub-division. This duty was not affected or qualified by such considerations as any reservations or second-thoughts Mr
Avenhouse may have had about the economics of the sub-division, his solicitors (and his) acceptance at Council's insistence of the need for a fresh application - none was needed, or any dealings between Mr Avenhouse and Mr
Carlyle. Even if, hypothetically speaking, the sub-division had become of academic interest only to Mr Avenhouse this would not have affected the
Council's duty so long as the discharge of that duty was being sought. Shortly stated, considerations extraneous to the discharge of the Council's duty cannot be prayed in aid by it as a reason to justify its non-performance." 
His Honour dismissed a claim based on negligent misrepresentation since he regarded it as antipathetic to Mr and Mrs Avenhouse's primary case which he upheld. This brought him to the question of damages. After examining a number of cases, his Honour said: "To relate the law to this case: first, the plaintiffs' are entitled to recover only that which they have lost and not that which they might have gained had the development gone forward. Second, they can only recover loss on an alternative use of their money, whether in another investment or on the basis of a loss of a chance to make such an investment, if the evidence establishes such a case." 
Mr and Mrs Avenhouse produced no such evidence. Spender AJ went on to hold that Mr Avenhouse could not recover damages for psychiatric illness or a heart condition as a consequence of breach of duty by the Council, it seems, because he had suffered no physical injuries or damage to property. Further, no damages were recoverable for worry and frustration. Mr and Mrs Avenhouse's claims for actual losses were in summary: $

Legal costs of first equity proceedings 6,190 
Legal costs of second equity proceedings 13,227 
Legal costs of Land and Environment Court proceedings against the Council 3,138 
Survey fees paid to WG Hunt Sunter & Co for the preparation of plans of sub-division and inter-allotment drainage 11,221 
Interest or holding costs between 29 June to July 1972 22,563 
Total 56,339 
His Honour disallowed the claim for the first equity proceedings and the claim for the legal costs of the Land and Environment Court proceedings. Part of the terms on which the Land and Environment Court proceedings were settled was that there should be no order as to costs. His Honour considered it would be wrong to allow that term to be nullified in these proceedings. The removal of these amounts reduced the amount allowed to $47,011, less than the net figure
Mr and Mrs Avenhouse recovered from the sale of 19 Fraser Road, $81,080.

His Honour considered the claim for loss of profits unsustainable and that damages for past and future economic loss, general damages and vexation were not recoverable. However, his Honour thought that he should say whether, if his view of the law was wrong and such damages were recoverable, he would have upheld the claims. He concluded this part of his judgment by saying: "Assuming my view of the law is wrong, I think Mr Avenhouse's claim for past loss of earning capacity and future loss of earning capacity fails as a matter of fact. I think the major matter of concern has been atrial fibrillation; that cannot be related to any actions of the Council. As to depression, and however extensive it may be, in my view it is not established that it is causatively related to the Council's actions. For the same reasons, the claims for general damages and vexation must fail." 
He gave judgment for the Council and ordered Mr and Mrs Avenhouse to pay the
Council's costs of the proceedings with one minor exception.

APPEAL 
The substance of Mr and Mrs Avenhouse's appeal was that they were entitled, contrary to his Honour's conclusion, to recover damages for: (i) the loss of profits they suffered as a result of the development on the land not proceeding; (ii) the legal costs of the first equity proceedings and the Land and Environment Court proceedings and (iii) vexation suffered as a consequence of the Council's breaches of duty. The Council's notice of contention was directed principally to the contentions that the trial Judge had erred in finding that the Council had, in all the circumstances, a duty to certify an approved linen plan of sub-division and that the Council had breached any relevant duty of care to Mr and Mrs Avenhouse. Relevantly, in its cross-appeal the Council claimed that the trial Judge had erred in failing to permit it to re-open its case and tender an engineer's report of 7 May 1975.

THE ISSUES ON THE APPEAL 
It is convenient to deal with the issues that the appeal, the notice of contention and the cross-appeal raise in the following order.
What duty of care, if any, the Council owed to Mr and Mrs Avenhouse to process their plan of sub-division including the certification of the linen plan with due diligence and within a reasonable time.
Whether there was a breach of such duty.
Whether the Council should have been permitted to re-open its case.
Whether Mr and Mrs Avenhouse were entitled to recover as damages the profits on the development of the land which they lost and damages for the cost of the first equity and the Land and Environment Court proceedings and for vexation.
If Mr and Mrs Avenhouse's breach of duty case failed, whether the Council had negligently misrepresented the form of the sub-division which had been approved by the Council and, if so, whether Mr and Mrs Avenhouse had acted to their detriment in reliance on such misrepresentation.

The parties accepted that in accordance with a direction which Cole JA gave at the call-over of the appeal this Court would not assess damages.

DUTY OF CARE 
Section 327 (2) (b) of the LG Act 1979 as in force at the relevant time provided that, in a case where a sub-division did not provide for the opening of a public road, land should not be sub-divided until - "(a) an application in respect thereof, accompanied by plans, has been approved under this Act; and the town or shire clerk has certified to the applicant that the requirements of this Act other than the requirement for the registration of plans have been complied with and, where the land comprised in the plan of sub division is within, or partly within, the area of operations, within the meaning of the Metropolitan Water, Sewerage & Drainage Act 1924 ........
of the Metropolitan Water, Sewerage & Drainage Board ..... has certified, or is deemed to have certified, that the requirements relating to the plan of sub division, of s34B of the Metropolitan Water, Sewerage & Drainage Act ..... have been complied with." 
Clause 3 (b) of Ordinance 32 made under the LG Act said how such a certificate was to be obtained: "In the case of a plan of sub division not involving the opening of a new road the applicant shall submit to the Council the plan proposed to be lodged at the Registrar General's Office and 3 exact copies thereof. If the sub division is substantially in accordance with the plan of sub division previously approved the Council shall return to the applicant the original plan and one exact copy thereof and subject to compliance with subsection (3) of section
A of the Act, if applicable, with the certificate of the Council Clerk noted thereon. Two additional copies of the plan shall be retained by the
Council." 
This sub-clause operated after the Council approved a plan of sub-division to ensure that the plan lodged at the Registrar Generals' Office accorded with the plan approved and an exact copy remained with the Council.

The word "shall" was used in cl 3 (b) Ordinance 32 once in each sentence. For present purposes, the important use of the word was in the second sentence which provided that "the Council shall return to the applicant the original plan" if the sub-division was substantially in accordance with the plan of sub-division previously approved and if it complied with s331A (3) of the LG
Act (the lodgment of a s34B certificate). The subject matter of the sentence in its context suggests that the word "shall" had its ordinary meaning and imposed upon the Council a duty to return the original plan to the applicant if the conditions stated were fulfilled.

However, the Council submitted that the use of "shall" in the first and third sentences showed that the Ordinance did no more than confer on the Council a power to return the original plan to the applicant which, at its discretion, it might or might not do. I do not so read the second sentence, even though the phrase "the applicant shall submit to the Council" in the first sentence imposed no obligation on the applicant to do so. I am inclined to think that the provision in the third sentence that the additional copies "shall be retained by the Council" did impose an obligation upon the Council. To my mind the Council was under a statutory duty to return the original plan to the applicant with the certificate of the Council Clerk under s327 of the LG Act noted thereon.

The nature and effect of an approval supports this conclusion. Adapting the language of Stephen J in Eaton & Sons Pty Limited versus Warringah Shire
Council <case>; [(1972) 129 CLR 270] at 293, it is an approval to the world at large which makes lawful in a town planning sense what otherwise would be unlawful. In the words of Else Mitchell J in Ryde Municipal Council versus Royal Ryde Homes [(1970) 19
LGRA 321] at 324, in some respects it is "equivalent to a document of title". It goes without saying that by implication the statutory duty carried with it a duty to perform it within a reasonable time. But it does not necessarily follow that the law should superimpose a common law duty of care: compare Gimson versus Victorian Workcover Authority <case>; <case>; [[1996] AC ] at -2, Lord Hoffmann, with whose judgment Lord Goff and Lord Jauncey agreed, said: "This can be seen if one looks at cases in which a public authority has been under a statutory or common law duty to provide a service or other benefit for the public or a section of the public. In such cases there is no discretion but the courts have nevertheless not been willing to hold that a member of the public who has suffered loss because the service was not provided to him should necessarily have a cause of action, either for breach of statutory duty or for negligence at common law.

There are many instances of this principle being applied to statutory duties, but perhaps the most relevant example of the disassociation between public duty and liability to pay compensation for breach of that duty was the ancient common law duty to repair the highway." 
A little later in his judgment at 952 Lord Hoffman said: "Whether a statutory duty gives rise to a private cause of action is a question of construction: see R versus Deputy Governor of Parkhurst Prison, ex parte Hague [1992] 1 AC 58. It requires an examination of the policy of the statute to decide whether it was intended to confer a right to compensation for breach. Whether it can be relied upon to support the existence of a common law duty of care is not exactly a question of construction, because the cause of action does not arise out of the statute itself. But the policy of the statute is nevertheless a crucial factor in the decision." 
In Sutherland Shire Council versus Heyman <case>; [(1985) 157 CLR 424] at 469, Mason J, as he then was, pointed to the difference between "policy decisions" and "operational decisions" and said: "The distinction between policy and operational factors is not easy to formulate, but the dividing line between them will be observed if we recognise that a public authority is under no duty of care in relation to decisions which involve or are dictated by financial, economic, social or political factors or constraints. Thus budgetary allocations and the constraints which they entail in terms of allocation of resources cannot be made the subject of a duty of care. But it may be otherwise when the courts are called upon to apply a standard of care to action or inaction that is merely the product of administrative direction, expert or professional opinion, technical standards or general standards of reasonableness." 
In Alec Finlayson Pty Limited versus Armidale City Council at 405, Burchett J noted that the same distinction between policy and operational decisions had been accepted by the Supreme Court of Canada in Nielsen versus Kamloops (City) DLR (4th) 641 at 661-2, 674 per Wilson J (Ritchie and Dickson JJ concurring). Burchett J said: "The consequence was put succinctly by her Honour, when she said (at 674) that `in the operational area, ie, in implementing their policy decisions, public officials will be exposed to the same liability as other people if they fail in discharging their duty to take reasonable care to avoid injury to their neighbours'." 
While in some cases this distinction may not be decisive or even appropriate (see for example, per Toohey J in Pyrenees Shire Council versus Day <case>; [(1998) 72 ALJR 152] at 168; 3 HCA at 68-69), in the present case the Council was not concerned with any policy matter or budgetary constraint which led to or justified its failure to certify the plan. To be borne in mind is the distinction between failing to act, in the sense of merely letting something happen, and an omission which is part of an action, such as failing adequately to inspect a product that is negligently manufactured and placed on the market; see the article in [46 Modern Law Review, 145] at 147 referred to by Gibbs CJ in Sutherland Shire Council versus Heyman at 443. The
Council's inactivity of which Mr and Mrs Avenhouse complained was an omission in the course of processing the sub-division which it had approved.

By drawing upon a number of decisions including Caledonian Collieries Limited v Speirs <case>; [(1957) 97 CLR 202] at 220; Sutherland Shire Council versus Heyman; Fellowes v
Rother District Council <case>; [[1995] 2 AC ] at , Gummow J, in Pyrenees Shire Council versus Day at 185; 3 HCA 177, stated the general rule as follows under the heading "Control mechanisms": "The general rule is that `when statutory powers are conferred they must exercised with reasonable care, so that if those who exercise them could by reasonable precaution have prevented an injury which has been occasioned, and was likely to be occasioned, by their exercise, damages for negligence may be recovered'. A public authority which enters upon the exercise of statutory powers with respect to a particular subject matter may place itself in a relationship to others which imports a common law duty to take care which is to be discharged by the continuation or additional exercise of those powers.
An absence of further exercise of the interconnected statutory powers may be difficult to separate from the exercise which has already occurred and that exercise may then be said to have been performed negligently. These present cases are of that kind. They illustrate the broader proposition that, whatever its further scope, Lord Atkin's formulation in Donoghue versus Stevenson <case>; [[1932] AC 562] at 580 includes `an omission in the course of positive conduct ..... which results in the overall course of conduct being the cause of injury or damage'; Sutherland Shire Council versus Heyman at 501." 
In the present case the general powers of the Council under Part XII of the
LG Act "Town planning" were found in Div 1. Section 331 provided: "(1) Applications under this Division shall be submitted to the council by the owner of the land or by some person authorised by him in writing.

The council may approve of any such application, or approve subject to conditions, or disapprove.

The council shall cause notice to be given to the applicant of its decision.

In the case of an approval given subject to conditions or of a disapproval, the reasons therefor shall be indicated in the notice which shall also indicate that the applicant has a right of appeal under this Act against the decision of the council.

In any decision under this Division with respect to a proposed road the council shall classify such road if it be not already classified by the council." 
In particular subs (2) empowered the Council to approve or approve subject to conditions or disapprove any application under the Division. The Council exercised its power to approve the application subject to conditions.
Statutory duties and powers followed from the exercise of this power. One was the duty to certify and return to the applicant the linen plan if it was substantially in accordance with the plan of sub-division previously approved.
What occurred was what Deane J called an omission in the course of positive conduct. The Council did not suggest that the failure to certify had anything to do with budgetary priorities. Nor did it distort the Council's priorities, or fall within the "core area" of policy making which, in Sutherland Shire
Council versus Heyman, Mason J regarded as immune from any liability in negligence (at 469). Nor, if liability is to be determined as Kirby J thought in
Pyrenees Shire Council versus Day, were there considerations of policy which would make it "repugnant" to allow recovery against the Council.

I have approached the question of duty in a way different from that Spender AJ preferred. His Honour referred to San Sebastian Pty Limited versus The Minister <case>; [(1986) 162 CLR 340], and quoted Gibbs CJ, Mason, Wilson and Dawson JJ. At 355 their Honours discussed the notion of proximity and its importance when the claim was for pure economic loss, referred to reliance in the case of a negligent misstatement and added: "But when the economic loss results from a negligent act or omission outside the realm of negligent misstatement, the element of reliance may not be present. It is in this sphere that the absence of reliance as a factor creates an additional difficulty in deciding whether a sufficient relationship of proximity exists to enable a plaintiff to recover economic loss." 
In this context Spender AJ then referred to Kyogle Shire Council versus Francis and a passage in the judgment of Kirby ACJ at 405. In that case damages were sought for negligent misstatements of fact. In that sense it was a reliance case. But Kirby ACJ was doing no more than summarise what had been said in
San Sebastian Pty Limited versus The Minister at 355.

The Council submitted that Spender AJ took, what it described as, a mechanistic approach to proximity by treating as analogous cases which were not. Spender AJ, as he was bound to, referred to several authorities but did not, in my opinion, take any mechanistic approach in applying them .

An example of sufficient proximity for this purpose would no doubt be that given by Gibbs J in Caltex Oil (Australia) Pty Limited versus the Dredge "Willemstad" <case>; [(1977) 136 CLR 529] at 555, as a case: ".... in which the defendant has knowledge or means of knowledge that the plaintiff individually, and not merely as a member of an unascertained class, will be likely to suffer economic loss as a consequence of his negligence, and owes the plaintiff a duty to take care not to cause him such damage by his negligent act." 
See also Hill versus Van Erp [(1997) 188 CLR 159] at 169, , 188-9 and 192-3.

The Council referred us to Esanda Finance Corporation Limited versus Peat Marwick
Hungerfords [(1997) 188 CLR 241], particularly at 252, 254, 263-4, 275 and 298. That case concerned allegedly negligent statements by a company auditor in the company's audited accounts and an accompanying report. A financier, who was not a member of the company, relied upon these to his detriment. In that context the Court considered what was needed to establish a relationship of proximity so as to give rise to a duty of care owed by the auditor to the financier or a class of persons of which the financier was a member. The decision throws no light upon whether a duty is owed in the case of the particular relationship that existed between the Council and Mr and Mrs Avenhouse.

A different approach to the same problem concentrates on the features of the particular case. Thus in Henderson versus Merrett Syndicates Limited <case>; [[1995] 2 AC ] at , Lord Goff said: "Furthermore, especially in a context concerned with a liability which may arise under a contract or in a situation `equivalent to contract', it must be expected that an objective test will be applied when asking the question whether, in a particular case, responsibility should be held to have been assumed by the defendant to the plaintiff: see Caparo Industries PLC v
Dickman <case>; [[1990] 2 AC 605], 637, per Lord Oliver of Aylmerton. In addition, the concept provides its own explanation why there is no problem in cases of this kind about liability for pure economic loss; for if a person assumes responsibility to another in respect of certain services, there is no reason why he should not be liable in damages for that other in respect of economic loss which flows from the negligent performance of those services." 
See the approach taken by Gummow J in Hill versus Van Erp at 234-5 and following.
The special feature of the present case was that the Council had approved the sub-division. This required it, as part of that process, to take the formal steps to give effect to that approval. That responsibility it seems to me placed upon it the duty to perform those steps, including the certification of the linen plan of sub-division, as Mr and Mrs Avenhouse claimed, with due diligence and within a reasonable time. The duty was owed to Mr and Mrs
Avenhouse as the current beneficiaries of the Council's confirmation of the approval following their application for re-approval of 28 December 1978.

Spender AJ held that the closeness of the relationship between a Council, which has as a central part of its duties the processing of approvals, as required by the law of sub-divisions for commercial (or other) purposes, and the holders of approvals is such as to create the requisite relationship of proximity. Holders of approvals must deal with the relevant Council: they have no choice; they can deal with no one else. The facts of this case - the transactions between Mr Avenhouse and his representatives with the Council - illustrate the closeness of the relationship. The Council had knowledge or means of knowledge that Mr and Mrs Avenhouse individually would be likely to suffer economic loss as a consequence of its negligence. The likelihood of economic loss to a person seeking the certification of the plans of an approved sub-division, if certification was not forthcoming within a reasonable time, was obvious.

The respondent submitted that Spender AJ failed to consider the public interest in the "post-approval" administration of functions and ignored the relevance of the Council's "bona fide" views about non-compliance with approval conditions. One problem with this approach was that after stamping and approving the linen plan in about May 1979, as his Honour found, and after the lodging of the s34B certificate on 11 June 1979, on 11 July 1979 the
Council advised Mr and Mrs Avenhouse that Mr Carlyle's cancellation of the previous sub-division authority had occurred and that the matter could not proceed. In November 1980, after consent orders had been filed on 20 October , Council officers advised that it was necessary to start again and it would only take a short time to have Stage I re-approved. In December 1980, for the first time, the Council expressed the view that Stage I constituted the excision of the house block leaving the battle axed shape residue. This was followed by the Council's letter of 3 February 1981 stating that: (i) the conditional approval granted by Council on 11 January 1979 was invalid; (ii) the only valid approval was the one for Stage I notified on 14 May 1975; and it had now become evident that the boundaries between Stage I and Stage
II were incorrectly shown. Again, in the absence of any evidence from Council officers, this reads more like a stalling exercise than the bona fide exercise by the Council of a consideration of whether or not the conditions of the ordinance had been satisfied. Against the evidence that the plan was approved in May 1975 and without any Council evidence that it was not, it was not open to the Council to say that a duty was not owed because in some circumstances, not the present, the Council might bona fide have thought that approval had not been granted.

His Honour was criticised for paying no apparent attention to Coshott v
Woollahra Municipal Council [(1988) 14 NSWLR 675] and
Revesz versus Commonwealth of Australia [(1951) 51 SR 63], cited with implied approval by Mason J in Sutherland Shire Council versus Heyman at 460. Coshott concerned a Council's alleged failure to determine a development application "promptly and diligently". The proceedings came before the Court on the defendant's application to strike out the statement of claim as not disclosing a viable cause of action. At 681 Wood J said: "What to my mind distinguishes the present from those cases where a duty of care has been found is the deemed refusal of consent where there has been no determination within forty days, and the right of appeal then conferred. The plaintiffs could not have had any legitimate expectation that their application would necessarily be approved, and they could not have relied on a favourable exercise of the powers conferred upon the consent authority. The outcome of their application depended on the many factors referred to in s90, and the response of any persons qualified to lodge an objection to the proposal.

Clearly, the legislature contemplated the possibility that development applications would not be processed within the respective periods laid down, and provided for that contingency by conferring a deemed refusal accompanied by a right of appeal. ....To my mind, these provisions are inconsistent with any general duty of care of the kind for which the plaintiffs would have to contend to establish the cause of action in tort." 
The case is distinguishable. Mr and Mrs Avenhouse do not assert a duty to approve promptly, but a duty, having approved, to process within a reasonable time.

Revesz versus Commonwealth of Australia involved a claim to recover damages in respect of financial loss caused by negligence on the part of the Minister, or his departmental officers, which unduly delayed the issuing of import licences. The facts were closer to the present. The Customs Department had acceded to an application for an import licence but, it was claimed, had so carelessly and negligently handled the licence that it was lost for a long time so that the Department was unable to deliver it to the plaintiff.

The defendant's demurrer to the declaration was upheld. But the grounds for doing so do not accord with modern authority. At 67 Street CJ said that the logical application of the general principle laid down in Donoghue v
Stevenson <case>; [[1932] AC 562] was wide enough to cover the facts of the case and wide enough to establish a duty on the part of the defendant toward the plaintiff.
A breach of this duty would entitle the plaintiff to relief. But logic could not be pressed too far. The facts in Donoghue versus Stevenson were special and no other reported decision would carry the application of the rule in that case to the extent to which the plaintiff sought to carry it. At 70 Maxwell J said that the action failed because neither the person nor the property of the plaintiff was affected. At 72 Owen J said that the plaintiff and the
Commonwealth were not "neighbours". In Sutherland Shire Council versus Heyman
Mason J cited the case for the proposition that generally speaking, a public authority which is under no statutory obligation to exercise a power comes under no common law duty of care to do so. In the present case, the Council was under a statutory duty to return to the applicant the certified plan. In my opinion, Revesz versus Commonwealth of Australia is no longer authority for any proposition which assists the Council.

I agree with Spender AJ that the Council owed Mr and Mrs Avenhouse a duty at common law to process the plan of sub-division, including the certification of the linen plan of sub-division, with due diligence and within a reasonable time. This ground in the notice of contention fails.

BREACH OF DUTY 
The Council claimed that, on 23 May 1979 when Mr Sunter submitted the plan of sub-division and the design for inter-allotment drainage to Stage I, Mr and
Mrs Avenhouse had not complied with the conditions of the approval in several respects to which I shall return. But the Council's principal argument was that the plan of sub-division submitted was not substantially in accordance with the plan of sub-division previously approved. The validity of this argument depended upon whether the May 1975 approval was of a sub-division which accorded with the plan returned to Mr Carlyle with the Council's letter of 14 May 1975 or of a sub-division which accorded with the plan sent with the
Council's letter of 12 November 1975 to the Valuer General. In other words, whether Stage I was a three lot or a two lot sub-division. The plan Mr Sunter sent to the Council on 23 May 1979 provided for a three lot sub-division in
Stage I of the sub-division. The Council submitted that the plan of sub- division approved incorporated a two lot first stage.

The evidence either way was documentary. The Council called nobody to prove the formalities of the approval or to explain how the various letters written by the Council and purporting to state the terms of the approval came to be written. Spender AJ found that the Council had approved a two stage sub- division which would eventually bring about five lots, Stage I of which was made up of the house block, Lot 5, the adjoining block, Lot 1, and a third lot which comprised the residue. That, his Honour said, was the only sensible interpretation that could be placed on the plan. Stage II was the sub-division of the residue into the three lots, numbered 2, 3 and 4. "In short, each stage was a three lot sub-division, which would eventually bring about five lots (or blocks)." His Honour went on to say that this was the interpretation that Mr and Mrs Avenhouse put forward and the interpretation the Council adopted (with one qualification, the letter to the Valuer General of 12 November 1975) for some six years. Spender AJ said that there was nothing in the evidence to suggest that the position put by the Council in its further letter to the
Valuer General was ever put to Mr Carlyle. Certainly, it was not put to Mr
Avenhouse. "Why this was so, was never explained: (the Council) chose not to call any of its officers, or former officers." 
The end of this six year period was marked by the Council's letter of 3
February 1981 to Mr Avenhouse's solicitors which I have set out. According to this letter the conditional approval granted by Council on 11 January 1979 was invalid. The only currently valid approval to sub-divide was for Stage I of which Mr Carlyle was notified on 14 May 1975 and, to quote the Council's words, "it now becomes evident" that the delineation between Stage I and Stage
II boundaries was incorrectly shown. It should have shown Stage I as Lot 1 fronting Fraser Road with a large residue lot containing the existing residence and Stage II excising the existing residence on Lot 5 and creating
Lots 2, 3 and 4 fronting the unmade road. The Council's refusal to budge from this position led Mr and Mrs Avenhouse, on 22 December 1981, to take the Land and Environment Court proceedings which were resolved by consent orders on 30
September 1982.

The Council's letter of 14 May 1975 was clear evidence that on 8 May 1975 approval had been granted to the proposed sub-division of Portion 325 in accordance with the layout attached to it and described both in the letter and on its back, over the signature of the Shire Clerk, as "the approved layout".
The Council did not seriously challenge this interpretation of the letter. The letters of the same date to the Metropolitan Water, Sewerage & Drainage
Board and the Valuer General support this interpretation. The Council called no evidence to say that these letters did not correctly record the approval given. Neither Mr Carlyle nor Mr and Mrs Avenhouse were ever advised of any error and the letter to the Valuer General of 12 November 1975, which spoke of the plan being "incorrectly marked as to the stage of the sub-division" and provided copies of a plan showing "the correct information", stood unexplained. The Council's case was not helped, as Spender AJ noted, by the statement nearly six years later that it had "now" become evident that the delineation between Stage I and Stage II boundaries was incorrectly shown. The
Council produced no plan of the layout of the sub-division in the form it claimed it had approved in May 1975, other than the November amendment of the approved layout. Absent any explanatory evidence from Council officers, the letter of 12 November 1975 does not significantly detract from the force of this contemporaneous evidence.

Accordingly, Spender AJ was right to find on the evidence before him that the
Council had approved a two stage development, Stage I described on the plan sent with the letter of 14 May 1975 as "edged in green" and Stage II as "edged in blue". The case was run on the evidence I have referred to until a very late stage when the Council applied to re-open its case.

COUNCIL'S APPLICATION TO RE-OPEN 
In his evidence Mr Avenhouse accepted that late in 1980 his solicitor or Mr
Sunter or both had been told by the Council that there was some doubt about the delineation between State I and Stage II. He had been advised by his solicitor that the expedient course might be to make a completely fresh application. Mr Sunter accepted in cross-examination that in discussions with the Council's engineer in 1979 it emerged that the engineer was interpreting the sub-division differently. Mr Sunter said this was discussed with Mr
Avenhouse but it was not put to Mr Avenhouse that he was aware of the engineer's interpretation at that time. It appeared from a letter Mr Avenhouse wrote on 3 December 1980 to Mr Sunter that Mr Taylor, the Council's Sub- divisional Engineer, was not clear what Stages I and II were, exactly, and wanted it clarified. In his judgment of 9 November 1982 in the second equity proceedings brought by Mr Carlyle against Mr and Mrs Avenhouse, Helsham CJ in
Eq said, in a passage I have already quoted: "Stage I provided for the sub division of Lot 1, that is the undeveloped lot on the western side of the two lots facing on to Fraser Road. Stage II was a sub division of the balance of the four lots, Lots 2, 3, 4 and 5, of course, was the lot shown as having the house situated upon it." 
The Chief Judge went on to say that the plan sent with the Council's notification of approval to Mr Carlyle was wrong. The material before his
Honour included not only the letter of 14 May 1975 notifying the approval and setting out the various conditions upon which it was given but also "an engineer's report, the conditions of which were embodied in the consent".

Helsham CJ in Eq observed that after the Council had indicated its re-approval of the sub-division on 11 January 1979 and this was notified to Mr and Mrs
Avenhouse "they obtained what they thought was re-approval of what had previously been approved, which, of course, provided for a Stage I excision from the land of a vacant block and Stage II a further sub-division into four lots and, as I have said, this re-approval was notified to them." 
We were told that Helsham CJ in Eq's judgment was admitted as evidence of the issues in those proceedings but not as evidence of the facts found. The
Council was not a party to the second equity proceedings so neither it nor Mr and Mrs Avenhouse were estopped from raising any issue about the May 1975 approval; compare Blair versus Curran <case>; [(1939) 62 CLR 464] at 531.

On 31 January 1995 the Council applied to re-open its case and to tender a report of the Council's engineer of 7 May 1975, at the bottom of which appeared above the engineer's signature: "This sub-division is approved by the Engineer as authorised by Council on 4
June, 1970 and as contained in the recommendation of this report.

Date of approval 8/5/75" 
Spender AJ refused the application and gave his reasons for doing so in a separate judgment on 27 June 1995. His Honour pointed out that the case had been fought from the outset by Mr and Mrs Avenhouse on the basis that the approval was that communicated to Mr Carlyle in May 1975 and re-approved in
January 1979. "It was not until after final submissions - which included voluminous written submissions - had been given and judgment reserved that the application was made to re-open." The Council cross-appealed against this decision.

The document the Council sought to tender was one of its own, had been discovered by it and had been included in counsel's brief. Apparently, counsel was not aware of the contents of the document until 20 December 1994. As his
Honour said, however that might be, the Council was aware of it as was the
Council's solicitor Mr Gibbons and Ms Allpress, who had had the general carriage of the matter under Mr Gibbons' supervision. His Honour summed up the effect of the document as follows: "[It] would have been to cut directly across the notifications of May 1975 and
January 1979. What the Council would then have been able to say was that the communications were made in error and that the actual consent was one which excised one lot only of the proposed sub-division, and that that would constitute Stage I of the overall sub-division." 
His Honour had no doubt that the Council, through its relevant officers and its instructing solicitors, was at all times aware of the existence and materiality of this document. His Honour summarised six "very sound reasons" for rejecting the application to re-open. Amongst these was that the very issue raised by the document had been the subject of the other litigation before Helsham CJ in Eq. The Council's lawyers were aware of these proceedings. Helsham CJ in Eq's judgment was tendered by Mr and Mrs Avenhouse and objected to by the Council. His Honour referred to adhering to case management principles and said: "If ever there was a case of a party - the defendant in these proceedings - having made its litigious bed, this was one.
It was far too late for it to be allowed to unmake it, and to do this would have been most prejudicial to the plaintiff." 
In opposition to the application Mr and Mrs Avenhouse relied upon an affidavit of their solicitor, Robert Heyblok, of 31 January 1995. He deposed that on a number of occasions starting on 29 October 1992 and going up to 28 November the Council had filed on its behalf schedules of documents in draft or final form and in some cases verified, that it proposed to tender. Even though the document, the subject of the application, had been discovered by the
Council, none of these lists referred to it. Mr Heyblok deposed that Mr and
Mrs Avenhouse's counsel, Mr Young, had prepared for the case and prepared his opening in reliance in part on the Council's documents to be tendered being as notified. Accordingly, counsel emphasised in opening that the approvals of and 1979 were valid and that the Council was negligent in not processing them and placed very little emphasis on the alternative basis of claim that if the approvals were invalid, it was negligent to have advised of approval and re-approval.

Mr Young informed Mr Heyblok that had notification of the tender of the document, the subject of the application, been given as directed, Mr Young would have given the most serious consideration to advising Mr and Mrs
Avenhouse to make investigations of the author of the report the subject of the present application. Alternatively, he would have advised that once Mr and
Mrs Avenhouse and their advisers discovered on 25 August 1994 that Mr Carlyle might be still alive, to try to get some information from him Mr Heyblok deposed that the plaintiffs were precluded from these steps for the following reasons: 
They had incurred considerable counsel's fees and considerable legal fees which had only been paid in part.

Unpaid counsel's fees billed to that date totalled approximately $17,000 and there was an additional approximate $7,000 unbilled.

The case had greatly extended past its estimated duration and if it was further extended it would increase even more the financial burden which had been imposed on the plaintiffs.

In the determination of the application made to Spender AJ justice was the paramount consideration; see Queensland versus JL Holdings Pty Limited <case>; [(1997) 71 ALJR 294] at 297, per Dawson, Gaudron and McHugh JJ and the passage therein referred to from the judgment of Bowen LJ in Cropper versus Smith [[1884] Ch D 700] at 710, in which his Lordship said that: ".... it is a well established principle that the object of Courts is to decide the rights of the parties, and not to punish them for mistakes they make in the conduct of their cases by deciding otherwise than in accordance with their rights....... Courts do not exist for the sake of discipline, but for the sake of deciding matters in controversy...." 
These principles, as their Honours acknowledged, still stand good. On the other hand in Ketteman versus Hansel Properties Limited [[1987] AC 189] at 220, Lord
Griffiths said: "[J]ustice cannot always be measured in terms of money and in my view a judge is entitled to weigh in the balance the strain the litigation imposes on litigants, particularly if they are personal litigants rather than business corporations, the anxieties occasioned by facing new issues, the raising of false hopes ....".

Neither Mr Gibbons nor Mr Heyblok were cross-examined on their affidavits which his Honour properly accepted at their face value. There was, of course, no question of using the Court's orders to punish the Council or those representing it for failing to bring the evidence forward in due time. But the prejudice to Mr and Mrs Avenhouse flowing from this delay hung heavily in the balance against allowing the Council to re-open. There could be no doubt that on its face the admission of the evidence could have affected the outcome of the case in a way favourable to the Council. Spender AJ had a discretion to exercise. No error was shown to have been made in the exercise of that discretion. I am not persuaded that the discretion miscarried. I do not think on appeal that we can interfere with his Honour's refusal to allow the Council to re-open its case. This ground of cross-appeal, the only one that the
Council pressed, therefore fails.

NON-COMPLIANCE WITH CONDITIONS 
Assuming that the Council was under a common law duty to return the certified plan within a reasonable time and that the plan submitted to the Council was substantially in accordance with the plan which the Council had approved, the
Council contended that the inter-allotment drainage was not provided and piped until about February 1983 and that until this was done the Council was not obliged to release a certified plan. Accordingly, it was said that the Council was not in breach of any duty in failing to do so. Further, it was said that unless Mr Carlyle maintained his consent to the application, there was no prospect that the sub-division conditions would be complied with and no prospect that the Council would be under any obligation to certify or release the sub-division plans.

Mr and Mrs Avenhouse did not contest that the provision of inter-allotment drainage was a condition of Stage I of the approval - condition 5. With his letter of 23 May 1979 Mr Sunter forwarded copies of the design for inter- allotment drainage to Stage I and asked if the Council would approve the design in order that "we may proceed with the construction of the line as soon as possible". As Mr Sunter said in evidence, without that approval he could not proceed with carrying out the drainage works. The only relevant response was the Council's letter of 11 July 1979 saying that in consequence of Mr
Carlyle's cancellation of previous sub-division authorities "the matter cannot proceed". Asked about the inter-allotment drainage line in cross-examination
Mr Avenhouse said that he did the work in a day. It consisted of digging a trench and putting in a 90mm stormwater pipe over a length of approximately m.

No reason was advanced for the Council's failure to approve Mr Sunter's proposal beyond its apparent decision that because of Mr Carlyle's cancellation of authority the matter could not proceed. Furthermore, the
Council's argument ignored his Honour's finding that in fact the plans had been stamped as approved but not issued. In my opinion, it is no answer to the claim that the certified plan was not duly issued, to say that the Council itself had failed without warrant or proper reason to approve the inter- allotment drainage plans. Mr and Mrs Avenhouse's claim was that the Council had not diligently and within a reasonable time processed the sub-division plan. The failure to deal appropriately with the inter-allotment drainage plan was a feature of this.

Furthermore, once the sub-division was approved, as it was in 1975 and in , Mr Carlyle's withdrawal of his consent could not affect the validity of the approval; see In re 56 Denton Road, Twickenham [[1953] Ch 51] at 56-7; Pearson v Leichhardt Municipal Council [(1997) 93 LGERA 206] at 211-2.
Spender AJ's conclusion that in the circumstances the period of a reasonable time expired in late August 1979 was not challenged.

I agree with Spender AJ that the Council was shown to be in breach of its duty to process the sub-division application within a reasonable time. This ground in the notice of contention also fails.

DAMAGES 
Grounds 1 to 4 of Mr and Mrs Avenhouse's amended notice of appeal challenged the trial Judge's conclusion that they were entitled to recover only that which they had lost and not that which they would have gained if their development on the sub-division had gone ahead. Mr and Mrs Avenhouse claimed that they were entitled, inter alia, to recover as damages the profits on development of their land which they lost as a result of the Council's breach of duty and that the trial Judge erred in holding that they could only recover loss on an alternative use of their money.

When the hearing of the appeal began Mr Taylor SC, who appeared for the
Council, said that, in relation to grounds 1 to 4 which dealt with the assessment of loss of profits and the way in which the trial Judge disallowed that claim, the Council did not wish to offer anything in opposition and conceded that these grounds of appeal should be sustained. However, the
Council did not concede that if damages were calculated as Mr and Mrs
Avenhouse claimed, any were or would be proved. However, this, it was agreed, would be a matter for a new trial. Consequent upon this concession Mr and Mrs
Avenhouse conceded that, in any calculation of loss of profits, allowance should be made for the net proceeds of the sale of 19 Fraser Road. This concession obviated the need for the Court to consider ground 5 in the amended notice of appeal about which counsel told us there was no issue.

However, in its supplementary submissions filed by leave after oral argument was complete, the Council asked the Court, if the issue of loss of profits was remitted for assessment, to indicate whether the Court's findings on duty would prevent the Council from raising in any assessment hearing: a contention that the duty only extended to costs incurred as a result of delay; a contention that the duty did not extend to the development of Lot 15
Fraser Road; a contention that the duty did not extend to the risk of non-completion of the development; a contention that non-completion of the project as a result of changes in the economic climate, including the real estate market, were too remote.

None of these matters has been addressed in argument. What damages are recoverable under the general head of profits lost on the development as a result of the Council's breach of duty will no doubt depend upon the evidence and is and should be a matter for the Judge assessing the damages. I need say nothing further about the Council's request except that it should be rejected.

LEGAL COSTS OF THE FIRST EQUITY PROCEEDINGS (Grounds 6 and 8 of the Notice of Appeal) 
Mr and Mrs Avenhouse claimed to have suffered a loss of $6,190 or thereabouts representing their legal costs of the first equity proceedings. Spender AJ said that the proceedings resulted from a dispute between Mr Avenhouse and Mr
Carlyle which, in his view, was in no way attributable to the actions of the
Council. The dispute concerned the alleged non-fulfilment by Mr and Mrs
Avenhouse of special condition 24, which related to the registration of the plan of sub-division as a deposited plan. Notice of this dispute was given to
Mr Avenhouse's solicitors by Mr Carlyle's solicitors by letter of 4 May 1979.
The plans were not lodged with the Council until 23 May 1979 and the s34B certificate until 11 June 1979. In the meantime, by letter of 28 May 1979 Mr
Carlyle's solicitors had confirmed rescission. The first equity proceedings were begun on 3 September 1979. Spender AJ said that this sequence of events made it plain that the Council could not be blamed for the first equity proceedings, and consequently for any costs attributable to those proceedings.

Spender AJ found that a reasonable outer time limit for the Council to approve the linen plan of sub-division and the inter-allotment drainage plan was in the order of ten weeks. He held that anything beyond that constituted unreasonable delay. The post sub-division approval steps should have been completed by late August 1979, that is to say, ten weeks from 11 June 1979 when the s34B certificate was lodged. Mr and Mrs Avenhouse submitted that in the result they would have been in a position to complete the purchase either before Mr Carlyle began his equity proceedings or shortly thereafter and the
Court should infer that the proceedings would never have been begun, or if they had, would quickly have settled. The point was made that when the proceedings did settle they provided for the same excision of Mr Carlyle's corner house lot as provided for in the approved plan of sub-division. Mr and
Mrs Avenhouse posed the question why Mr Carlyle would have pursued a claim for rescission when he could have had his sale settled by early September 1979.
The fact that he entered into a settlement of the proceedings with them which left the contract basically on foot over a year later suggested that this was more likely than not. In that event Mr and Mrs Avenhouse would have avoided all or substantially all of the costs of the first equity proceedings which, as it turned out, they were unable to settle until October 1980.

The only evidence, to which counsel for Mr and Mrs Avenhouse could point, of how Mr Carlyle would have reacted if Mr and Mrs Avenhouse had found themselves in a position to complete in early September either before or shortly after he began his equity proceedings, was Mr Avenhouse's evidence that "Mr Carlyle was the kind of person who, if he could see money, .... would agree to anything.
If the Council would have been quick enough in returning those plans, Mr
Carlyle would have been quite happy to sign because he would then have got his money, there would have been no contest, there would have been no equity case at all." Spender AJ did not address this submission in his reasons for judgment.

In the first equity proceedings Mr Carlyle sought a declaration that the contract for sale had been validly terminated or, alternatively, rectification of the contract to change the sale price for the entire parcel of land from $25,000 to $40,000. This was no doubt in answer to the purported exercise of the option on 2 May 1979 to purchase the whole of the land including improvements for $25,000. The short minutes of order dated 20 October 1980, which settled the proceedings, provided that: (i) the contract was to continue in force as varied by the agreement, that is, by a provision that special conditions 24 (the rescission condition) and 30 (the option condition), inter alia, would not apply; (ii) Mr and Mrs Avenhouse should purchase lots 1-4 and should pay $10,000 for the land in addition to releases of all claims they might have against Mr Carlyle.

Apart from the passage which I have referred to and which, if admissible, was of little weight, no evidence was given of how Mr Carlyle would have reacted in September 1979 to a proposal that he withdraw his notice of rescission and abandon the equity proceedings. Mr and Mrs Avenhouse's argument is based on speculation. In my opinion, Spender AJ was right to reject it. His Honour may well have dealt with it succinctly because a consideration of the course of the trial suggests that Mr and Mrs Avenhouse did not pursue it with much enthusiasm. This challenge to the damages award fails.

COSTS OF LAND AND ENVIRONMENT COURT PROCEEDINGS (Grounds 7 and 8 of the Notice of Appeal) 
Order 3 of the consent orders made in the Land and Environment Court was: "No
Order as to Costs." Spender AJ said it would be wrong to allow that term to be nullified in these proceedings. "In any event the loss of those costs follows the terms of settlement in those proceedings and not from the Council's negligence. Alternatively expressed, the agreement as to costs broke the chain of causation." The amount claimed was $3,138.

After the settlement of the first equity proceedings in October 1980 Mr
Carlyle again became impatient. In June 1981 he foreshadowed court proceedings and a notice of termination was sent to Mr and Mrs Avenhouse by Mr Carlyle's solicitors on 27 October 1981. This led to the second equity proceedings against Mr and Mrs Avenhouse in which they received judgment in their favour on 9 November 1982. In the meanwhile, it had become apparent to Mr and Mrs
Avenhouse that the Council would not move from the position it had taken up in its letter of 3 February 1981. Accordingly, they took the proceedings against the Council in the Land and Environment Court which were consolidated and settled on 30 September 1982 on terms of an order approving sub-division in accordance with Mr Sunter's plan of 11 May 1979.

The proceedings in the Land and Environment Court were the result of the
Council's failure to certify the plan of sub-division. Spender AJ said: "Its failure to act after December 1980, its volte face of 3 February 1981 and its forcing the Avenhouses to take it to court - which was the practical effect of its conduct - was a continuance of the same kind of unreasonable and unjustified behaviour." 
Mr and Mrs Avenhouse submitted that they could not argue their tort case in the Land and Environment Court and that they mitigated their damages by settling the case.

The legal costs of the first equity proceedings, which Mr and Mrs Avenhouse claimed, were incurred in proceedings between them and a third party, Mr
Carlyle. Costs incurred in previous proceedings between the now plaintiff and some third party have been held recoverable as damages subject to the rules of remoteness of damage; Hammond versus Bussey [[1888] 20 QBD 79], particularly at 93, 96 and 100. See generally, McGregor on Damages, 16th ed, at 508. However, the costs of the proceedings in the Land and Environment
Court were costs in proceedings between the same parties. Accordingly, Mr and
Mrs Avenhouse were faced with the difficulty that a cost order had already been made in the earlier proceedings between the Council and them. The author of McGregor at 501 said: "Clearly it would make nonsense of the rules of the court as to the award of costs and the taxation of costs if the successful party could recover as damages either the costs withheld by the court or any further costs he has incurred to his solicitor beyond the taxed costs, whether in the same action or in a further action brought solely for this purpose." 
Reference was made to Cockburn versus Edwards [[1881] 18 ChD 449], where at , Jessel MR said: "The law gives the successful litigant his costs as between party and party, and he cannot be said to sustain damage by not getting them as between solicitor and client." See also 462 and 463. In a footnote, in McGregor at 503 reference was made to earlier cases necessarily involving two separate actions between the plaintiff and the defendant where costs not indemnified by a costs order in the first were held not to be recoverable as damages in the second. An example was Doe versus Filliter <case>; [(1844) 13 M & W 47], where the plaintiff sued first in ejectment to recover the possession of the property and then in trespass for mesne profits, that is to say, the profits derived from the land during the wrongful holding of possession. In the second action the plaintiff sought to recover the difference between the taxed costs and the full costs of the earlier action. Pollock CB at 51 and 21 said: "The taxed costs are a fair indemnity; and if they are not so, the rules which govern taxation ought to be altered." 
In Berry versus British Transport Commission [[1962] 1 QB 306] at 320-1
Devlin LJ said that the reason for the rule was not that the costs incurred in excess of the party and party allowance were deemed to be unreasonable; it was that what was presumed to be the same question cannot be gone into twice; see
Hathaway versus Barrow <case>; [[1807] 1 Camp 151:] [170 ER 909.] However, his Lordship continued: "If in the earlier case there has been no adjudication upon costs (as distinct from an adjudication that there shall be no order as to costs), a party may recover all his costs assessed on the reasonable, and not on a necessary, basis. If a party has failed to apply for costs which he would have got if he had asked for them, a subsequent claim for damages may be defeated; but that would be because in such a case his loss would be held to be due to his own fault or omission. In any case in which the legal process does not permit an adjudication, the rule does not apply." 
At 322 Devlin LJ said: "I find it difficult to see why the law should not now recognise one standard of costs as between litigants and another when those costs form a legitimate item of damage in a separate cause of action flowing from a different and additional wrong." 
However, his Lordship explained that the limitation may be designed to keep down extravagance in litigation.

The case might be seen to be different if the now plaintiff claimed that a separate tort was involved in instigating, assisting or causing the previous proceedings and sued for damages for that tort. Such torts could be malicious prosecution, false imprisonment or conspiracy; see McGregor at 503.

Quartz Hill Consolidated Gold Mining Company versus Eyre [[1883] 11 QBD ]
concerned an action for malicious prosecution. The court held that the extra costs incurred in defending the winding up petition complained of were not damage for which an action would lie; see 683 and 690 where Bowen LJ said: "The bringing of an ordinary action does not as a natural or necessary consequence involve any injury to a man's property, for this reason, that the only costs which the law recognises, and for which it will compensate him, are the costs properly incurred in the action itself. For those the successful defendant will have been already compensated, so far as the law chooses to compensate him. If the judge refuses to give him costs, it is because he does not deserve them: if he deserves them, he will get them in the original action, if he does not deserve them, he ought not to get them in a subsequent action." 
In Berry versus British Transport Commission at 317, Ormerod LJ said that considerable doubt had been expressed from time to time as to the reality of the view expressed by Bowen LJ, but that it was well established and in any event it was not for the Court of Appeal to disturb it. However, costs awarded in a criminal prosecution were different in that they might have no relation to those incurred and were not necessarily intended to compensate the successful party; see 317, 323-332 and 336-339.

In The Ocean Dynamic [[1982] 2 Lloyds Rep 88], the plaintiff sued a sea carrier under a bill of lading for damage to the goods.
The defendants disputed the jurisdiction of the English courts so the plaintiff began protective proceedings in the United States against the same defendants. The defendants' attempt to set aside the English writ failed and the plaintiff proceeded in England and sought to recover as part of its damages costs incurred by it in the United States proceedings. Robert Goff J held that the sum was not recoverable. At 94, he said: "These proceedings were between the parties to the present action in respect of the same claim. As such, the general principle is that they cannot be recovered as damages, but can only be recovered if an order for costs was made by the appropriate Court. Indeed, there is no evidence that if the United
States action had been pursued to judgment, the relevant Court would have made any order for costs in favour of the plaintiff recovering these particular costs, and bearing in mind the practice in the courts of that country, I certainly cannot infer that that would have been done. The plaintiff's submission involves therefore the bizarre consequence that, having discontinued the United States proceedings, they should now be able to recover as damages costs which they would not have been awarded in the United States action if they had won it. This plainly cannot be right." 
What his Lordship said seems to cut across the principle applied in those cases where costs have been recoverable as damages in later proceedings between the same parties. McGregor at 503 footnote 12, observed that it should make no difference whether costs would or would not have been awarded in the earlier action; indeed it might even be argued, on an analogy with the old ejectment/mesne profits cases cited that there was a somewhat stronger case for the plaintiff where the previous proceedings could bring no costs in their train.

Hanrahan versus Ainsworth [(1985) 1 NSWLR 370], was a case where the plaintiff claimed damages for the defendant's alleged abuse of legal process by instituting defamation proceedings and sought to recover costs incurred as a result of those defamation proceedings. Hunt J, at 375, referred to the difference between an action for malicious prosecution, where the plaintiff must plead and prove that the earlier proceedings had terminated in his favour, and an action for abuse of process, where that was not so and said: "If the earlier proceedings had terminated in favour of the present plaintiff, then his expenses would have been recoverable in those proceedings and they would not support his subsequent action for abuse of process. But, where those earlier proceedings have not so terminated in favour of the present plaintiff,
I see no reason why his expenses in relation to those proceedings should not validly support his present claim.

No question arises in this case .... as to whether the plaintiff would be entitled to found his action for damages for abuse of process upon the `solicitor and client' component of his costs which would not have been recoverable in the earlier proceedings." 
Had Mr and Mrs Avenhouse obtained an order for costs in the Land and
Environment Court, principle would suggest that they could not recover in the present proceedings the difference between the costs assessed and the actual costs or expenses they incurred. Principle would also suggest that if the Land and Environment Court had ordered them to pay the Council's costs, they should not be able to recover their costs as damages in the present proceedings. That would make a mockery of the Land and Environment Court costs order. I see no reason why in the Land and Environment Court it was not open to them to argue in any contest about costs, that the proceedings were necessitated as a result of the Council's conduct, such as is here complained of; s69 of the Land and
Environment Court Act. Ordinarily, costs would have followed the event if Mr and Mrs Avenhouse had succeeded, but such material may have been relevant in support of a claim for costs on an indemnity basis. I do not see how reliance upon such material is inhibited by the considerations discussed in National
Parks and Wildlife Service versus Stables Perisher Pty Limited [(1990) 20 NSWLR .](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281990%29%2020%20NSWLR%20573 "View LawCiteRecord" ) In that case it was held that the Land and Environment Court, though a superior court of record, was a court of limited jurisdiction and had no jurisdiction to deal with a claim in tort for general damages.

If the court determined that there should be no order as to costs, the same result would follow: see generally per Devlin LJ in Berry versus British Transport
Commission at 320-1. His Lordship there remarked that if a party has failed to apply for costs which he would have got if he had asked for them a subsequent claim for damages may be defeated. Mr and Mrs Avenhouse having agreed that there should be no order for costs, they cannot, in my opinion, now seek to go behind that agreement by claiming the costs as damages in the present proceedings. In my opinion, Spender AJ correctly held that the costs incurred in the Land and Environment Court proceedings were not recoverable.

VEXATION (Grounds 9 and 10 of the Notice of Appeal) 
In their claim for damages, Mr and Mrs Avenhouse separately particularised as a head of damages vexation suffered by them and each of them progressively from 1979 onwards as a result, inter alia, of the Council's failure to process the sub-division. By "vexation" I would understand them to mean the state of being irritated or annoyed. The right to recover damages for non-material injury is shortly and usefully discussed in Fleming the Law of Torts, 9th ed, at 285 where the learned author said: "It used to be thought that damages for non-material injury were allowed only consequent on physical injury but not damage to property, such for example as grief over the death of a cat or distress and inconvenience over damage to one's home or car. But there has lately been a change: damages for foreseeable worry and anxiety, or physical inconvenience are now being awarded in cases of negligently constructed homes, even business premises, and at least for intentional shooting of pets. Equally in cases of purely economic loss, such as resulting from conversion and misrepresentation." 
For damages to be recoverable the vexation must be related to the tortious act or omission complained of, not to the ensuing litigation or the ordinary commercial, professional or private incidents of the complainant's life.
Reference was made to the decision of the New Zealand Court of Appeal in
Mouat versus Clark Boyce [[1992] 2 NZLR 559] at 569, where Cooke P remarked that there are many tort, contract or statutory status cases in New Zealand in which foreseeable distress has been an ingredient in the award and at 573 where Richardson J said: "....there are numerous recent cases in which moderate awards have been made in respect of discomfort and inconvenience and associated anxiety and distress sustained by plaintiffs where damage to buildings has occurred due to carelessness on the part of local body building inspectors." 
This appeal in the New Zealand Court of Appeal was from a decision at first instance on a re-trial previously ordered by the Court of Appeal when upholding an appeal from an earlier trial. Subsequently, this previous decision of the Court of Appeal was reversed by the Privy Council [1994] 1 AC
However, this does not seem to me to affect the authority of the later
Court of Appeal decision which attracted no comment or mention in the Privy
Council, on the question with which we are here concerned.

In Brickhill versus Cooke [[1984] 3 NSWLR 396], the plaintiffs, who were about to purchase a house, recovered damages from the defendant, an engineer who negligently inspected and reported on its condition. This Court applying the decision of the English Court of Appeal in
Perry versus Sidney Phillips & Son [[1982] 1 WLR 1297], upheld an award of damages for inconvenience, even though the plaintiffs' claim was in tort for negligence to recover damages for economic loss only. Namely, the difference between the value of the house in the sound condition described in the engineer's report and its value in the defective condition which should have been reported to the plaintiffs. In the English case, Lord Denning MR at , said that the plaintiffs were entitled to damages for all the vexation, distress and worry which they had been caused by reason of the negligence of the surveyor. At 1307 Kerr LJ pointed out that it would be wrong to award damages for the vexation and inconvenience of being involved in a legal dispute. The damages were those that flowed directly from the negligent act.

The right to recover such damages was again confirmed in this Court in
Campbelltown City Council versus Mackay [(1989) 15 NSWLR 501] at 504, and 510-512. As McHugh JA pointed out at 511, the question was whether the consequential damage was the reasonably foreseeable result of the defendant's negligence.

The commission of the tort primarily affected Mr and Mrs Avenhouse's economic interest in developing their land, said to give rise to damages for pecuniary loss, particularised as wasted expenses and loss of profits. The claim for damages for non-pecuniary loss, vexation, though connected, was secondary.
Such damages have been called "parasitic", a word which so used, while graphic, may be misleading. Policy dictates whether such damages can be recovered; see Spartan & Steel & Alloys versus Martin & Co <case>; [[1973] QB 27](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1973%5d%20QB%2027 "View LawCiteRecord" ) at 35 and 49; McGregor at 141 and following; Luntz, Assessment of
Damages, 3rd ed at 169-170. In Lynch versus Knight <case>; <case>; , [11
ER 854] at 863 Lord
Wensleydale said: "Mental pain or anxiety the law cannot value, and does not pretend to redress, when the unlawful act complained of causes that alone; though where a material damage occurs, and is connected with it, it is impossible a jury, in estimating it, should altogether overlook the feelings of the party interested." 
In Baltic Shipping Company versus Dillon <case>; [(1993) 176 CLR 344] at 359-60 Mason CJ said: "...... in some circumstances at least, a plaintiff can recover damages for injury to his or her feelings caused by tortious conduct; assault, false imprisonment, malicious prosecution and defamation are causes of action in which a plaintiff may recover damages on that score. This is not surprising.
As Lord Cranworth V.-C. observed in Kemp versus Sober <case>; [(1851) 1 Sim (NS) 517] at 520; <case>; [61 ER 200] at 201, `the feeling of anxiety is damage'. No doubt his
Lordship, by that statement, intended to convey that damages could be recovered by a plaintiff for anxiety, disappointment or distress when those feelings were the consequence of conduct for which damages are recoverable and the damages recoverable for that actionable wrong include compensation for injured feelings of that kind." 
Damages for such non-pecuniary loss, irrecoverable if claimed alone, may be added if the plaintiff has suffered and the defendant is liable for pecuniary loss. In the present case Mr and Mrs Avenhouse have succeeded in proving damages for pecuniary loss in a total amount of $41,011. In addition they are entitled to recover, if proved, damages for lost profits.

In support of Mr and Mrs Avenhouse's claim for damages for loss of earning capacity medical evidence was called to prove that as a result of the
Council's acts or omissions, Mr Avenhouse developed conditions described as atrial fibrillation and severe depression. Spender AJ reviewed the medical evidence in some detail in his reasons for judgment. He noted that it was submitted for Mr Avenhouse that he had suffered since early 1981 from a severe depressive illness, linked via stress to attacks of atrial fibrillation. On the other hand, for the Council it was submitted that Mr Avenhouse was not suffering from any illness attributable to his dealings with the Council. Such symptoms as Mr Avenhouse did exhibit were due to repeated stress over a prolonged period of time and attributable to such matters as litigation (other than litigation which has been referred to in this judgment), family problems (including the death of a haemophilic son who received a polluted blood transfusion and died of AIDS), and investments that had gone wrong. The
Council also relied on the way in which Mr Avenhouse gave his evidence. His
Honour said: "It was, I thought, that of a man (apart from two occasions when he lost composure and cried in the witness box) who over a number of days of cross- examination appeared for the most part to be alert, focused, his powers of recollection good and sometimes detailed to a quite considerable extent. On occasions he smiled in a way which seemed unforced. This the defendant said was inconsistent with the case put on Mr Avenhouse's behalf. The defendant also relied on actions taken by Mr Avenhouse including - to take one example - the detailed and focused way in which he prepared lengthy submissions to the Consumer Claims Tribunal in 1991." 
Spender AJ accepted that in 1980 Mr Avenhouse was at the peak of his powers.
He was a man of very considerable industry and application. Equally, since or thereabouts, a decline in his capacities of a fairly significant nature had taken place. His Honour accepted the general thrust of his evidence on the subject of how he felt, and what he had or had not been able to do, without necessarily accepting all of the detail of his evidence. His case was supported by a general decline in his activities since the early 1980's, and overall, in very general terms a decline in income earned. Mr Avenhouse's evidence of his general state of health and activity was supported by his wife, whom the trial Judge found to be a reliable witness, who sought to put the true events before the Court and not to colour things to help her husband.
In her evidence she said with reference to 1980 or thereabouts that Mr
Avenhouse had changed to being very uncommunicative, short tempered, sullen, withdrawn, and a poor sleeper. From being energetic and hard working he had become tired and lethargic, with a changed posture, and was slouching and listless. He started complaining of chest pains in 1980. By about 1982 or 1983 he was taking a long time to complete a house; sometimes he would go to work in the morning and be back at lunch time because he was not well.

In 1984 Mr Avenhouse, on a referral by Dr Futcher, who had first seen him in
February 1983, saw Dr Washington, a consultant cardiologist. Dr Washington saw
Mr Avenhouse again in December 1986 and for the last time in August 1988. Mr
Avenhouse presented with paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. In his report Dr
Washington said this was a medical condition not usually caused by stress although it was possible that stress could trigger an individual attack. It might occur for no apparent reason. When he saw Mr Avenhouse in August 1988 he was generally well apart from fatigue which Mr Avenhouse thought might be secondary to flecainide therapy. In cross-examination Dr Washington said that the atrial fibrillation which Mr Avenhouse suffered from was non-specific.
There could be numerous causes of it. The exact cause was not known; an individual attack could be triggered by stress; he did not believe that depression caused the structural change to bring about fibrillation. The net effect of this evidence was, Spender AJ said, that on the probabilities, Mr
Avenhouse's atrial fibrillation was not caused by either stress or depression.

During the period from October 1986 to January 1990, Mr Avenhouse consulted Dr
Paul Veress and Dr Kathleen Veress, who were general practitioners. Dr Paul
Veress thought that the atrial fibrillation was precipitated by mental stress and resulting anxiety. In cross-examination he said the reason for Mr
Avenhouse's mental stress, almost anguish, appeared to have been chest pain in the morning which accompanied his attacks of atrial fibrillation. "He might have been worried about himself or his health, or even his life." Dr Kathleen
Veress, who referred Mr Avenhouse back to Dr Washington, in a letter to that specialist, referred to very serious problems in Mr Avenhouse's family. In her evidence she said that Mr Avenhouse was depressed when he came to her and seriously disturbed by the fact that he was unable to work because of fibrillation. She was not sure of the cause of the depression but did say: "I think we have three important factors: one was Hans' ill health from time to time; the second one was his son's eventual terminal illness and the constant need of care and blood transfusion; the third one I think was the consequence of his physical disability, that he was not able to support adequately the family financially." 
Having concluded that by reason of the evidence of Dr Washington, atrial fibrillation could not be related on the probabilities to Mr and Mrs
Avenhouse's case, his Honour said that as to depression, on the other medical evidence, the same consequences followed. However, he dealt in some detail with the principal evidence about depression that Mr and Mrs Avenhouse led, that of Dr Herron, a consultant psychiatrist, who saw Mr Avenhouse on three occasions, in June and July 1985 and October 1993.

In a report of 8 August 1985, Dr Herron recorded that since Mr Avenhouse was involved in court proceedings in 1979 he had been suffering from depressive symptoms, manifested by poor sleep, a continuous feeling of being worn out, and heart symptoms that required investigation by a specialist physician. His
Honour accepted that this history was given to Dr Herron and that it expressed
Mr Avenhouse's genuine views about his condition. Dr Herron said that Mr
Avenhouse's pain and suffering had been continuous since the problems started over the land sale that led to the court case, that is to say, what he described as the 1979 case. In the report of 21 October 1993, Dr Herron recorded Mr Avenhouse's feelings of butterflies, continuous feelings of anxiety, episodes of depression, feelings of hopelessness and worthlessness when depressed, ruminations on suicide, that he was very emotional and that if he saw an accident on the TV news he burst into tears.

Spender AJ said that the high-water mark of Mr Avenhouse's case on depressive illness was Dr Herron's relating the aetiology of Mr Avenhouse's depression to the early 1980's when he was unable to proceed with the sub-division. Dr
Herron said: "Depression has been continuous since that time, gradually progressing until it has severely interfered with his ability to work .....

I have no doubt that Mr Avenhouse's current incapacitating psychological state is directly due to the difficulties experienced as a result of his inability to sub-divide his land which he tells me was directly related to actions by
Hornsby Shire Council." 
Spender AJ concluded that in large measure a depressive condition, an expression he chose with care, had been made out and that the evidence referred to in the written submissions of Mr and Mrs Avenhouse supported this conclusion. Further, he found that the symptoms of depression did cause significant distress or impairment of Mr Avenhouse's social and occupational functioning. The judgment continued: "I would summarise my views concerning his condition in these terms: 
There was, as I have said, a decline in his powers; 
He has suffered from a depressive condition but, putting his case at its highest, there are difficulties as to linkage and causation to which I shall now refer; 
From the viewpoint of medical treatment, atrial fibrillation relevantly has been the most important concern.

The link between atrial fibrillation and a sense of depression, in a hard working man is easy to understand.

Mr Avenhouse's evidence goes some distance to making this linkage.

He has been able, as has been pointed out by the defendant in its written submissions, to do focused work which [is] inconsistent with the notion of a depressive illness continuing from 1980 onwards. He was working in 1983 every single day, according to his wife; in that year he did the conveyancing himself for sale of Lots 2 and 3 of 19 Fraser Road; his personal submission to the Consumer Claims Tribunal in 1991 shows focus, concentration and command of detail - to take but two examples.

Aside from Dr Herron, there is no medical evidence to relate Mr
Avenhouse's depression to the Council's actions. As to Dr Herron's evidence, I treat that with caution, and I do not accept the conclusion which is expressed by him, and which I have quoted which relates Mr Avenhouse's depression causatively to the Council's actions. This is, I note, inconsistent with the observations of Dr Kathleen Veress who, whilst not a psychiatrist, as a general practitioner saw a good deal more of Mr Avenhouse than Dr Herron, or for that matter, Dr Gertler.

There is the time factor. No medical treatment was sought before the 22
February 1983, when Mr Avenhouse consulted Dr Futcher as practise [sic] concerning his complaints of irregular heart beat.

Assuming my view of the law is wrong, I think Mr Avenhouse's claim for past loss of earning capacity and future loss of earning capacity fails as a matter of fact. I think the major matter of concern has been atrial fibrillation; that cannot be related to any actions of the Council. As to depression, and however extensive it may be, in my view it is not established that it is causatively related to the Council's actions. For the same reasons, the claims for general damages and vexation must fail." 
Mr and Mrs Avenhouse do not appeal against the findings about atrial fibrillation and depression. They do appeal against the disallowance of damages for vexation. Spender AJ held that damages for vexation were as a matter of law irrecoverable for the breach of duty found. With respect, I do not think this is correct. If Mr and Mrs Avenhouse are entitled to recover damages for pecuniary loss the modern trend to which Professor Fleming referred and the cases which I have mentioned, support recovery for this non- pecuniary loss.

Mr and Mrs Avenhouse then complained that his Honour failed to deal with the question of whether Mr Avenhouse and indirectly Mrs Avenhouse by reason of the effects on her husband suffered from vexation as distinct from the illness of depression. In particular, they relied upon their own evidence of the effects of the Council's actions, the trial Judge's acceptance of the truthfulness of the account that Mr Avenhouse gave Dr Herron of the changes in his condition which included an attribution of the cause of the change to the Council's breach of duty. The trial Judge's acceptance of Mrs Avenhouse as a reliable witness was said to pick up her evidence which I quote: "In about 1980 my husband advised me of difficulties he was experiencing with a development he was undertaking at Cowan. Shortly after he advised me of these difficulties he became very uncommunicative to myself and my children.
On those occasions that he did talk to either myself or my children he would usually only talk about the development at Cowan. If a member of our family attempted to discuss day to day matters with him he would become very short tempered, impatient and terminate the conversation as quickly as possible.
Whenever he did discuss the Cowan development with me he would often raise his voice, vigorously gesticulate and continually pace around the room. From about he would often refer to Hornsby Shire Council. When the name of Hornsby
Shire Council was brought up in conversation he would become angry and raise his voice.

I noticed that during the early 1980's his character changed from a person who would laugh regularly and joke to somebody who was usually sullen and withdrawn and rarely smiled.

During the early 1980's we experienced severe financial difficulty and such things as annual holidays, which we had previously undertaken were stopped.
Whenever I needed to purchase clothes for the family they were usually bought from second-hand shops. I was reluctant to ask my husband for money because he would say he did not have any and he would become angry with me." 
In their written submissions on vexation Mr and Mrs Avenhouse called in aid the written submissions that had been put to the trial Judge dealing with the claim that Mr Avenhouse had suffered since early 1981 from a severe depressive illness, linked by stress to attacks of atrial fibrillation. The evidence demonstrated that various general practitioners from the beginning of 1983 to had noted that Mr Avenhouse was depressed. Dr Herron, who saw him in , was in no doubt that he was then and continued to suffer from a serious depressive illness. He saw Mr Avenhouse a number of times in 1985. It was submitted that it could not seriously be in issue that Mr Avenhouse had the symptoms of a major depressive. The evidence was that Mr Avenhouse had changed from being an outgoing, easy going, pleasant man, a regular communicator with his wife and their children to one who cut short conversations and took no part in family day to day discussion and who was sullen and withdrawn. The material went on to deal with atrial fibrillation.

Mr and Mrs Avenhouse's submissions referred to the trial Judge's findings, which I have summarised, about how Mr Avenhouse felt and what Mrs Avenhouse observed. It was submitted that to a small scale builder with a family to support relying on profits from the sub-division coupled with developing blocks with his cottages, it would be intensely surprising had the breach of duty not caused intense worry and vexation. When one adds the fact that the breach of duty caused directly considerable litigation it would need a stoic to resist such slings and arrows.

Mr and Mrs Avenhouse submitted that the only qualified expert who gave evidence as to the cause of vexation suffered by Mr Avenhouse was Dr Herron.
This presumably is a reference to Dr Herron's report of 8 August 1985 in which in the course of saying that when he saw Mr Avenhouse on 26 June 1985 he had a florid depressive illness which had been present for much of the above time, that is to say "since the involvement of Mr Avenhouse in court proceedings in ". Dr Herron said: "Mr Avenhouse had been extremely irritable with his family whom he saw suffering greatly as a result of this. The irritability was not in any way under his control, and of course is a classic symptom of depression." In a later report of 21 October 1993, Dr Herron said, amongst other things, that Mr Avenhouse had a continual feeling of anxiety and concluded that he had no doubt that Mr Avenhouse's current incapacitating psychological state was directly due to the difficulties experienced as a result of his inability to sub-divide his land which he told him was directly related to actions by Hornsby Shire Council.

Spender AJ treated Dr Herron's evidence with caution, an approach which, in my opinion, having read the transcript of Dr Herron's evidence, and leaving aside altogether the attack made on his credit by reference, amongst other things, to the findings of the Royal Commission into Deep Sleep Therapy, was open to him. In particular, Spender AJ did not accept his conclusion which related Mr
Avenhouse's depression causatively to the Council's actions. There is no logical basis for treating such evidence as Dr Herron gave about the cause of
Mr Avenhouse's irritation any differently. Indeed this explains his Honour's statement that for the same reason that atrial fibrillation and depression could not causatively be related to the Council's actions the claim for vexation "must fail". His Honour preferred the evidence of Dr Kathleen Veress, who had seen a great deal more of Mr Avenhouse than Dr Herron and obviously knew more about other factors in Mr Avenhouse's life likely to have brought about his irritability and vexation.

Mr and Mrs Avenhouse's submissions at the trial were that the state of vexation and anxiety was closely inter-connected with the claim that Mr
Avenhouse was caused to suffer some mental illness symptomised by depression.
They presented a case wherein they sought to lay at the door of the Council Mr
Avenhouse's condition of atrial fibrillation and of depression and irritation . This case failed. Moreover, as the present submissions suggest the real burden of the case, apart from atrial fibrillation, was that the
Council's acts or omissions had brought about Mr Avenhouse's severe depression. One of the claimed symptoms of this condition was irritability.
Spender AJ did not accept this and indeed Mr Avenhouse's evidence in cross- examination demonstrated that during the relevant period there were other misfortunes, both business and private, which could be likely causes of irritation.

But this is not to say that Mr Avenhouse would not, on the probabilities, have suffered some vexation from the Council's failure to process the sub-division within a reasonable time. With respect, I think his Honour failed to give consideration to whether something should have been allowed for vexation albeit that he concluded that Mr Avenhouse's atrial fibrillation and depression was not causatively related to the Council's actions. Accordingly,
I would order that on the assessment of damages, Mr and Mrs Avenhouse be permitted to claim for damages for vexation. To this extent this ground of appeal succeeds.

REMAINING GROUNDS OF APPEAL 
Ground 11 in the amended notice of appeal which related to costs was not pressed. Ground 12 related to interest. I understand the Council accepted that if Mr and Mrs Avenhouse were entitled to damages they were entitled to interest thereon as ordinarily awarded or prescribed. Mr and Mrs Avenhouse added ground 13 to be relied upon if the Council succeeded in disturbing his
Honour's conclusion that the Council owed a duty to process the sub-division approval diligently and within a reasonable time and was in breach of that duty. In my opinion, the notice of contention fails in this respect and accordingly, it is unnecessary to consider ground 13 of the amended notice of appeal.

CONCLUSION 
The appeal succeeds on grounds 1 to 4 and 9 and 10 of the amended notice of appeal. There should be a new trial limited to assessing damages quantified as the profits on the development of the land contained in the sub-division lost as a result of the Council's breach of duty and damages for vexation.
Otherwise the appeal fails as does the notice of contention and cross-appeal.
Since the Council's cross-appeal failed and took up a substantial part of the hearing time, in my opinion, it should be dismissed with costs. The appeal succeeded in part on grounds which the Council conceded. The grounds of appeal upon which Mr and Mrs Avenhouse failed took a comparatively small part of the hearing time compared with the cross-appeal. I think that Mr and Mrs Avenhouse are entitled to the costs of the appeal. I propose the following orders:
Appeal allowed with costs;
Set aside order 1 made by Spender AJ on 27 June 1995 giving judgment for the defendant and order 2 in so far as it ordered that the plaintiffs pay the defendant's costs of the proceedings;
Direct a new trial limited to damages quantified as the profits on the development of the land contained in the sub-division lost as a result of the
Council's breach of duty and damages for vexation;
Cross-appeal dismissed with costs;
The costs of the first hearing to be the costs in the hearing of the new trial directed in order 3.
 * * * 
