

Komnas Trohalis by his tutor the Protective Commissioner of NSW versus Jamalex
P/L [1997] NSWSC 44 (19 February 1997) 
Komnas TROHALIS BY HIS TUTOR THE PROTECTIVE COMMISSIONER OF NSW versus JAMALEX
P/L /93 
Monday 17 February 1997 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
HIDDEN J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The defendant and cross-claimant to these proceedings seeks an order that the cross-defendant and the insurance company comply with a subpoena served upon it for production of documents in respect of the claim made by the defendant arising out of the claim for personal injuries by the plaintiff in his accident on 28 May 1992.

On the face of it, the subpoena framed in that way seems to cast a wide net and counsel for the cross-defendant/ insurance company submitted that it is so wide as to be oppressive and that, in any event, it does not appear to be seeking material relevant to the issues between the defendant and the cross- defendant.

Mr Rollinson has taken me to the pleadings from which it appears that, not only will there be an issue between the defendant and cross-defendant as to whether the cross-defendant was bound to indemnify the defendant in respect of the accident in which the plaintiff was said to be involved, but also an issue whether the cross-defendant has not in any event acted in such a way as to have affirmed the insurance contract and to have waived any rights it might have had to resist indemnity under that contract.

In the light of those issues I am not persuaded that the subpoena, cast as it is, is too wide. Nor am I persuaded that the material that it seeks is irrelevant to the issues between the parties.

The cross-defendant's conduct in dealing with the claim made by the defendant in respect of the plaintiff's injuries becomes relevant given the issues raised by the pleadings.

For that reason I am of the view that the defendant is entitled, as far as I can judge it at this stage, to production of the documents sought.

There is also before me a cross-motion by the cross-defendant seeking that the subpoena be set aside on the basis that it is too wide and is irrelevant.
However, for the reasons I have given, I am not of that view. That motion is dismissed.

It may well be, as Mr Fisher foreshadows, that questions of privilege will arise as to some, at least, of the documents caught by the terms of the subpoena. However, that is not for me to determine at this stage. That will be a matter to be determined on production of the documents in due course.

Accordingly, I am of the view that the defendant is entitled to the orders sought in its motion. I order that the documents be produced in answer to the subpoena in the return of subpoena list on Wednesday 19 February 1997.
 (Counsel addressed on the question of costs) 
I believe the defendant is entitled to an order for costs. Therefore, the defendant is to have its costs of these motions, noting that the two matters were heard within a relatively short period of time and raised the same issue.
 * * * 
