

Farrow Mortgage Services Pty Ltd (In Liquidation) versus Slade and Nelson Nos.
Ca 40193/93; Cd 50102/92 Deeds - Form and Execution - Guarantee and Indemnity - Discharge of Surety [1996] NSWSC 276 (17 July 1996) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
GLEESON CJ(1), CLARKE(2) AND COLE(3) JJA
Appeal from Commercial Division - Giles J
HRNG
SYDNEY, 1 February 1996 #DATE 23:2:1996 #ADD 17:7:1996 
Counsel for the Appellant      J R Sackar QC with
N E Abadee 
Solicitors for the Appellant     Clayton Utz 
Counsel for the Respondent      S D Epstein 
Solicitors for the Respondent    Boyd House and Partners
ORDER
Appeal dismissed with costs
JUDGE1
GLEESON CJ Farrow Mortgage Services
Pty Limited (In Liquidation) ("Farrow") brought proceedings in the Commercial Division of the court against Messrs
Williams, Slade and Nelson, who were shareholders and directors of Intercapco
Pty Limited ("Intercapco"), as guarantors of the repayment of money lent by
Farrow to Intercapco. The debt amounted to $3,789,045.83.
The present appeal is concerned only with the claim against
Mr Nelson.
Giles J, at first instance, held that the claim failed for two reasons.
The first reason was that Mr Nelson had never been bound by his deed of guarantee, which was void. The second reason was that, even if Mr Nelson had entered into a binding contract of guarantee, his liability as guarantor was discharged by reason of a variation in the contract of loan between Farrow and
Intercapco, by which the rate of interest was substantially increased, which occurred without the consent of Mr Nelson.
 .
The second of the reasons given by Giles J for his decision is incontrovertible, and on that ground this appeal must fail.
 .
The relevant facts, and contractual provisions, are set out in the reasons for judgment of Cole JA. It appears that the renegotiation of the loan arrangements between Farrow and Intercapco, including the interest variation, was undertaken by Mr Williams on behalf of Intercapco, and that Mr Nelson was not personally involved. At all events, Giles J found as a fact that Mr Nelson did not consent to the variation of the principal contract, which increased
Intercapco's interest-obligations. That finding is not challenged. For the reasons given by Cole JA, and by Giles J at first instance, I agree that the provisions of clause 8 of the deed of guarantee, and clause 5 of the instrument of mortgage, do not have the effect for which Farrow contends. The case is to be determined by the application of the well-settled principle that a variation of the agreement between a creditor and a debtor, of a kind which could prejudice a surety, will discharge the surety from liability unless the surety consents to the variation, or unless there is a contrary provision in the contract of suretyship.
This is sufficient to dispose of the appeal. However, because the first of the reasons given by Giles J was fully argued on appeal, and has been addressed in the judgment of Cole JA, which I have read in draft, I will make some observations about that matter.
The essential facts are as follows. Intercapco, in late 1988 and early , urgently needed an amount a little less than $4,000,000 to refinance a property development project. Intercapco, dealing through a broker, applied to
Farrow for a loan. For reasons that are not material, in the course of dealing between Farrow and Intercapco from November until January 1989 the precise amount to be advanced by Farrow to Intercapco varied. When the instrument of mortgage and deed of guarantee were prepared by Farrow's solicitors, and submitted to Intercapco's solicitors for execution in anticipation of settlement, the amount of the proposed loan had been agreed between Farrow and Intercapco as $3,804,100. The deed of guarantee, which was to be signed by Mr Nelson and the other two guarantors, referred in various clauses to "the principal sum". That expression was defined as the sum stated in the schedule to the deed. As the deed was originally prepared, the schedule specified the principal sum as $3,804,100.
The deed was in that condition when it was executed by Mr Nelson and returned to Intercapco's solicitors. A similar position obtained in relation to the instrument of mortgage.
It was common ground that it was the intention of all parties to the mortgage and the deed that the instrument of mortgage and the deed of guarantee were to take effect upon settlement, which was to (and did) involve a meeting between the solicitors for the parties. At that meeting the amount of the loan was handed over to Intercapco's solicitors, or paid according to their direction, and Farrow's solicitors received the mortgage and guarantee executed by Intercapco and by the guarantors.
After Mr Nelson had executed the documents and returned them to
Intercapco's solicitors, but before settlement, it was agreed between Farrow and Intercapco that the amount of the principal sum would be reduced to $3,760,000. That occurred because of a revaluation of the property to be mortgaged. Farrow's solicitors requested that the instrument of mortgage and deed of guarantee be amended accordingly, and that the amendments be initialled by all parties. It was later represented to them that this had occurred, and, on settlement, they received from Intercapco's solicitors the instrument of mortgage and the deed of guarantee with the amount of $3,804,000 altered to $3,760,000, the alterations apparently bearing the initials of all the guarantors, including Mr Nelson.
In truth, however, as Giles J found, Mr
Nelson did not at the time, know of the alteration, and he had not initialled the alteration or given anyone authority to do so on his behalf. The alteration was probably made by Mr Williams or Mr Slade, or by somebody at their request. Whoever made the alteration placed Mr Nelson's initials alongside the alteration. In his evidence Mr Nelson said that nobody told him about this at the time. However, he agreed that the alteration was not to his disadvantage, and he acknowledged that his purpose was to guarantee the amount which Intercapco needed, and agreed to borrow, from Farrow for the purpose of the refinancing.
He left it to Mr Williams to carry out the detailed negotiations with Farrow. He said that he would have signed the mortgage and guarantee if the principal sum had been shown as $3,760,000. The clear inference is that, if Mr Williams or Mr Slade had told him about the alteration, he would have authorised it.
Thus, the amount of the principal sum specified to in the mortgage and guarantee had, prior to settlement, been altered from $3,804,100 to $3,760,000. Farrow believed that the alteration had been made with the knowledge and approval of Intercapco and all three guarantors. In fact the alteration had been made with the knowledge and approval of Intercapco and two of the guarantors, but not Mr Nelson. Where did that leave Farrow and Mr
Nelson?
The mortgage and guarantee were altered, after execution by Mr Nelson, before they came into Farrow's possession on settlement. Farrow did not know, and had no reason to suspect, that the alteration had been made, without Mr
Nelson's knowledge, by his co-guarantors. The alteration was not to Mr
Nelson's disadvantage. He would not have objected to it had he known about it.
Although he did not decide the issue on this basis, Giles J appeared willing to accept that the alteration was, in the circumstances, not material; at least, his Honour remarked that it would be "strange if something of no concern to the party affected were a material alteration".
There seems little merit in a conclusion that, in those circumstances,
Farrow and Mr Nelson never came into contractual relations, and that Farrow never had the benefit of a guarantee from Mr Nelson. Such a conclusion, it may be noted, is not unequivocally favourable to the guarantor.
As it happens, in the present case the issue arose in the context of an attempt to enforce the guarantee. However, one aspect of the litigation, which it is unnecessary to resolve in this appeal, illustrates that the boot could have been on the other foot. One of the complaints made by Mr Nelson against Farrow was that Farrow, in breach of its contractual obligations, failed to honour its obligations to finance the property development in question. In pursuing that complaint, depending upon the nature of the remedy he sought, Mr Nelson may have wished to establish that he and Farrow had entered a contractual relationship. The point is that, depending on the circumstances of the individual case, a conclusion that there never was any contract could disadvantage a person in the position of Mr Nelson, as well as a person in the position of Farrow.
It was at all material times the common intention of Farrow,
Intercapco, and Messrs Williams, Slade and Nelson that their contractual arrangements in relation to the loan, the mortgage security, and the guarantees, would be embodied in formal written documents. Although there were antecedent communications acknowledging that there would be a loan, and that it would be secured by a mortgage over land, and that there would be personal guarantees from the directors of Intercapco, the detailed terms and conditions of the loan, and the mortgage, and the guarantees, were never agreed outside the instrument of mortgage and the deed of guarantee. There was no question of those documents merely recording some antecedent contract.
They were intended by all parties to be the contract, and were executed, and delivered on settlement, with that intention.
 .
In the events that occurred, the question of the legal effect of the documents as between Farrow and Mr Nelson is to be determined by reference to the principles relating to the alteration of deeds, and other written contracts, after execution.
Considerations which are relevant to those principles include the materiality of the alteration, the circumstances in which it occurred, and whether it operated in any way to the disadvantage of the party sought to be made liable.
The ancient rule, which dates back to Pigot's case in 1614 ((1614) <case>; [11 Co.
Rep. 26b], is said in the authorities to be that, where a deed or other written contract is, after execution, materially altered without the consent of the obligor, by the obligee, or by someone else without the consent of the obligee, or by a stranger whilst it is in the obligee's custody, the deed becomes void (or, according to some, voidable at the election of the obligor).
An example of the application of the rule is Ellesmere Brewery Co v
Cooper [(1896) 1 QB 75.] Four sureties executed a joint and several bond of suretyship. By the terms of the bond, two were liable up to a limit of 50 pounds and two were liable up to a limit of 25 pounds each. After the other three had executed the bond, but before it was handed to and accepted by the obligee, one of the two sureties whose liability was limited to 50 pounds executed the bond, but added to his signature the words "25 pounds only". This alteration affected the rights of contribution between the sureties, and so was material. It was held that the effect of the alteration was to discharge the other three sureties from their obligation.
The application of the rule in Pigot's case to alterations by strangers has been questioned (eg Anson's Law of Contract, 26th Ed, p487). The rule is said to have had its origin in considerations which are largely irrelevant in modern times, and this court has doubted the applicability of the rule to non-fraudulent alterations (Warburton versus National Westminster Finance Aust Ltd NSWLR 238. See also Chilcott v Goss [(1995) 1 NZLR 263).]
There has also been doubt as to what constitutes materiality for the purpose of the rule, and as to the relevance of the fact that an alteration is wholly to the advantage of the obligor. The learned author of Anson's Law of
Contract, 26th Ed, at p487 says that "in most cases ... a material alteration will be one which imposes a greater liability on the promisee".
A notable discussion of the modern operation of the rule is to be found in the judgment of Bray CJ in Armor Coatings (Marketing) Pty Ltd versus General
Credits
Pty Ltd [(1978) 17 SASR 259.] I would respectfully agree with his Honour's views as to the need, in modern conditions, to confine the nullifying operation of the rule to cases which fall strictly within its ambit, and to interpret the rule as liberally and reasonably as possible.
The circumstances of the present case are as follows:  The alteration was made without any fraud or other fault on the part of
Farrow, and before the documents were handed over to Farrow's solicitors on settlement. Farrow had no reason to doubt that the documents it received were in the form they took when executed by Mr Nelson.  The alteration was not made by Farrow, but by Mr Nelson's co-guarantors.  The alteration was entirely to the advantage of Mr Nelson, by diminishing his potential liability under the guarantee.
 If the alteration had been made known to Mr Nelson before settlement he would have been unconcerned about it, and if his approval had been sought he would have given it.  Farrow, acting on the faith of the instrument of mortgage and deed of guarantee, advanced the principal sum, as amended, to Intercapco, and
Intercapco (of which Mr Nelson was a director and shareholder) had the benefit of the loan.
From points 1 and 2 above it follows that the alterations were not fraudulent, that Farrow was not privy to them, and that they were not made whilst the documents were in the custody of Farrow; on the contrary they were made whilst the documents were in the custody of Intercapco and the guarantors. As to points 3 and 4, the concept of materiality is sufficiently flexible to justify the conclusion that, in the circumstances, the alterations were not material. For those reasons, the rule in Pigot's case does not operate to nullify the obligations of Mr Nelson. From point 5, in combination with the earlier points, it follows that there is nothing in the equities of the case which should deprive Farrow of the benefit of Mr Nelson's guarantee (subject, of course, to the later discharge which resulted from the variation of the contract of loan).
Accordingly, I agree with the appellant's submissions as to the first reason given by Giles J for his decision.
However, the second reason was correct, and on that ground the appeal should be dismissed with costs.
JUDGE2
CLARKE JA I agree with the reasons and orders of the Chief Justice.
JUDGE3
COLE JA Farrow Mortgage Services Pty Limited (In liquidation) ("Farrow") advanced monies to a company Intercapco Pty Limited ("Intercapco") for property development purposes. Security for the advance was a mortgage over certain property and guarantees from the three directors of Intercapco, Messrs
Williams, Slade and Nelson. The development project failed. Farrow sued Messrs
Williams, Slade and Nelson on the guarantee. At the hearing before Giles J only Mr Nelson appeared. In the result judgment was entered in favour of
Farrow against
Mr Williams in the sum of $3,789,045.83. The claim against
Messrs Slade and Nelson faded. Farrow has appealed against Giles J's judgment in that respect. The appeal against Mr Slade was discontinued.
 
FINDINGS OF FACT
Giles J found that, when Mr Nelson executed each of the deed of mortgage and deed of guarantee the principal sum was shown in the document signed by him as $3,804,100. That was the sum initially intended to be advanced and guaranteed. However before the documents were subsequently executed by Messrs
Williams and Slade and by Intercapco and Farrow, the principal sum in each of the deed of mortgage and the deed of guarantee was altered to $3,760,000. Some unknown person without Mr Nelson's authority purported to place his initials beside these alterations. Giles J found that Mr Nelson had proved that the alterations were unauthorised. His Honour said: "I am satisfied notwithstanding what Farrow said, that he did not initial or authorise the initialling of the alterations and was unaware of the change in the amount of the loan and of those alterations." ((1) Appeal Book, p.419H.)
That finding was not challenged on appeal.
Relying upon that unauthorised alteration, Mr Nelson contended that as the deed of mortgage and deed of guarantee had been materially altered after his signature without his consent, there was never an effective guarantee on his part, or alternatively his guarantee had been avoided.
Giles J upheld the first contention holding: "In the present case the course of events I have outlined seems to me to show that at all material times Mr Nelson intended to guarantee a loan of $3,804,100, whereas at all times after 
December 1988 Farrow intended that he should guarantee a loan of a different amount and as at 27 January 1989 Farrow intended that he should guarantee a loan of $3,760,000. True it is that what
Farrow intended involved a lesser burden for Mr Nelson, true it is that Mr Nelson would readily enough have agreed to guarantee a loan of a lesser amount, but there was no agreement between Mr
Nelson and Farrow which the mortgage and the deed of guarantee could or did record." ((2) Appeal Book, p.422U-423H.)
Later his Honour said: "Farrow did not submit that Mr Nelson was precluded from contending that no contract of guarantee had come into existence, for example by reason of his conduct in relation to a signature of the mortgage and the deed of guarantee. It did submit that
Mr Nelson's intention was not to guarantee a loan of $3,804,100 but rather to guarantee a loan in whatever amount might ultimately have been arranged by Intercapco. If that were so, it said, the altered principal sum was within what Mr Nelson was prepared to agree to, and there was a common contractual intention in the sense that Mr Nelson's intention extended to guaranteeing a loan of $3,760,000 and Farrows ultimate intention was that he should guarantee a loan of that amount. I do not think however, that an unexpressed willingness on Mr Nelson's part, one to which he probably gave no thought at the time, to undertake a different obligation from that recorded in the mortgage and the deed of guarantee which he signed can establish an antecedent agreement, or common intention sufficient to uphold the altered documents as a correct record of the obligation which he undertook In NSW
Medical Defence Union Ltd versus Transport Industries Insurance Co Ltd [(1986) 6 NSWLR 740] it was held that in the absence of outward expressions of accord rectification may be ordered if it be established that each of the contracting parties had an identical subjective intention in the relevant respect Mr Nelson's intention, it seems to me, was to give a guarantee for a loan of the amount in the documents which he signed, and I do not think that in any real sense he had an intention to give a guarantee for a loan in some other amount. I am unable to accept Farrows submission, and in my opinion no contract of guarantee binding on
Mr Nelson came into existence." ((3) Appeal Book, pp423P-424R.)
His
Honour recognised two distinct arguments. The first concerned whether there was any agreement at all created by the deed of guarantee.
The second was, assuming there was such an agreement, did the alteration after signing by
Mr Nelson to the documentation recording the agreement release the guarantor.
Mr Nelson contended that it did, whilst Farrow contended that the established alteration could only be beneficial to Mr Nelson and thus should not be regarded as a "material alteration avoiding the guarantee". ((4) See, for instance, Pigots Cast <case>; (1614) 11 CO Rep 266; [77 ER 1177]; Armor Coatings (Marketing.) Pty Limited versus General Credits (Finance Pty Limited [(1978) SASR ]; Citibank Savings Limited versus Vago (unreported, Cole J, 1 May 1992).)
Giles J found it unnecessary to determine the second question having resolved the first adverse to Farrow. It is necessary to consider the second question only if Farrow's appeal regarding the first is upheld.
Although Farrow's summons did not seek rectification, Giles J considered whether there was an antecedent common intention of Mr Nelson on the one hand and Farrow on the other which, notwithstanding the differences in the content in the deed of mortgage and deed of guarantee at the time of execution by the respective parties, would permit rectification of the deeds to accord with the antecedent common intention. If there was such an antecedent common intention,
Giles J was of the view that a contract would exist. If however, there was not, then rectification would not be possible because there was no agreement between Mr Nelson and Farrow which the mortgage or deed of guarantee could be rectified to reflect. ((5) See Georgiou versus Sindel <case>; [(1983-4) 154 CLR 661).] His
Honour, in the passage I have quoted, found that the evidence did not establish an antecedent common intention or agreement.
On appeal, Farrow has contended that there should have been found an antecedent common intention between Mr Nelson and Farrow that Mr Nelson would guarantee a loan from Farrow to Intercapco "in whatever amount might ultimately have been agreed", or at least up to $3,804,100. This contention was based upon the circumstance that Mr Nelson had signed a mortgage between
Intercapco and Farrow in December 1988 showing that sum as principal as well as a guarantee showing that sum in the schedule to it. Further, Clause 2 of the guarantee provided: "The Guarantor hereby guarantees to the Mortgagee the due of punctual payment by the Borrower and by the Mortgagor of all monies payable under or secured by the mortgage (whether principal, interest or otherwise) and the due and punctual observance and performance of all the covenants, agreements and obligations on the part of the borrower and on the part of the
Mortgagor therein contained."
Further, Mr Nelson gave evidence that he would have signed the mortgage and guarantee whatever the amount of the advance may have been as negotiated by Mr Slade or Mr Williams, he being content to leave to them negotiation of the final sum. ((6) Appeal Book, p.34M-R.)
Accordingly Farrow submitted that it was artificial to find, as his
Honour did, that Mr Nelson intended to guarantee a loan of $3,804,100 but that
Farrow had intended to him to guarantee a loan of $3,760,000 and thus there was no antecedent common intention. It was said to ignore commercial reality to suggest that an intention to guarantee a larger sum does not include an intention to guarantee a lesser sum.
In deference to the manner in which Giles
J approached the matter and the argument advanced, I will deal with these submissions although, as will appear, in my view they address an irrelevant question.
There are two relevant clauses in the mortgage and another in the deed of guarantee, apart from clause which I have recited. The fifth and eighth covenants in the mortgage were as follows: "FIFTHLY - the Mortgagee may until the principal sum shall be fully paid and satisfied RECALCULATE the instalments payable hereunder if there is any alteration in the interest rate payable or if there is any further advance or it for any other reason whatsoever, any other monies become payable. The Mortgagee shall thereupon give to the Mortgagor notice of such recalculated instalment, and upon receipt of the notice the Mortgagor shall pay to the Mortgagee the instalments of the amount as calculated by the Mortgagee. Nothing herein contained shall give the
Mortgagee the right to increase the interest rate without the consent of the Mortgagor.

EIGHTHLY - the covenants, agreements and obligations herein contained or implied on the part of the Mortgagor are guaranteed by JOHN HINTON WILLIAMS of "Mayfair Park" Mulgoa, company director, BRIAN STAFFORD SLADE of 14 Prince Alfred Parade, 
Newport, company director and RONALD JOHN NELSON of 52 Arcadia
Drive, Mermaid Waters, Queensland, company director ("the 
Guarantor") under DEED OF GUARANTEE AND INDEMNITY dated on or about the date hereof, the within principal sum having been lent and advanced by the Mortgagee at the request and direction of the Guarantor." ((7) Appeal Book, p. 149.)
The deed of guarantee signed by Farrow and the three guarantors provided by clause 8 as follow: "8. The Guarantor covenants with the
Mortgagee that his covenants herein contained (both as to guarantee and indemnity) shall continue to apply notwithstanding and unaffected by an assignment of the mortgage debt and/or transfer of the mortgage by the
Mortgagee (save as to the identity of the new Mortgagee) AND notwithstanding and unaffected by any variation of the Mortgage, save that neither the principal sum nor the rate of interest shall be increased (otherwise than in accordance with the terms of the mortgage), nor the term shortened, without the Guarantor's prior consent Neither shall the Mortgagee's rights against the
Guarantor be affected by the death of the borrower or the
Mortgagor or the bankruptcy or the winding up of the Guarantor, the borrower or the Mortgagor." ((8) Appeal Book, p.182.)
The commercial reality is that Mr Nelson was prepared to and did sign both a mortgage and deed of guarantee in the sum of $3,804,100 containing the above terms. The fifth covenant of the mortgage contemplated a variation in the principal sum by agreement. The words "any other monies become payable" make that clear. "The within principal sum" referred to in the eighth covenant must refer to the principal sum specified in the mortgage, or as varied as contemplated by the fifth covenant.
Clause 8 of the deed of guarantee continued the binding effect of the guarantee even if the mortgage was varied except, relevantly, if the principal sum was increased otherwise than in accordance with the terms of the mortgage, or the term shortened, without the guarantors prior consent. Each such alteration requiring the guarantor's consent would be disadvantageous to the guarantor. Implicitly that clause contemplated a variation of the mortgage by reduction of the principal sum with the guarantee remaining binding even though the guarantor did not give prior consent.
Mr Nelson signed such a guarantee and returned it to his solicitors for delivery to Farrow. Farrow would only make the advance to Intercapco if the directors gave a guarantee. The commercial substance of the transaction was that the each of Farrow and Mr Nelson were in agreement that there would be a guarantee of the advance to Intercapco which advance was not to exceed $3,804,100 without the consent of the guarantor, or unless permitted by the terms of the mortgage. It is implicit in those commercial arrangements, and in the deed of guarantee and mortgage which Mr Nelson signed that, by agreement between Intercapco and Farrow, the mortgage sum, and thus the liability under the guarantee could be reduced below the sum of $3,804,100.
It is in my view clear that if the principal sum nominated in the mortgage and the deed of guarantee of $3,804,100 had not been altered after Mr
Nelson executed those documents to $3,760,000, and had Farrow received those documents in that form and executed them, immediately thereafter Farrow and
Intercapco could have agreed to reduce the principal sum to $3,760,000. The guarantee would have remained binding on Mr Nelson. That demonstrates the commercial substance of the transaction. It negates the concept that there was no common antecedent intention. In my opinion Giles J was in error in finding that Mr Nelson did not "in any real sense .. have an intention to give a guarantee for a loan in some other amount". Each of the mortgage and deed of guarantee signed by Mr Nelson contemplated that very circumstance.
It is, in my opinion, not correct to concentrate upon the fact that prior to unauthorised alteration the sum stated in the guarantee was $3,804,100. In truth it was that sum subject to any variation as permitted or contemplated by the deed of guarantee.
However the question whether there was a common antecedent intention is, in my view, irrelevant to a determination of the claim, or the appeal. That is because rectification was not sought. Thus the claim was based upon the deed of guarantee as tendered in its altered form.
The traditional and in my view correct approach is to recognise that there exists a deed of guarantee signed by Mr Nelson. It was on that document that Farrow sued. The defence was, at least as pleaded, that the deed was avoided by material alteration. In argument at trial it was contended that there was in truth no agreement between Mr Nelson and
Farrow which the deed could reflect or record. However one does not look to find if an antecedent agreement exists which is reflected in a deed. The starting point is the deed signed by the party sued. In some circumstances it may be avoided if it has been altered - but one does not approach the question of liability of the obligor by enquiry whether it reflects a prior agreement, or whether the obligor authorised the delivery of the deed to the obligee. A deed which on its face is signed and delivered by the obligor is treated as establishing the agreement contained in its terms, although it maybe nullified if it be established to be a forgery or in some circumstances it may be avoided by material alteration. There are sound reasons for this approach: any other approach would negate the prima facie binding nature of a deed.
In this case no question of rectification arises. It was not sought. Thus no question of the existence of a pre-existing common intention arises for consideration. The true issue to be addressed is whether the deed sued upon is, for some reason, not a proper basis for liability upon the obligor sued upon it.
That leads to a consideration of the further grounds of appeal contending that the trial judge should have found that the variation by reduction in the principal was not a material variation and thus Mr Nelson was not discharged from the guarantee.
The reduction in the principal sum was $44,100 or approximately 1%. Mr
Nelson's liability was reduced accordingly. Farrow contends that the alteration to the guarantor's obligation was both "unsubstantial" and not prejudicial to Mr Nelson. Indeed it contended that such a reduction could only be beneficial to Mr Nelson.
Giles J did not find that the alterations were made by Farrow. His Honour found that "someone" presumably Mr
Williams or Mr Slade (or another person at the direction of one of them) placed what purported to be Mr Nelson's initials in the appropriate places." ((9) Appeal Book, p.417G.) If that be so the alteration was not made by the creditor, nor whilst in its custody.
In law the alterations are treated as having been made by a stranger. The consequence of that is that where a document is so altered, the party producing it bears the onus of explaining the alteration. ((10) Banque National de Paris and Anor v
Falkirk Developments
Limited <case>; [(1977) 13 ALR 377] at 384.) Here the explanation is obvious: Farrow did not know that unauthorised alterations or forged initials had been placed on the document before it was forwarded to it.
A question arises whether the strict rule enunciated in Pigot's case should be held to apply to deny effect to a deed where the alteration is made by a stranger to the deed, in this instance when the document was not in the custody of the obligee but in the custody of persons to whom it had been sent by the obligor for execution prior to delivery to the obligee.
I find the reasoning of Hope JA in Warburton and Anor versus National
Westminster Finance Australia Ltd ((11) (1988) 15 NSWLR 238 at 243-4), Bray CJ in Armor Coatings ((12) [(1978) 17 SASR 259] at 269-271) persuasive to the view that it should not.
Sir Ivor Richardson wrote: "The classic statement on the effect of unilateral alterations to instruments after their execution is contained in Pigot's Case at p27a: "When any deed is altered in a point material, by the plaintiff himself or by any stranger, without the privity of the obligee, be it interlineation, addition, erasing or by drawing of a pen through a line, or through the midst of any material word, the deed thereby becomes void...".

Pigot's Case itself was directed to alterations to deed. A document such as the present memorandum of mortgage which is in registrable form is not a deed but has "the force and effect of a deed" (Land Transfer Act 1952, sl57(2)). In any event since Master v Miller (1791) 4 TR 320 the doctrine has been regarded as applicable to all written instruments.

If a promisee intentionally alters a contractual instrument in a material respect the promisee cannot enforce the instrument against the promisor. A promisor who alters a contractual instrument cannot by that expedient avoid liability under the instrument as it previously stood. The difficult intermediate area is where the alteration is made by a third party. If the third party is acting as agent for the promisor or the promisee he or she stands in the shoes of the principal. The problem in terms of principle and policy is to determine what circumstances justify attributing responsibility to the promisee for the conduct of a third party who is not an agent.

Directly reflecting the rule as laid down in Pigot's Case, 12
Halsbury's
Laws of England (4th ed) para 1381 "Deed and other
Instruments" makes the custodian of the document strictly liable for the alteration: "1381. Alteration by stranger after execution. If after the execution of a deed it is intentionally altered in some material part by a stranger (that is one who is neither a party nor entitled under it), that alteration has the same effect exactly, as against a person entitled under and having custody of the deed, as an alteration made by that person himself, notwithstanding that the alteration was made without his consent." 
Halsbury's laws of England (14th ed) vol 8, para under "Contract" is to the same effect.

A qualified approach is taken by 12 Halsbury's Laws of England in the subsequent para 1455: "1455. Material alteration by stranger. An alteration made while the instrument is in the custody of one party, although not with his knowledge or consent, has the same effect in avoiding the instrument as if made by him on the principle that he who has the custody of an instrument made for his benefit is bound to preserve it in its original state. IT IS, HOWEVER,
DOUBTFUL
WHETHER THIS RULE APPLIES WHEN THE ALTERATION IS MADE AGAINST
THE WILL OF THE PARTY HAVING CUSTODY, and an alteration made by a stranger when the instrument is in the custody of neither party, does not affect the document, if its original state can be proved." (Emphasis added.) 
The underlined qualification is based on a passage in the judgment of Lord
Herschell in Lowe versus Fox [(1887) 12 App Cas 206.] Al p217
His Lordship expressly reserved his opinion as to whether an alteration made against the will and in hand of the person who has the custody invalidates the document. More recently, Lambert
JA delivering the judgment of the British Columbia
Court of Appeal in Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce versus Skender [(1986) 1 WWR 284], saw it as important "in today's welter of documents" that, where a clerk in employment of the promisee alters a document: "....in addition to considering whether there was any alteration in the legal effect of the document, there should be some additional balancing of the interests of Justice; some flexibility in the concept of materiality of the alteration, and some recognition of the principles of unjust enrichment." 
A broader approach is also reflected in the decision of the Full 
Court of the Supreme Court of South Australia in Armor Coatings
Pty Ltd versus General Credits (Finance) Pty Ltd [(1978) SASR 259.] In that case the Court held, effectively as a proviso to the doctrine in Pigot's Case; that a party should not be "entitled to avoid a written instrument because of an alteration made in good faith to that document by the other party wholly in the interests of the would-be avoider" (pp 280-281). At p276 Bray
CJ also observed that it was impossible to reconcile all the cases which had considered the rule in Pigot's Case that he preferred to follow those cases which had interpreted the rule as liberally and reasonably as possible; and that there was, in his view, "little reason for preserving, in a rational system of law, a rule which instead of adjusting the equities of the case to the circumstances and nature of the alteration visits the document with total nullity." See also Warburton versus National Westminster Finance
Australia Ltd (1988) 15 NSWLR 238.

In considering responsibility for the acts of strangers it is, we think, important to keep in mind the rationale for the rule which prevents a promisee who intentionally alters a written document in a material respect from enforcing the written contract - even without the alteration - against the promisor. In Master v
Miller Lord Kenyon Ch J at p239 put it on the basis that "no man shall be permitted to take the chance of committing a fraud, without running the risk of losing by the event, when it is detected."
So, if there is fraud on the part of the obligee, then the obligee should not only be prevented from benefiting from that fraud but additionally should be penalised by preventing him or her from enforcing even the original unmodified obligation (Canadian Imperial bank of Commerce versus Skender, p288).

Chitty on Contracts (26th ed, 1989) para 1753 observes: "More difficult to justify, however, is the supposed rule that a material alteration made by a stranger, while the instrument is in the custody of the promisee discharges the promisor from his obligations. The reason for this is said to be that the alteration of the instrument may raise a doubt as to its identity. If this is so, the reason is both illogical and inadequate. It is illogical because the same doubt would be raised, whether or not the instrument was in the custody of the promisee, and it is inadequate, because extrinsic evidence would be admissible to prove the true words of the agreement. On the other hand, if the reason for the rule is that an alteration made while the document is in the custody of the promisee raises a suspicion that it was made with his connivance or consent, the situation is already adequately covered, since it is incumbent on the party seeking to enforce an altered instrument to show that the alteration was made in such circumstances as not to invalidate it. The acceptance of the rule would mean that an alteration by an officious burglar would discharge the contract. Such a conclusion has rightly been doubted and it is submitted that the rule should be discarded." 
The American Law Institute,
Restatement of the Law, Second,
Contracts, para 286 goes further and expresses the rule as discharging the obligor only where the alteration is fraudulent and material: "An alteration that is not both fraudulent and material does not have this effect and the duty remains enforceable according to its original terms." And, to the same effect a leading Canadian text, Waddams,
The Law of Contracts (2nd ed, 1984) p261 submits that the quasi-penal consequence of total nullity rests of deterrence of fraud and should be reserved for cases of actual fraudulent intent.

The alternative rationale for the rule in Pigot's Case is based on the need to preserve the original record of the transaction between the parties, rather than on punishment. Salmond and
Williams on Contract (2nd ed, 1945) p574 puts it in this way: "The presumed purpose of the party or parties in reducing the contract to writing is to provide an authentic record of it beyond the reach of future controversy, bad faith or treacherous memory, and plainly this purpose would tend to be defeated if the instrument were not to be preserved in an unaltered state.
The law, therefore, in favour of a party bound by a written contract, reads it subject to the condition that no material alterations in it shall without his consent be made by the other party or by anyone else while the contract is in the custody of the other party." 
In its discussion paper on the "Property Law Act 1952" (Preliminary Paper no 16, 1991) at p20 of the Law Commission noted that "the making of an unauthorised material alteration to a deed with the consent of all parties renders it void. It observed that a fairer and less arbitrary rule would be for the alteration to be "ineffective unless it has been agreed upon by the parties to the contract or gives rise to an estoppel."
Following the usual extensive discussion processes the Law
Commission has recommended in its June 1994 report no.29 "A New
Property Law Act", that the rule be abolished; and the proposed s9(9) provides: "(9) The rule that a deed becomes invalid if then has been material alteration to it after its execution is abolished, but the abolition of that rule does not validate any such alteration if it is invalid on any ground other than that rule." 
In the light of thew considerations there is some force in the argument for the company that it as was submitted, the deed was held and altered by Mr Haddon for his own fraudulent purposes, that should not be imputed to the company which should be able to sue on the mortgage as unamended." ((14) [(1995) 1 NZLR 269-272.)]
There is no reason in principle why a lender receiving a validly executed guarantee which has been altered, prior to delivery to him, by a stranger to the transaction should bear the loss of the security. Responsibility for delivery of a deed in the form in which it was executed by a promisor should lie with that promisor. Such an alteration should be treated a as nullity and the documents as executed by the guarantor should be enforceable in its terms as executed.
However, even if that not be so, the question remains whether the alteration was material.
The strict rule enunciated in Pigot's Case ((15) <case>; [(1614) 11 Co.Rep 26(b))] that any alteration, not approved by all the parties to the original document made after execution renders the instrument void, applies only to material alterations. An alteration benefiting a guarantor is not a material alteration. ((16) Brunker versus Perpetual Trustee
Company Limited <case>; [(1937) 57 CLR ] at 280-281; Walsh versus Westpac Banking Corporation ACTR 30 at 35-36; Lombard Finance Limited versus Brookplain Trading
Limited [(1991) 1 WLR 271] at 274; Westpac Banking Corporation versus Chan (1991) 104
FLR 37 at 42.)
In my opinion the alteration reducing the guarantors exposure from $3,804,1000 to $3,760,000 is both "unsubstantial" and "beneficial to the surety". Although it may not always be so, in the present case, such a minor reduction in financial exposure is not prejudicial to a guarantor, rather it is beneficial to that person in his capacity as a guarantor. Such a minor financial reduction could not realistically threaten the financial validity of a project of this financial dimension. Thus the alteration is not a material alteration discharging the guarantor. ((17) Ankar Pty
Limited versus National
Westminster Finance (Australia) Limited <case>; [(1987) 162 CLR 549] at , 404; Bond versus Hong Kong Bank of Australia Limited [(1991) 25 NSWLR 286] at .)
Further, for the reasons already given, clause 8 of the deed of guarantee permitted such a reduction in the principal sum by agreement between the borrower and the lender without the consent of the guarantor and without releasing the guarantor in consequence of the alteration. To adapt the words in Aldous versus Cornwall ((18) (1868) 3 LR QB 573 at 579) it would be repugnant to justice and common sense to hold that an alteration reducing the principal sum guaranteed to accord with a reduction permitted by the guarantee released the guarantor.
For these reasons ground 5 of the notice of appeal should be upheld.
 
INCREASE IN INTEREST
RATES
The mortgage was for a period of twelve months expiring on 26 January
There were disputes between the parties regarding whether Intercapco had an option to roll the loan over at that time. Ultimately, by letter dated 2
March 1990 Farrow offered to "extend" the loan to 8 September 1990. As the trial judge found, the loan then stood at $3,724,736 plus interest of $125,000. The new offer stipulated interest at 23.5% reducible to 16.5%. This was greater than the interest payable under the original mortgage. Mr Nelson contended that the increase in the interest rate discharged him from his guarantee because it altered his obligations without his consent and alteration was prejudicial to him and was not insubstantial. Mr Slade also did not consent.
Giles J found that clause 8 of the deed of guarantee which, as a term of the guarantee, negated the right of the lender to increase the interest rate otherwise than in accordance with the terms of the mortgage did not save the mortgagee from discharge of the guarantee because the increased interest rate agreed between the mortgagor and the mortgagee was not with the consent of the guarantor and nor was it in accordance with the terms of the mortgage. Farrow had contended that clause 5 of the mortgage, in particular the last sentence thereof, conferred a right in the mortgagee to increase the interest rate with the consent of the mortgagor.
Giles J rejected this argument stating: "Where clause 8 of the deed of guarantee referred to increase in accordance with the terms of the mortgage, in my view the parties did not have in mind something which could be done by consent at any time whether or not the mortgage so provided. Rather, they intended to refer to the increase in the principal sum which would come about as interest was capitalised in accordance with clause 7 of the mortgage (which would result in exceeding the stated principal sum of $3,760,000) and the increase to the default rate of interest or to Farrows commercial lending rate which would come about pursuant to clause of the Memorandum incorporated in the mortgage." ((19) Appeal Book, p.433K.)
In my opinion Giles J was right for the reasons he gave. The last clause in the fifth covenant in the mortgage: "Nothing herein contained shall give the Mortgagee the right to increase the interest rate without the consent of the Mortgagor." made clear and reinforced that the mortgage did not contain a power to increase the interest rate. Any increase which occurred thus occurred in consequence of agreement between the mortgagor and the mortgagee exterior to the mortgage. This last sentence denied rather than sustained a power to increase the interest rate under the mortgage. The "increase" in the interest rate referred to in clause 5 of the mortgage was an increase beyond that expressed in the mortgage. Clause 56 of the memorandum incorporated in the mortgage permitted the mortgagee to charge a higher interest rate in the event of default in payment of the principal sum on the due date.
However the higher rate offered by Farrow on March 1990 ((20) Appeal
Book, p.349-350) and subsequently agreed to by Intercapco was not the imposition of that higher rate pursuant to clause 56. The offer and acceptance of that facility was an extension of the prior loan on higher rate terms. The "roll over" was an additional agreement with an increased interest rate rather than the implementation of a power to charge a higher interest rate conferred by clause 56 of the memorandum accompanying the mortgage. This agreement varied the mortgage by extending the term of the mortgage, as clause 8 of the guarantee. permitted, but increased the interest rate, which clause 8 of the mortgage prohibited without the guarantor's consent unless permitted by the mortgage. Farrow thus varied in a material way the mortgage thus discharging the guarantor.
Farrow then contended that, nonetheless, Mr Nelson was not discharged from his obligations unless he treated them as at an end in consequence of that variation, and he had not done so. Reliance was placed on the passage in the majority judgment in Ankar where their Honours; said: "It was not in controversy that a surety is discharged from its obligation under a contract of suretyship by the creditor's breach of an essential condition, so long at any rate as the surety treats the contract as at an end." ((21) 162 CLR at 555; Phillip and O'Donovan: The Modem Law of Guarantee at 321.)
Normal principles of contract were said to apply such that it was incumbent upon the guarantor to rescind for breach by the mortgagee.
This argument was rejected by Giles J. His Honour said: "The judgment of Deane J expressly rejected (at 570) the need for repudiatory conduct or acceptance of a repudiation in relation to a contract of suretyship. But the submission requires that what occurred be characterised not as a variation of the agreement between the creditor and the debtor, but as a breach of clause 8 of the deed of guarantee; further, it requires that clause 8 be hold to be promissory, so that by agreeing to an increase in the interest rate Farrow committed a breach of the contract of guarantee. I do not think that in either respect it can be accepted, and the proposition found by Farrow in Ankar versus National
Westminster Finance (Australia) Limited is simply inapplicable.
What must be addressed is variation of the agreements between the creditor and the debtor, and there are a number of cases in which it has been held or recognised that an increase in the interest rate as between the creditor and the debtor will discharge the guarantor in the absence of consent, including when the increase related only to an extended period of the loan: see
Invercargill
Savings Bank versus Genge [(1929) NZLR 375] ((22)
Appeal Book, p.436.)
I respectfully agree.
It follows in my opinion that Giles J was correct in holding that
Mr
Nelson was discharged from his obligations under the guarantee.
It becomes unnecessary to deal with the matters raised in the notice of contention.
The appeal should be dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1996/276.html  
