

Regina versus Jgo [1996] NSWSC 602 (5 December 1996) 
REGINA versus JGO /96 December 1996 
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
Priestley JA, Smart J, Simpson J 
CATCHWORDS: New trial - trial judge refuses leave for further cross-examination.

RESULT: Convictions quashed, new trial ordered.

On second trial of appellant (jury having been unable to agree at first trial), appellant convicted of five sexual offences against A (aged fourteen),
B (aged thirteen) and C (aged 15), all on the one occasion - in second trial B gave her evidence first, then A - A's evidence differed in material ways from that given at first trial - A says evidence on this point at first trial false to her knowledge at time - B had given similar evidence at first trial - counsel for accused seeks leave to cross-examine B further - trial judge refuses leave - Held: on taking into account the circumstances in detail of the trial to that point, discretion of trial judge wrongly exercised, with result that trial miscarried: Brown versus Petranker [(1991) 22 NSWLR 717];
Masters [(1992) 59 A Crim R 445];
Fleming (unreported, Court of Criminal Appeal, NSW, Hunt, Campbell and
Mathews JJ, 12 December 1989) applied - convictions quashed, new trial ordered.
 
JUDGMENT 
PRIESTLEY JA: The conclusion I have come to is that a new trial must be ordered in this case. The reason is quite simple, but to explain it requires me first to summarise a fairly lengthy set of events.

The appellant was charged with having committed five offences on 8 March 1994 against three females, whom I will call A, B and C in order to avoid, so far as possible, their being identifiable. On 8 March 1994 A was fourteen, B was thirteen and C was fifteen. Three of the charges were that the appellant had had sexual intercourse with A without her consent knowing that she was not consenting and in circumstances of aggravation, namely that she was then under the age of sixteen years and that he threatened to inflict actual bodily harm on her and other persons present by means of an offensive instrument. The fourth charge was that he had committed the same offence against B. The fifth charge was that he had committed the same offence against C.

The appellant was tried on these charges in August and September 1995. The jury were not able to reach a verdict. A second trial began before his Honour
Judge Christie QC of the District Court and a jury of twelve on 31 January
A, B and C were principal prosecution witnesses at both trials.

The accounts given by A, B and C of the events of 8 March 1994 varied in detail but were generally to the following effect. B and C were sisters. A was a friend. A was about to enrol in the same country town high school B was going to. C went to another high school in a nearby town. On the morning of 8
March 1994 the three of them caught the bus to B's high school, stayed there only briefly and went into the town centre. They decided not to go to school that day but to go and visit A's mother in a nearby town, and then have the rest of the day off school. They stayed near the town centre until about 10 o'clock. A wanted to hitchhike and got a car to stop which was being driven by the appellant. Until then he was unknown to A, B and C. After talking to them for a time, he said he would take them all to A's mother's place in his car.
They then all got into the car with the appellant and he drove off in the direction of A's mother's place. They went a roundabout way on back roads with stops in bushland areas. The appellant suggested they smoke cannabis. This they all did except C. The appellant then drove them to A's mother's home. A,
B and C went into A's mother's flat, leaving the appellant sitting in his car.
After some conversation with the mother, in which they said they were going out with B's uncle for the day, the three rejoined the appellant. He then drove to a bottle shop and bought a bottle of Jim Beam and a couple of litres of Coke. They then drove around the area, stopping at bush picnic places and a beachside pool. A and B had some Jim Beam and Coke. They were joined at times by another man they did not know. At one stage while he was with them, the appellant produced some more cannabis. All five then smoked or inhaled some of it. The second man then left in his car. A, B and C got back into the appellant's car which he drove further into the bush. He got out of the car, put the bonnet up, then took off his T-shirt and started to rip it up. Then the car got going again and in a clearing the appellant starting doing "burn- outs". The appellant then drove on for a further kilometre or so in the bush when the car stopped again. A was in the front seat. The appellant said "If you co-operate I won't hurt you in any other way but rape". He then grabbed A and B took the empty Jim Beam bottle and hit him on the head with it. The appellant then produced a screwdriver and threatened B with it, saying that he would kill B if she didn't shut up and do what she was told to do. He then tied the hands of each of A, B and C with the ripped strips of T-shirt. The appellant then made A take her clothes off and committed the offences against her with which he was charged. He then committed the offences charged against
B and C. The appellant then let A, B and C untie their hands. They dressed and the appellant drove them to about one kilometre away from A's mother's place, which was over the road from the town police station. They walked to the police station and told a Constable that they had all been raped.

The appellant's account, given to the police and later in his unsworn statement at the trial was to the same general effect as that of A, B and C so far as their travels in his car on 8 March 1994 were concerned. He said he had had intercourse with C. His account was different from theirs in that he said there had never been any question of threats or violence, and further said that C had consented to the intercourse and there was no intercourse with A or
B.

What gave rise to the point which in my opinion makes it necessary to quash the appellant's convictions and order a new trial concerns the period immediately before the appellant dropped A, B and C at A's mother's place. In their evidence at the first trial all three of A, B and C said that in the course of the drive to A's mother's flat the appellant had threatened them in various ways so that they would return to his car after seeing A's mother without saying anything to her about the threats. He said that he knew where A lived and if they didn't return to the car he would do them harm. According to
A he also threatened them with a screwdriver. The general picture was of the three of them being in fear when they went in to see A's mother, then because of that fear not telling her they were frightened, and then going to rejoin him in his car, unwillingly and in fear. This provided a plausible introduction to what they said happened later.

At the second trial B gave evidence first. In her evidence in chief she said nothing about any threats by the appellant to the three of them during the drive to A's mother's place.

In cross-examining B the appellant's counsel approached this difference from her evidence in the first trial with caution. He asked her whether she agreed that nothing unusual happened on the way to A's mother's house and she said she didn't think so, she was not sure. She then agreed that her best recollection was that it was just a normal drive in with other people talking.
Counsel asked her whether she had any reason to believe she was in danger at that stage and she said no, not really. Counsel, going a little further, then asked whether anything the appellant had done at the time B went to A's mother's place would give her a belief that she was in any danger and again she answered no, not really.

It would have been open to counsel at that stage to cross-examine B on this quite different account of this part of her trip with the appellant from the one she had given at the first trial. He did not do so, because, he subsequently explained, at that point he had no reason to think that A would not give evidence concerning this part of the trip to the same effect as she had given it at the first trial, and he was apprehensive that if he were to ask B about the difference in her two accounts she might take the opportunity of going back to her earlier story, which would then, as counsel then believed, be substantially the same as what A was going to say.

A gave her evidence next. In her evidence in chief she said nothing about any threats from the appellant on the drive to her mother's place. When the cross- examiner approached this subject he first obtained from her an answer that at the stage when the three of them left her mother's place there had been no force or threat or anything else at that point. A little later she agreed that it would be completely untrue to say that any of the three was threatened before they got to her mother's place. She next agreed that at the first trial she had said in evidence that on the way to her mother's place the appellant had grabbed a screwdriver and held it at B's throat and told them that they had to tell A's mother that B's uncle was waiting for them and they had to come back to him. She agreed that both of those statements had been untrue, also that she had made a series of statements at the first trial about the circumstances of the drive to her mother's place and what happened at her mother's place that were untrue and which she knew at the time that she gave the evidence were untrue.

Next, A said in answer to questions in cross-examination that a few days before the second trial began she had told the Crown Prosecutor who appeared at the second trial and his solicitor of the incorrect evidence she had given at the first trial. She further agreed that she had realised some time after making her first statement to the police after 8 March 1994 that it contained a serious false allegation about the appellant but that she had decided to continue with that version at the first trial. She also said that when the appellant had dropped the three of them at her mother's place, before going in to see her mother they had worked out the story about B's uncle to tell her (A's) mother so that she wouldn't be difficult about letting them go off and have the day with the appellant.

A little later there was the following passage in A's evidence: "Q. Because the reality is there were no threats at all until after the second bog isn't it? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. Did you think you had to come up with some explanation for what you were doing with this man all day? 
A. No I was - I was just confused that night up at the hospital when I had to give my statement.
 
HIS HONOUR: Q. At the time you told Detective Weir about the screwdriver did you have a recollection of any incident involving a screwdriver or do you not now know? 
A. Yes I think that is why I was so confused about it.
 
O'CONNOR: Q. But you've agreed earlier that the part you said to Detective
Weir or what you said to Detective Weir was he held the screwdriver at [B's] throat - I withdraw that. You recall that earlier on you agreed you said to
Detective Weir 'He grabbed a screwdriver out of the front that was on the seat next to him and said, I'm going to drive you home and you can tell your mum [B's] uncle is waiting for us and we got to go out.' Now both the suggestion of him grabbing the screwdriver and the suggestion of telling mum that [B's] uncle's out the front they're both untrue aren't they? 
A. (No verbal reply).
 
Q. Bot [sic] the propositions him grabbing a screwdriver before you got to your mother's place? 
A. That's untrue.
 
Q. That's untrue and him making the suggestion 'I'm going to drive you home and you can tell your mum [B's] uncle is waiting for us and we got to go out' that's untrue isn't it? 
A. Yeah.
 
Q. And you've put them both together haven't you, you see clearly in your statement what you've said is he's produced the screwdriver at a time before you even got to your mother's place haven't you? 
A. Yeah.
 
Q. And that's quite clear from the statement isn't it? 
A. Yeah.
 
Q. And didn't you know that was untrue when you told it to the policeman? 
A. Yeah.
 
Q. And then you've said he held the screwdriver at [B's] throat and at the time that you said that to the policeman you knew that wasn't true didn't you? 
A. Yeah.
 
Q. And then you've said to the policeman 'He drove us to my house and I got out and I told my mum that [B's] uncle was taking us out for the day.' Now that part was true wasn't it? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. You did tell your mum that and he did drive you there? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. And you said to the policeman 'I did this because he saw me walk into my house, I was too scared to stay there.' That wasn't true was it? 
A. No." 
The cross-examination then proceeded to a number of other matters.

As soon as A's evidence was complete the appellant's counsel asked the court to be permitted to ask further questions of B in cross-examination. He said he had deliberately not asked her questions concerning the inconsistent evidence she had given at the first trial for the reason mentioned earlier. The following exchange occurred: "O'CONNOR: ... the concern was that when it was put to [B] 'Oh look you've changed your evidence' we might have ended up with instead of 'No there was definitely no threat', we may have ended up with 'Oh well you've reminded me I remember that there was what I said --' 
HIS HONOUR: She still might have said that, she still may say there was a threat I don't know, but you've got to justify bringing her back, a girl of that age for a third trip. Gee you'd be hard pressed to convince me.
 
O'CONNOR: Well your Honour what I'm saying is that in a criminal trial we're entitled to have notice of the Crown case as it's to be presented and we're entitled to have that before the trial starts." 
The trial judge eventually said he had to be satisfied there was some disadvantage to the defence in not having cross-examined B about her inconsistent statements, such disadvantage arising from something that the defence was not expecting, that he could not see it but that he would hear what the Crown said. The Crown Prosecutor said: "... the Crown's submission is simply this, that my friend made a tactical decision not to ask the witness. He didn't do that, his opportunity is now lost." 
The trial judge then refused to permit B to be recalled for further cross- examination.

It was submitted for the appellant that the judge's refusal to permit further cross-examination of B was an erroneous exercise of discretion, which in the circumstances of this trial was a serious one.

There seems to be little controversy about the general rule in such circumstances. It applies both in civil and criminal cases.

In Brown versus Petranker [(1991) 22 NSWLR 717], a civil case which went to the Court of Appeal, senior counsel for the defendants at the trial had sought to recall a witness for further examination. The trial judge refused to allow this, on the basis that the failure to lead the evidence from the witness was the result of an oversight by the defendant's counsel and in the circumstances leave should be denied. On this, Clarke JA, with whom Handley JA and Waddell AJA agreed, said: "It is well-settled that the decision whether leave should be granted to recall a witness who has already concluded his or her evidence lies in the discretion of the trial judge. Accordingly, on appeal the principles governing discretionary judgments apply: House versus The King <case>; [(1936) 55 CLR 499] at 505. The judgment will, in accordance with those principles, be vulnerable if, inter alia, the judge acts upon a wrong principle or if he allows extraneous matters to guide him.
 
In my opinion there is an overriding principle which should be applied and that requires the court to inquire whether the interests of justice require that leave be granted or refused. There is no rule or, as far as I am aware, practice of the court which requires a party seeking to recall a witness to show that that party has been taken by surprise. Nor is there any rule to the effect that it is only rarely that 'a court will permit a witness who has completed his evidence to be recalled'.
 
On the contrary the court is concerned to consider what is just between the parties. Ordinarily the interests of justice would favour the grant of leave where the evidence sought to be adduced had been overlooked and the other party would not be prejudiced by the fact that the additional evidence is to be given after cross-examination and re-examination of the witness has been completed.
 
On the other hand if counsel had deliberately refrained from leading the evidence when the witness was being examined in chief in the hope of gaining some tactical advantage or it appeared that the opposing party would suffer prejudice if leave was granted there would be sound reasons for rejecting the application.
 
In my view the principle was correctly stated by Jeffrey J in Henning v
Lynch [[1974] 2 NSWLR 254], in the context of an application to re-open a prosecution case before the commencement of the defence case. There his Honour said (at 259): '... The applicable principle is one which in the circumstances here strongly favours the reopening of the prosecution case: where the defendant's case has not been gone into and there is ready to be tendered some additional evidence which by accident, mistake or want of foresight has not been tendered before the prosecution case is closed, it is - to use the words of Cave J in
Hargreaves versus Hilliam [(1894) 58 JP 655], "a very fit and proper thing to allow the evidence to be given unless there is some very good reason".' 
In this case there was no question of prejudice to the respondent nor was it suggested that the appellants' counsel should be held to a tactical decision.
On the contrary his Honour rejected the application because counsel for the appellants had failed to demonstrate that he had been taken by surprise. In my opinion his Honour failed to apply the correct principle and his decision was erroneous." 
The rule tends to be stated even more strongly in regard to criminal trials. In Masters [(1992) 59 A Crim R 445], the court (Hunt CJ at CL, Allen and Badgery-Parker JJ) said, at 473: "This Court has said that, generally speaking a judge should always accede to a request to have a witness recalled for cross-examination upon a point of substance which has been overlooked - however incompetently - unless real and incurable prejudice is created for the party calling that witness: Fleming (unreported, Court of Criminal Appeal, NSW, Hunt, Campbell and Mathews JJ, 12
December 1989), p 9." 
In Fleming, Hunt J, in the sentence following the foregoing citation from
Masters, had said: "The attitude should be the same where something arises for the first time, at a stage of the trial after the witness has given evidence." 
Also, he had said earlier: "Sometimes, of course, counsel deliberately omits to cross-examine upon a particular issue, and then seeks leave to do so later because his tactic has not succeeded. The judge is justified in those circumstances in being sceptical about any claim that the point was overlooked. Even then, however, the point is not simply whether there had been an opportunity to raise the issue earlier. The point is whether both parties receive a fair trial. There may be circumstances where the Crown would be prejudiced by a witness being recalled, but it is difficult to imagine what those circumstances could be (cf
Regina versus Powch [(1988) 14 NSWLR 136], at 137 - where surprise is indicated that the Crown would even oppose the recall of one of its own witnesses)." 
In the present case, it was common ground that counsel for the appellant had made a tactical decision not to cross-examine B on the conflict between her evidence at the first trial and the second. Fleming and Masters show that that was not in itself a sufficient basis for the trial judge's discretionary decision; but over and above that, any force there may have been in the Crown
Prosecutor's submission that because of that tactical decision the appellant's counsel had lost his opportunity to cross-examine B on that issue was completely vitiated by the fact that the tactical decision had been made on the basis of incomplete information. Counsel for the appellant had submitted that the defence were entitled to have notice of the Crown case as it was to be presented and that they had not had such notice of the change in A's evidence. The judge himself had recognised in argument that this change was "a dramatic one".

The position as it stood when the application for leave to cross-examine B further was made was that A had said in her evidence that she had told the
Crown's counsel and solicitor shortly before the second trial that there had been no threats by the appellant before A, B and C had been taken by the appellants to A's mother's place and that the whole of her evidence at the first trial to the effect that there had been such threats was deliberately untrue. At no stage in the subsequent debate before the trial judge on the application for leave to cross-examine B further did the Crown Prosecutor make any suggestion that he and his solicitor had not been told what A had now said in evidence in the second trial she had told them. In fact, the debate appears to have been conducted on the basis that what A had said about that matter was right.

In my opinion counsel for the appellant was right in saying to the judge that the Crown should have given the defence notice of this change in the Crown case: see R versus MJK (CCA, unreported, Hunt CJ at CL, Smart and Sully JJ, 6
April 1995) especially at p 4 of Hunt CJ at CL's reasons. At no stage did the
Crown Prosecutor suggest that such notice had been given, in any form. This seems to me to be somewhat surprising and it may be that there were material circumstances relating to this matter which are not known to this court. The
Crown Prosecutor at the appeal was not the same one as at the trial, and the latter has had no opportunity of explaining the circumstances. However, the court can only go on the materials before it, and on those materials it seems quite clear that the Crown were notified before the trial by A of the very significant change in her evidence, and that no notice of this change was given to the defence. In my opinion such notice should have been given.

Whatever may have lain behind the non-giving of notice, the consequence of its not having been given was that at the time when counsel for the appellant made the tactical decision not to cross-examine B about her differing evidence in the two trials he did so lacking information, directly relevant to that decision, which only came to his knowledge after he had finished his cross- examination of B. The differences in her evidence, although perhaps not absolutely basic at the trial, were of considerable potential significance to both the Crown and the defence cases.

The question of the credibility of A, B and C was one of the main issues at the trial. The account given by the appellant to the police and later in his unsworn statement at the trial was not a completely incredible one. He said he had had consensual intercourse, and only with C and denied any threats or violence. The medical evidence had been that examinations of A, B and C late in the night of 8 March 1994 had shown traces of semen in C's vagina, but not
A's or B's. On the other hand there was other medical evidence consistent with their stories. The case presented by the Crown at the first trial through the evidence of A, B and C that when they called on A's mother they did not want to rejoin the appellant in his car and only did so through fear of him, if accepted by the jury, must have made it easier for them to accept the complainant's accounts of what happened later. What emerged at the second trial, through the evidence of A was that A, B and C had willingly rejoined the appellant in his car without any fear and under no threat and after having deceived A's mother about what they were doing. This in itself must have been of some assistance to the defence. At that stage it must have seemed to the defence that there was a real chance of getting B, if she could be further cross-examined, to say that she too had been deliberately lying about threats and fear before the visit to A's mother. This would surely have redoubled the strength of the defence criticism of both the credibility and the story of A,
B and C.

In my opinion, for the trial to be fair, counsel for the appellant should have been allowed to cross-examine B further. The result of the trial may have been no different. In the circumstances of the present case, that is not the test.
The importance not only of the credibility of A, B and C but also of their motivation at the time when they rejoined the appellant in his car after they left A's mother's place, and the relevance to both of these matters of the cross-examination from which counsel for the appellant had refrained prior to the "dramatic" and unforeseen change in A's evidence, made it imperative, in my opinion, that he be allowed the opportunity to conduct that cross- examination once the new version of A's evidence became plain. The fact that he was not permitted to undertake this further cross-examination seems to me to have been of such significance that the trial itself miscarried because of it.

Other new trial points were argued by counsel for the appellant concerning directions given by the trial judge on matters referred to as corroboration.
If the appellant were to succeed in the submissions on these directions the consequence would be a new trial. Since, in my opinion, it is clear there must in any event be a new trial because of the first ground relied upon by the appellant, I see no advantage to be gained in considering the "corroboration" directions.

In my opinion the appeal should be upheld, the convictions of the appellant quashed and a new trial ordered.
 
SMART J: I agree with Priestley JA.

SIMPSON J: I agree with the orders proposed by Justice Priestley and his reasons therefor.
 * * * 
