

Robert Geoffrey Renton By His Tutor The Protective Commissioner versus Michael
Francis Doherty [1996] NSWSC 639 (19 December 1996) 
ROBERT GEOFFREY RENTON BY HIS TUTOR THE PROTECTIVE COMMISSIONER v. MICHAEL
FRANCIS DOHERTY /90 
WEDNESDAY 18 DECEMBER 1996 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
BADGERY-PARKER J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff, Robert Geoffrey Renton, then aged 27, was involved in a motor vehicle accident which occurred on 12 October 1987 near Muswellbrook. He claims damages in respect of very severe injuries sustained, and the defendant admits liability.

The plaintiff suffered fractures to the skull and the face. Associated with the skull fractures was severe brain damage particularly to the frontal lobe.
The facial fractures have united with considerable deformity including in particular, displacement upwards of the left orbit which, in conjunction with scarring resulting from associated lacerations to the face, have left him severely disfigured. As well, he sustained injury to the optic nerves and the combination of various problems in his eyes, together with the distortion of his face, leaves him with a loss of visual efficiency estimated at 82.5%. The principal components of that include a left hemianopia which causes loss of vision on the left side and optic atrophy in the right eye, together with a traumatic mydriasis which needs intermittent treatment by way of drops. With the help of either a magnifying glass or spectacles, the right eye does function well enough to allow him to read.

The most significant consequence of his accident is, however, the brain damage and its effect generally on his ability to function normally in the community.
It is not contested that he has a severe frontal lobe impairment and it is not contested that in consequence of that, he is unable to live independently without substantial care and attention.

The parties have conducted this litigation in a very practical and co- operative way and have been able to resolve most of the issues between themselves. I shall set out later those agreements which have been come to.

The first and major issue in the case is as to the extent of his need for personal care and as to how best that need may be satisfied and at what cost.

The second issue was as to the plaintiff's loss of earning capacity. The agreements reached between the parties cover the past loss of earnings and it is my task only to assess future loss.

Future Care 
The plaintiff's acute care post-accident was carried out at Muswellbrook
District Hospital and then at the Royal Newcastle Hospital. From there he was discharged on 22 February 1988 to Koorabel Rehabilitation Centre. At that time he was mobile, independent and continent, and able to feed orally. From
Koorabel he was discharged on 4 November 1988 to Weemala Home, a long term skilled nursing home. It was hoped that with further improvement in his condition he might be able to achieve supervised living status in a hostel.
Attempts were made to place him in sheltered employment but he was unable to cope with that. Gradually the degree of his need for supervision decreased and he was able to be transferred to a privately run hostel near Morisset, called
Carinya Oaks. He resided there from about August 1990. The place appears to have been badly run, with poor supervision of residents with diverse physical and mental problems. It is common ground that the plaintiff's need for care was not adequately met.

In June 1994, his place of residence was changed to Avondale Retirement
Complex where he resided as one of eight in a group home known as Three Bells.
This is a privately owned facility, operated for commercial profit. There, the plaintiff was cared for by the employed manager, Maureen Davies. It is abundantly clear from the whole of the evidence, and became common ground between the parties, that at Three Bells under its then management, the plaintiff was remarkably well cared for and all of his needs were adequately and well met.

The trial of the action began on 11 June 1996 and on Monday 17 June judgment was reserved.

At that stage, the plaintiff's case was that, accepting that the plaintiff's needs were well met at Three Bells, that outcome was achieved and achievable only because of the extraordinary skill and devotion of Mrs. Davies; that it could not be assumed that the care which she was providing or care of comparable quality would be available indefinitely and certainly not throughout the plaintiff's life (his life expectancy being accepted as about years); that his experience for several years at Carinya Oaks, which was badly run and eventually closed down, demonstrated the difficulty of finding suitable hostel or group accommodation for such a person as the plaintiff; and that his needs could not realistically be met except by the provision of care in his own home for the rest of his life, at least commencing from such time as it might reasonably be foreseen that he would have to leave Three Bells.

The defendant's case was, at its highest, that the only provision which needed to be made was for the continuance of accommodation at Three Bells or some similar establishment at comparable cost; the fall back position was that the plaintiff's needs would adequately be met by provision of a sum of money which would enable him to continue at Three Bells or some similar establishment, his care there being supplemented by visitation from outside by a suitable person for perhaps three hours a day. The defendant's ultimate submission was that the plaintiff's needs would adequately be met by the provision of funds calculated at a weekly rate somewhat in excess of the current cost of his accommodation at Three Bells but substantially less than the best estimate of the cost of private care in his own home, to the intent that he would continue in Three Bells or a similar institution for as long as that proved possible, suitable and acceptable to the Protective Commissioner who will have him in his care, the funds accumulating in the meantime to enable the provision of private care at such future time as that might become necessary.

However, very shortly after the hearing, the situation changed. The plaintiff obtained leave (by consent) to re-open his case and adduce further evidence.
That evidence shows that on 15 July 1996, Mrs. Davies received notice of termination of her employment and she left Three Bells on 12 August 1996. She and her husband obtained rented accommodation, initially in a three bedroom house at Dora Creek and more recently in a four bedroom house at 15 Kay
Avenue, Kanwal. She took the plaintiff to live with her and her husband so that she might continue the care of him. He has continued in her care to the present time.

At the conclusion of the resumed hearing, senior counsel for the defendant did not contest:-
That the needs of the plaintiff would not adequately be met in a hostel or group home such as Three Bells, absent the close degree of personal care and supervision which Mrs. Davies was able to give to the plaintiff at Three
Bells.
That his needs are such as reasonably require the provision of one on one care and supervision such as Mrs. Davies is currently providing for him.
That the reasonable cost of providing for his needs for the rest of his life comprises two components: the increased cost of providing accommodation for a live-in carer or carers, over and above the reasonable cost of providing accommodation for the plaintiff himself; the ongoing cost which will be incurred to pay for his continuing care.

There has ceased to be any issue as to the nature of the plaintiff's needs or the extent of the care required, but it is desirable to summarise the situation very briefly. The plaintiff is physically capable of showering, shaving, cleaning his teeth and attending to his toilet, dressing and undressing, and preparing, cooking and serving meals. But he requires supervision in respect of all of these activities, not because of any lack of physical capacity but because he will simply forget or omit to do what needs to be done unless constantly reminded: he needs to be prompted and sometimes persuaded (even blackmailed or bribed) to attend to his personal hygiene. A major problem is his reluctance to let anybody touch him on his face or head, for example to shave him or attend to cleaning of his ears and teeth or to attend to his hair. Mrs. Davies has won his confidence and trust and he allows her to assist him in this regard but that could be a problem if he was changed into the care of anybody else. Until quite recently, he regularly wet his bed but unless his carer intervened was likely to remake the bed without changing the sheets. (He has not wet the bed in recent times except when under stress connected with the listing of his matter for hearing). Although he can dress himself, he needs guidance and correction in the matter of the choice of appropriate clothing. Although physically capable of preparing a meal, he needs supervision because of the risk that he may injure himself or others by negligence in the use of utensils and cooking appliances. He is able to be left alone for substantial periods provided sensible precautions are taken including having somebody check on him at frequent intervals. He is affable and gregarious but needs supervision especially because of a tendency to inappropriate and disinhibited behaviour which can be a source of embarrassment to himself and others. He enjoys going out shopping, to church, or just for a walk, and in general is able to manage to get himself to and from a destination, although if it requires the use of public transport he needs careful instruction or "programming" beforehand and is still not entirely reliable, so that it is necessary to check that he in fact reaches his intended destination. He has a considerable amount of insight into his situation and is clearly capable of deriving pleasure out of his various social activities, so that the provision of an opportunity for same forms a definite requirement in the provision of care for him.

The real question is as to the quantification of the amount which should be charged to the defendant in respect of this level of care.

In Griffiths v. Kerkemeyer <case>; [(1977) 139 CLR 161], the High Court held that a plaintiff was entitled to recover damages for the value of services rendered to him gratuitously by his fiancee and members of his family. The effect of the decision was explained by the majority of the court in Nguyen v. Nguyen <case>; [(1990) 169 CLR 245] at 261-262:- "In reaching its conclusion the court followed the decision of the Court of
Appeal in Donnelly v. Joyce <case>; [(1974)
QB 454], and viewed the damages in question as damages for one component of the plaintiff's loss occasioned by his physical disability. The disability gave rise to the need for nursing and other care. The need was met by the services gratuitously provided. The value or cost of those services was, in the circumstances, an appropriate means of quantifying that aspect of the plaintiff's loss which was represented by the need. As the need represented the loss, the value of the services required to fulfil that need served as a mean of assessing the loss.
The fact that there were persons, prompted by motives of concern for the plaintiff, who were prepared to provide the services gratuitously was, it was held, not something which should diminish the damages to the advantage of the defendant. It was only right in the circumstances that the plaintiff should benefit rather than the wrongdoer whose negligence was the cause of the plaintiff's loss." 
In Van Gervan v. Fenton <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 327], the court held that the fair and reasonable value of such services to be included in the assessment of damages is "as a general rule, the market cost or value of those services" (pp.331, 333-334). At 334 the court discussed the problem of determining the value of services and observed that:- "Where the plaintiff has entered into a binding agreement for the provision of the required services, the defendant's liability is confined to the contractual cost of the services unless the cost exceeds the reasonable cost of the services. In such a case, the defendant and not the plaintiff obtains the benefit of any bargain which the plaintiff has acquired in obtaining the services at below market cost." 
In this case the plaintiff tendered evidence of what it would cost if the plaintiff's needs were met by carers engaged through the well-known agency,
Dial an Angel; the defendant tendered evidence of the cost of such services provided through another well-known agency, Macquarie Nursing Service. In the end, plaintiff's counsel did not contend for any amount larger than the cost of meeting the plaintiff's needs through carers engaged through the latter group.

However, the fact is that at the present time, the plaintiff's needs are met at a much lower cost because Mrs. Davies has negotiated a fee with the company which was the workers compensation insurer of the plaintiff's employer at the time of the accident (the accident having occurred in circumstances where the plaintiff was entitled to the benefits of the Workers Compensation Act). That insurer meets the cost of medical care, evidently by a way of reimbursement of the Protective Commissioner; and also, as I would understand it, pays to the
Protective Commissioner the weekly payments of compensation to which the plaintiff is entitled. From the latter source, the Protective Commissioner pays to Mrs. Davies and her husband a proportion of the rent of the house in which they provide accommodation to the plaintiff. So far as her services as a carer are concerned, the workers compensation insurer has agreed with Mrs.
Davies on a fee of $514 per week. That is very much below the cost of similar care provided through either of the agencies.

Counsel for the plaintiff handed up as part of his submission a document purporting to calculate the cost of care provided by a carer engaged through
Macquarie Nursing Services which showed a figure, additional to accommodation costs, of $1,172.62 per week. There is room for argument about some of the items included (eg. sick leave, provision of an alternative carer during periods when the nominated carer was sick, and the allowance for handyman assistance) and inasmuch as the daily rate includes the agency fee, the total can be adjusted downwards in order to arrive at a cost which could be said to represent the commercial cost of the services provided by Mrs. Davies were it not for the fact that she has entered into a contract at a lower figure. The item "food costs" (which I take to represent the cost of keep of the carer) may also be deleted so long as the situation is that Mr. Renton is cared for in Mrs. Davies' home. The adjusted figure would seem to be somewhere between $950 and $1,000 per week. However, to award that much would represent an over- compensation of the plaintiff at least during such times as the present arrangement continues.

It is, however, the plaintiff's wish that he should in due course be accommodated in his own home, and a claim is made and conceded by the defendant (subject to quantum) for the additional cost which would be incurred in providing accommodation adequate not only for the plaintiff himself but for a carer or carers. The probability is that once his verdict is received by the
Protective Commissioner, a reasonable proportion of it will be invested in the purchase of an appropriate home including accommodation for the carer, and the probability is also that Mrs. Davies and her husband will move into that home and the plaintiff will continue to be cared for in similar fashion as is presently the case. There is no evidence that the present contractual arrangement is for a fixed term, and no reason to assume that it will continue unaltered and that the care which Mrs. Davies provides to the plaintiff will continue to be available to him at the same figure as now. On the other hand, so long as she and her husband are the carers (she being the principal carer and he providing some backup, including handyman assistance), the probability is that the contract price which would be negotiated with them would be somewhat less than the cost at which the same services could be provided through an agency. It would remain the case, in my view, that such contract price as would be negotiated should properly be regarded as the market cost, so that again, during any such period as she might continue to be the carer, the plaintiff would be over-compensated if the Macquarie Nursing figures were adopted without adjustment. On the other hand, it cannot be assumed, adversely to the plaintiff, that he will always be able to have the benefit of a contract under which the services are provided at a discount below the cost commonly charged in the market. In Van Gervan the majority pointed out (at p.336) that "The use of the market cost criterion enables the plaintiff to be properly compensated by the award of a reasonable sum whether or not the gratuitous care provider continues to provide that care." Similarly, the use of a market cost based on the cost of engaging a carer through an agency "enables the plaintiff to be properly compensated" in the event that an agreement for the provision of care at a lower cost comes to an end.

I have come to the conclusion that the amount which should be allowed for the plaintiff's future care (that is, the fee or wages to be paid to his carer, leaving aside rent and the cost of his own keep, which will be compensated in effect by the award of a sum for loss of earning capacity) should comprise two components: first, a sum equal to the present value of $514 per week during the remainder of the plaintiff's life; and secondly, a sum, somewhat arbitrarily assessed as representing the present value of the difference between $514 a week and the cost of the same services provided through an agency, roundly $1,000 per week, but recognising that the time when that larger cost is likely to be incurred may be deferred for some years. The present value of $514 per week using the agreed multiplier of 917.5 is $471,595. The present value of the difference between $514 and $1,000, ie.
$486 per week, deferred respectively for five, 10 and 15 years, is $333,396, $245,187, $176,175. It appears to me that an assessment which fairly and reasonably as between the parties compensates the plaintiff for the likely cost of his future care is the sum of $750,000.

That sum is, of course, assessed on the basis that at a relatively early date the plaintiff will move into a home of his own, which will be more expensive than the home which he would ordinarily have required by reason of the need to provide additional accommodation for his carer. The architect engaged by the plaintiff has proceeded on the basis of the purchase of a two bedroom house, to which additions would be made to provide additional accommodation for the carer. That may be a reasonable approach in a case where the plaintiff already owns accommodation suitable to his own needs, and has to or might reasonably choose to extend that house to provide the additional accommodation. Where, however, the plaintiff does not own a property but is to be compensated on the basis that he will purchase one suitable not only for his own needs but the need to accommodate a carer, a more realistic approach appears to me to be that suggested by the architect engaged on behalf of the defendant, namely the purchase of a three bedroom house with two bathrooms, the additional cost to the plaintiff occasioned by his need for care being measured by the difference between the cost of a three bedroom house with two bathrooms and the cost of a two bedroom house with one bathroom. It may be necessary to modify an existing three bedroom house to provide an extra bathroom, or to provide for the carer self-contained accommodation such as is commonly referred to as a granny flat.
Considering the contents of both architect's reports and the submissions of counsel, and recognising an inevitable measure of arbitrariness when the assessment has to be made at a time when there is no particular premises in view, I have come to the conclusion that an allowance of $45,000 would represent a fair and reasonable compensation for the plaintiff under this head.

Future loss of earnings 
At the time of the accident the plaintiff, who had had a good employment record working for many years with the State Rail Authority, had given up that employment to pursue a career as a youth worker with the Uniting Church. At the time of the accident he was working part time in a parish at Muswellbrook and earning only about $120 per week net. His intention was to enrol in a course of training as a youth worker provided at Trinity Theological College in Brisbane, and earlier in 1987, and not long before the accident, he had attended a weekend assessment programme to determine whether he was capable of undertaking that course and a suitable candidate for it.

The defendant has submitted that the plaintiff's previous academic and employment history would not encourage the view that he was capable of fulfilling the academic requirements of the course, no matter how well qualified he may have been in terms of personality and other skills for the practical work involved in the course and in the practice of the occupation of a youth worker in the church following graduation. It is the fact that the plaintiff's education ceased at school certificate level and that his school certificate results were not good. He was placed in the bottom 20% in all subjects but one; and in that he was in the bottom 10% of the school population. However, from then on he had worked in a variety of employments before settling into a position with the State Rail Authority where he had progressed to the level of an assistant stationmaster, tasks which must have involved some administrative ability, and a measure of literacy and numeracy I would think above what was indicated by his school results.

In any event, I find that I can confidently accept the assessment of the
Reverend Pittman, the principal of the College who was personally involved in the weekend assessment of the plaintiff. He was satisfied that the plaintiff had the capacity to complete the academic portion of the course, notwithstanding that it is now accredited as being of tertiary standard. He pointed to his experience that many persons who perform badly in the school system can, with a sufficient number of years and appropriate experience in the workforce, develop to a stage where they are capable of completing such a course as his. I also accept his evidence that the plaintiff was of appropriate personality and ability to complete the other practical side of the course which involved part time work in a parish and his assessment that the plaintiff was a suitable person to secure employment as a youth worker in the church after completing the three year training (1988-1990 inclusive). It cannot be assumed in the plaintiff's favour that he would certainly have completed the course, but there is a very high probability that he would have done, and it appears to me that I should assess that probability as in the order of 95%.

The next question which arises in order to determine his claim for loss of earning capacity is as to the probability that he would have obtained employment with the Uniting Church as a youth worker, given the budgetary constraints which preclude some parishes from employing persons in that capacity, however much the desire to do so may be there. As to that, I accept
Mr. Pitman's evidence which is to the following effect: that although it is only the larger parishes that employ youth workers, and a youth worker can only be appointed to the parish if the parish can support him, the fact is that there has been a steady growth in the demand for qualified persons for such appointments, not only directly in parishes but in other situations less directly connected with the church. Looking back to the time when the plaintiff would have undertaken the course and graduated, a very high proportion of those who graduated each year were successful in obtaining employment within the church. The opportunity also existed for part-time work in some parishes. Bearing those matters in mind, I assess at 90% the probability that, having completed the course, the plaintiff would have obtained employment in his chosen field.

That field is not one which attracts high remuneration. Clearly the church demands a substantial measure of personal sacrifice on the part of those who choose to work for it, and the evidence shows that had the plaintiff completed the course, as anticipated, at the end of 1990 and obtained employment as a youth worker at some stage thereafter, and been in such employment at the time of trial, his gross earnings at the date of trial would have been at the rate of $27,336 per annum. Additionally to that, in some parishes, the plaintiff would be provided with accommodation at church expense, but such accommodation is rarely available to a youth worker, most parishes having only one house which is made available for the minister; in such a parish he would be provided with a housing allowance amounting to $6,840 per annum. The plaintiff submitted that his likely future earnings but for the injury, and subject to discounts for the possibility that he would not have completed the course or obtained employment, should be assessed as including the total of those two amounts. However, the defendant submitted that whatever house allowance might have been payable should be regarded as offset by the provision in the award of damages for future care which would include accommodation and food. That submission had some force at the time when it was made, when the plaintiff was still accommodated at Three Bells; but it loses its force once the situation occurs that damages are to be assessed on the basis that the plaintiff will live in his own home and pay a carer. I accept the plaintiff's submission.

There is an issue as to whether in addition an amount payable to him as "travel allowance" should also be included for the purpose of assessing his earning loss. The evidence relating to that allowance is not entirely clear.
It appears that a sum of $6,240 per annum would be paid, and if, in the course of his work, he travelled more than 10,000 kilometres per annum in his own car, kilometres in excess of 10,000 would be paid for at the rate of 16 cents per kilometre. Mr. Puckeridge, QC. on behalf of the plaintiff has contended that the proper approach is to treat the whole amount as part of his remuneration package, it being however a condition that he would pay for his own transport up to 10,000 kilometres a year. On the other hand, Mr. Murray,
QC. contends on behalf of the defendant that the only realistic approach is to regard the whole sum (which exceeds by about $4,500 an amount equivalent to an allowance of 16 cents per kilometre for those first 10,000 kilometres) as compensation for the cost of owning and running a motor vehicle and accordingly, the whole amount should be treated as an amount which would be consumed by his requirement to provide his own transport up to 10,000 kilometres per annum. I think that is realistic and on that basis, it does not appear to me that the whole sum should be regarded as forming part of his remuneration, for the loss of which he is to be compensated. To that extent I accept the defendant's submission. On the other hand, there would clearly have been a benefit to the plaintiff by reason of the receipt of such a sum annually, in that such motor vehicle as he was thereby enabled to provide would be available to him for his personal use, and it seems to me that he should be compensated for the loss of that advantage. Ultimately, it may not matter whether one approaches it from the point of view urged by the defendant or the point of view urged by the plaintiff. The one would require exclusion of the travelling allowance as such, but provision of some sum to compensate for loss of the advantage of owning a motor car; the plaintiff's approach would lead to the inclusion of the travelling allowance, but subject to a discount to represent the extent to which it would in fact be utilised in travel in the course of his employment from which he is necessarily, by reason of his injury, relieved. The evidence does not enable anything but an arbitrary assessment and I have come to the conclusion that the only fair approach is to include as though it were remuneration an amount equal to one half of the annual travelling allowance which would be paid.

The total remuneration to be brought to account in determining future economic loss is therefore the sum of $37,296 per annum gross, $28,593 net so that the plaintiff's net loss may be calculated at $549.86 per week. On the basis of a working life extending to age 65, the appropriate multiplier on five percent tables is agreed at 809.6. The resulting total $445,166.65 is to be discounted according to the allowances which I have deemed appropriate for:- the possibility that the plaintiff would not have completed the course (five percent) which reduces the allowance to $422,908.31; and the possibility that he would not have obtained employment or continuous employment (10%) which produces a further reduction to $380,617.47.

That sum itself needs to be discounted for other vicissitudes and I reduce it by a further 15% to $323,525.

Assessment of damages 
The parties are agreed, and upon the whole of the evidence before me I am also of the view, that this plaintiff's case equates to 90% of a most extreme case.
Section 79 of the Act provides that the damages for non-economic loss in a most extreme case are to be the sum of $247,000. Accordingly the plaintiff is entitled to damages for non-economic loss to 90% of that figures, $222,300.

The components of the plaintiff's award of damages, as agreed or assessed, are thus as follows:- 
Out of pocket expenses  $203,269.78  
Non-economic loss  $222,300.00  
Past loss of earning capacity (agreed)  $153,518.00  
Future loss of earning capacity (assessed)  $323,525.00  
Loss of superannuation benefits (agreed)  $45,000.00  
Reimbursement of income tax deducted from  $2,429.71  workers compensation payments (Fox v. Wood)  
Cost of future treatment including medication and  $39,018.00  dental (agreed)  
Cost of future care and accommodation (assessed)  $795,000.00  $1,784,060.49  
The plaintiff is entitled in addition to the inclusion in his award of an allowance for the cost of management of the resulting fund which ought be assessed according to the methodology described by Meagher, JA. in Rosniak v. GIO [(1992) 27 NSWLR 665] at -699.

The matter will stand over to tomorrow, Thursday 19 December 1996 for the entry of such judgment as the parties are agreed should result; or for argument on any outstanding issues.
 * * * 
