

Beca Developments Pty Ltd Matter No 1513/92 [1997] NSWSC 319 (21 August )

Beca Developments Pty Ltd /92 August 1997 
Young J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division /92 - RE BECA DEVELOPMENTS PTY LTD 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The liquidator of Beca Developments Pty Ltd ("the Company"), has filed a notice of motion in the Company's winding up proceedings for orders that Gary and Malama Pselletes are jointly and severally liable to pay $621,820.57 to the Company. Mr and Mrs Pselletes were the sole directors of the Company from 28 September 1971. The liquidator was appointed on 28 April 1992. 
The liquidator primarily relies on the Company's balance sheet, which shows that the "Directors' Advance Account - G & M Pselletes" was in debit at the time of the liquidation to the extent of $621,820.57. The Company's ledger, Exhibit PX06, on page 5, shows how this balance was reached.

The defence is that there is an offset of $1,117,021.55 which Mr and Mrs
Pselletes (whom I will call "the respondents") say should have been credited to that account. I will deal with this defence in detail shortly.

These proceedings were tried in conjunction with 1600 of 1996, Beca
Developments Pty Ltd versus Centurian Constructions Pty Ltd in which proceedings I am delivering judgment on the same day as the present reasons for judgment. In those proceedings, the liquidator of Beca Developments Pty Ltd claims that an associated company, also controlled by Mr and Mrs Pselletes, Centurian
Constructions Pty Ltd, owes Beca Developments Pty Ltd $534,945.00. Beca
Developments Pty Ltd, by its liquidator, seeks to wind up Centurian
Constructions Pty Ltd. There is no doubt that all the appropriate formalities for a winding up have been established; indeed, that is admitted. The defence to the claim is again that Centurian Constructions Pty Ltd has substantial offsetting claims. It is clear that during the period 1980-1989, Beca
Developments Pty Ltd was a development company and Centurian Constructions Pty
Ltd was a construction company and they dealt with each other in those roles, both companies having common directors and shareholders.

Returning to the facts in this present case, the respondents say that there were three income earning properties whose income found its way into the
Company as loans from the directors. These properties were (a) a block of six home units at 39 York Street, Coffs Harbour owned by Gary Pselletes ("the
Coffs Harbour property"); (b) two home units in Hurstville owned by Gary
Pselletes and his mother Constance Pselletes as joint tenants ("the Hurstville property"); and (c) a home in Anzac Parade, Maroubra, owned by Anthony
Developments Pty Ltd ("the Maroubra property"). All three properties were mortgaged to support the Company. On 2 October 1991, the Coffs Harbour property was sold, the proceeds to the proprietors being $243,255.09 net.
These moneys were paid directly to AGC to whom the Company owed substantial moneys.

The units in Hurstville were sold on 5 July 1991. AGC received the whole of the net proceeds, namely $243,611.00.

After liquidation and on 20 July 1993, Maroubra was sold for $168,853.00. Of this sum, the respondents deployed $124,013.00 to the liability of the Company to FPM Finance Ltd, a liability which they had guaranteed.

Additionally, rents of $103,090.00 had been received from the Coffs Harbour property and $38,751.00 from the Hurstville property and they had been paid into the Company's account and at least should have been, according to the respondents, credited to the Directors' Loan Account, though they acknowledged that there was an agreement that the Company would manage the properties in return for one-third of the rent, so that it is acknowledged that one-third of the rent cannot be claimed back. In addition to these claims, there are claims for wages for each of the respondents of $25,000.00, for 10 years.

A basic issue in this case is how far the Company and the respondents should be bound by the way in which the Company's accountant entered the figures in the books from which the parties prepared their annual accounts and income tax returns.

It is too naive to say that once an entry has been made in company books, an irrevocable election has been made as to how a receipt or payment is to be treated. Whilst theoretically the book-keeper should not make an entry without authority of the general manager, and in some cases of the directors, commercial experience is that in practice, book-keepers make entries as to what they think is appropriate and then the managers and perhaps directors examine the entries and if they consider them inappropriate, tell the book- keeper that he or she has erred and to reverse entries. However, once the accounts have been signed off for any particular year, ordinarily there has been an election as to how each item is to be treated in the company's books.
There may be exceptional cases where there have been mistakes of fact or law, but ordinarily, once the accounts are signed off, there is no further room to manoeuvre.

Mr Durston, who appeared for the liquidator, said that in the instant case the books and records of the Company appeared to have been well kept. He says that definite choices were made at the time and these cannot now be rearranged. Mr
Roche, for the respondents, said that it was quite plain both in this matter and in the Centurian Constructions matter, that errors had been made and it would be inappropriate to deny the respondents justice by adopting some artificial rule as to presuming accounts to be correct.

So far as Coffs Harbour is concerned, there is no doubt that the Company borrowed money from AGC and that Mrs Pselletes gave a security over York
Street, Coffs Harbour to secure this borrowing and that the proceeds of $243,255.09 went to AGC on the Company's account in October 1991. All Mr Wily, the liquidator, says about this in his affidavit of 14 April 1997, is - "14. I do not have any record of any payment by GP [Gary Pselletes] to reduce any liability of Beca arising out of this alleged disposal." 
He also says that Gary Pselletes does not appear to have mentioned this in an affidavit sworn in 1992 before the Company was wound up.

It is unfortunate that this transaction is not properly recorded, but acting on the balance of probabilities on the documents that are before the court, there is no reason to doubt Mr Qureshi's evidence that the money was paid over to AGC on account of the Company, Beca.

The same comment applies to the $243,611.00 proceeds from Hurstville. Most of the questions in cross examination were directed to the claim for wages and the claim that rents had been paid in. There was very sketchy cross examination on the moneys which had come to AGC on Beca's account as a result of the sale of properties owned by Mr Pselletes or his mother. It is easy to see how, in a small company, even though the amounts were large, the accounts would not pick up the fact that by virtue of the sale of properties owned by the directors, the Company's mortgage liability to AGC had been reduced.

Accordingly, on the balance of probabilities, I must find that the amount of $486,866.09 should be credited against the liability shown in the Directors'
Loan Account.

The next claim is for rents which were paid into Beca's account with respect to the Coffs Harbour property and the Hurstville property. The position here is by no means clear. The rents that were going to Beca were not only the rents for the Coffs Harbour property in York Street, but also other Coffs
Harbour properties owned by Beca or by members of the Pselletes family. All Mr
Qureshi can say is that he has prepared in Table 1 to Exhibit ZQ8 to his affidavit, figures "indicating, for a typical rental period, the calculations for estimating rents paid to Beca and the rental statement for Beca for the period 29 May 1987 to 30 June 1987, showing rents received from the said York
Street property." 
Mr Wily says that the books appear well kept and he cannot see any reason why any rents that were received by Beca from properties not owned by Beca would not have been properly accounted for in the periods in question. This statement is, of course, of nil evidentiary value, but as the onus is on the
Pselletes, this is not the end of the matter.

The evidence is extremely weak on this part of the case. The onus is on the
Pselletes to show that it is more likely than not that the rents from these properties flowed through to Beca and were not adjusted in the Directors' Loan
Account. The evidence is insufficient for me to find in their favour.

The next claim is for wages. It is clear that there was no agreement for wages between the Company and the Pselletes. Furthermore, it would seem from Mr
Wily's evidence that both Mr and Mrs Pselletes were receiving some salary from
Centurian. There is very great doubt about the amount of work that Mrs
Pselletes did for the Company, and indeed, the evidence leaves me in a state where I am not convinced that Mrs Pselletes did any great amount of work for the Company at all.

Against the claim for wages is also the fact that no mention of any claim is made in any income tax return submitted by Mr and Mrs Pselletes. Another factor is that as Mrs Pselletes was born in 1961 and so was 10 when the
Company was incorporated, it would be odd if she was working for the Company the whole time. This point, which was stressed in cross examination, loses a lot of its sting when it is realized that Mrs Pselletes was only claiming wages from 1981 to 1991, but she did not demonstrate that she ever did any work justifying a salary of $25,000 a year even on a quantum meruit basis.

There seems little doubt that Mr Pselletes was involved in this Company and
Centurian on more or less a full-time basis. However, the claim is, to my mind, clearly one of him saying after the liquidation that he should have been remunerated for the work he put into the Company and was justified in making a claim for $25,000.00 a year for 10 years, a total of $250,000.00. Whether that claim be morally justified or not, I cannot see any legal justification for it. There was never any agreement to pay wages and the claim made is not on a quantum meruit basis, and even if it were, nothing has been put before the court as to why the quantum is merited by what Mr Pselletes did. Accordingly,
I disallow the claim for wages.

The remaining claim is for the moneys that were paid by Anthony Developments
Pty Ltd on the sale of the Maroubra property to FPM Finance Limited.

The short answer to this claim is that if there is any claim, it is by Anthony
Developments Pty Ltd, and not the respondents. If and when Anthony
Developments Pty Ltd put in a proof of debt, it will doubtless be dealt with according to law.

Accordingly, this notice of motion can be decided without spending time on evaluating the credit of the witnesses. However, I should make some brief comments in case the matter goes further.

Mr Wily was not affected at all by cross examination and I accept his evidence. The only weakness of that evidence was that Mr Wily had to rely on the books and records of the Company.

Mr Pselletes lost some credibility on the issue as to how much his wife was involved in the Company and I thought he prevaricated on questions relating to his income tax returns and partnership returns. I am quite sure Mr Pselletes doesn't really appreciate what fiduciary duties are, though he kept uttering those words. I accepted Mr Pselletes as basically an honest man, though one who has reconstructed what in his mind is a meritorious claim to compensate him for a lot of hard work he put into this Company over a number of years. Mr
Qureshi has done a lot of work. He was an accountant employed after the
Company went into liquidation to endeavour to provide material to back up the respondents' claim. Although I do not consider that Mr Qureshi's credit was affected at all, his evidence is really only as valuable as the history given to him by Mr and Mrs Pselletes, usually by the former. Again, Mr Lowe, the accountant who acted for the Company in its lifetime, was not affected in cross examination, but with respect to him, he was more a book-keeper who received secondhand instructions through Mr Stavrou, his employer, as well as from Mr Pselletes.

In accordance with what I have said above, the liquidator is entitled to be paid the sum sought in the notice of motion of $621,820.57 less $486,866.09, that is, $134,954.48. The notice of motion asks for judgment against each of
Mr and Mrs Pselletes in the amount found to be due. It does not seek interest.
Accordingly, there will be judgment against each of Mr and Mrs Pselletes for the sum I have mentioned. So far as costs are concerned, I would think that as the liquidator has succeeded, albeit for a lesser sum, the respondents should pay the costs of the motion, but I am prepared to entertain submissions as to why some other order should be made, at a time convenient to counsel, before the order is taken out.
 * * * 
