

Jd versus Director-General of Department of Youth and Community Services and
Ors Matter No 10646/98 [1998] NSWSC 353 (19 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 15 September 1998 
JD versus DIRECTOR-GENERAL OF DEPARTMENT OF YOUTH AND COMMUNITY SERVICES & ORS /98 March 1998 
Black AJ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The evidence in this matter consists of the following: an affidavit of Menachem Mendel Hasofer affirmed on 10 March 1998 on behalf of the plaintiff; an affidavit of Gregory Alexander Walsh sworn 10 March 1998 on behalf of the plaintiff; and a transcript of 35 pages relating to the day's proceedings of Thursday 5 March 1998 at the Childrens' Court, Campsie. 
The background giving rise to the plaintiff's summons is that on 2 February the first defendant filed care applications in relation to the second defendants before the Campsie Childrens' Court. The first day of hearing was on 2 March 1998 and the hearing on 5 March was the second day of the hearing.
The plaintiff is the father of the second defendants. The third defendant is the magistrate hearing the matter who submitted a consenting appearance, save as to costs.

The Childrens' Court had been told that the matter was likely to occupy a number of days before it and discussions had taken place about the possibility of a block of dates and changing the venue.

The relevant passages from the transcript of 5 March 1998 are as follows - at p.3 starting at line eight, the following is recorded:- "BENCH: As requested, I made enquiries through the Chief Magistrate's office about the possibility of special fixture hearing dates, hearing in the Downing
Centre, that sort of thing. That proposal was not looked on with any favour whatsoever, so the matter will have to proceed here. After having carefully considered the matter and carefully considered what the issues are in this establishment hearing, the number of witnesses involved, the fact that most of the evidence that the Department is relying on has already been filed in written form, and taking into account the limited hearing dates available in this matter, I propose to direct that cross-examination of the witnesses by each of the counsel be limited. My view is that 20 minutes per counsel is a sufficient time. Mr. Trench, you've already commenced your cross-examination.
I'm not going to say you've already had your 20 minutes. That direction can start from today." 
Mr. Trench was counsel for the plaintiff.

Discussion ensued as recorded in the transcript and at p.4, line 36 the following passage appears:- "BENCH: Very well. I will certainly consider extending that time to half an hour for major witnesses." 
That ruling was not enforced for the balance of the morning hearing. However, after the luncheon adjournment it was raised by counsel with the magistrate and at p.34, line 34 the following passage appears:- "TRENCH: Your Worship, just two things. Just so it's clear for the record seeing as so much is going on the record today. The order that you had previously made or the direction as to the cessation of the cross-examination as I understand was suspended or delayed by you to enable me to continue. I take it that that order now - or direction or finding now has effect as and from this moment? 
BENCH: Yes. That will give your something to appeal Mr. Trench." 
The hearing in the magistrate's court was then adjourned to 20 March 1998 and in the meantime the summons seeking relief from the above ruling by the magistrate came before this court on short notice. The relief sought by the plaintiff was supported by the first and second defendants who were represented before me.

The relevant paragraphs for the purposes of this judgment of the plaintiff's summons are as follows:- "3. A declaration that the third defendant denied the plaintiff natural justice by ruling on 5 March 1998 that cross-examination of witnesses by all parties' legal representatives, including the plaintiffs, be restricted to 30 minutes.
Further, or in the alternative, a declaration that the third defendant erred in law in the exercise of her discretion by ruling on 5 March 1998 that cross-examination of witnesses by all parties' legal representatives, including the plaintiffs, be restricted to 30 minutes." 
In Talbot v. Minister for Community Services [(1992) 30 NSWLR 487], Young,
J., in relation to the [Children (Care and Protection) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/capa1987250/), held at p.499B-C that proceedings in the Childrens' Court are proceedings involving an action between parties, resulting in a hearing and determination by the court, and are not in the nature of an enquiry.

Section 55 of the [Children (Care and Protection) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/capa1987250/), so far as relevant, provides as follows:- 
The objects of this part are to ensure that children in need of care are provided with assistance and supportive services, the provision of that assistance and those services being based on the premises that:- the welfare and interests of children are to be given paramount consideration, ...
 except in exceptional circumstances or pursuant to legal proceedings, there should be no interruption of relationships between children and their parents contrary to the wishes of children and their parents." 
Section 65 of the same Act provides as follows:- "(1) In any proceedings under this part with respect to a child:- the child and each person responsible for the child, and the Director-General, may appear in person in the proceedings, or be represented by a barrister or solicitor or, by leave of the Childrens' Court, by an agent, and may examine and cross-examine witnesses on matters relevant to the proceedings." 
In Wakeley v. R. & Bartling v. R. <case>; [(1990) 93 ALR 79], the following passage appears at p.86 of the unanimous judgment of the full court of the High Court:- "The limits of cross-examination are not susceptible of precise definition, for a connection between a fact elicited by cross-examination and a fact in issue may appear, if at all, only after other pieces of evidence are forthcoming. Nor is there any general test of relevance which a trial judge is able to apply in deciding, at the start of a cross-examination, whether a particular question should be allowed. Some of the most effective cross- examinations have begun by securing a witness' assent to a proposition of seeming irrelevance. Although it is important in the interests of the administration of justice that cross-examination be contained within reasonable limits, a judge should allow counsel some leeway in cross- examination in order that counsel may perform the duty, where counsel's instructions warrant it, of testing the evidence given by an opposing witness.
Lord Hanworth, MR., in words which commanded the approval of the House of
Lords in Mechanical and General Inventions Co. & Lehwess v. Austin &
Austin Motor Co. Limited [[1935] AC 346] at 359, said:- 'Cross-examination is a powerful and valuable weapon for the purpose of testing the veracity of a witness and the accuracy and completeness of his story. It is entrusted to the hands of counsel in the confidence that it will be used with discretion; and with due regard to the assistance to be rendered by it to the court, not forgetting at the same time the burden that is imposed upon the witness.' 
In R. v. Kalia [(1974) 60 Cr. App. R. 200] and in R. v. Maynard [(1979) 69 Cr. App. R. 309], while the Court of Criminal Appeal affirmed the duty of counsel not to extend cross-examination unduly nor to pursue irrelevant lines of enquiry, it emphasised that counsel must always be at liberty to do their duty in the proper interests of the client. It is the duty of counsel to ensure that the discretion to cross-examine is not misused. That duty is the more onerous because counsel's discretion cannot be fully supervised by the presiding judge. Of course, there may come a stage when it is clear that the discretion is not being properly exercised. It is at that stage that the judge should intervene to prevent both an undue strain being imposed on the witness and an undue prolongation of the expensive procedure of hearing and determining a case. But until that stage is reached - and it is for the judge to ensure that the stage is not passed - the court is, to an extent, in the hands of cross-examining counsel." 
In J. v. Lieschke <case>; [(1986) 61 ALJR 143] at 148, the following passage appears:- "It would offend the deepest human sentiments as well as a basic legal principle to permit a court to take a child from its parents without hearing the parents when they can be heard and when they wish to be heard in opposition to the making of an order. A guardian who has been appointed in loco parentis is no less entitled to be heard. Only by ensuring, where practicable, that the parents or guardians have an opportunity to be heard can the court be confident that it has protected whatever interests the child may have in its parents' or guardians' discharge of their duty to the child." 
In The Queen v. The Australian Broadcasting Tribunal & Ors; ex parte
Hardiman & Ors <case>; [(1979-80) 144 CLR 13], the following passage appears at p.34 of the unanimous judgment of the court:- "It follows that the Tribunal is entitled to place limits on cross- examination. However, generally speaking, it would seem an arbitrary exercise of the Tribunal's power to fix a time limit other than in respect of individual witnesses, or, in any case, without having regard to the nature of the issues and the evidence being given with respect to those issues. In the present case the submission made by the prosecutors made it evident that a time limit of half an hour was quite inadequate for a cross-examination designed to deal with the issues of contravention and public interest.
Certainly the Tribunal made it clear that an application for extension of time would be considered and, perhaps, considered favourable. But the initial fixation of time, the comments subsequently made by the chairman and the indication that an extension would be for a limited period all indicate that the Tribunal fixed the time limit arbitrarily." 
It now falls to be considered whether the provisions of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) have in any way altered or modified the above statements of common law.

In Coco v. The Queen <case>; [(1993-94) 179 CLR 427] at 437 the following passage appears:- "The insistence on express authorization of an abrogation or curtailment of a fundamental right, freedom or immunity must be understood as a requirement for some manifestation or indication that the legislature has not only directed its attention to the question of the abrogation or curtailment of such basic rights, freedoms or immunities but has also determined upon abrogation or curtailment of them. The courts should not impute to the legislature an intention to interfere with fundamental rights. Such an intention must be clearly manifested by unmistakable and unambiguous language. General words will rarely be sufficient for that purpose if they do not specifically deal with the question because, in the context in which they appear, they will often be ambiguous on the aspect of interference with fundamental rights: see
Chu Kheng Lim v. Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic
Affairs [(1992) 176 CLR 1] at 12 per Mason, CJ.

So long as the requirement for express statutory authorization is understood in the sense explained above, we would accept the requirement as a correct statement of principle. At the same time, in our view, the principle is expressed more simply by Brennan, J. in Re Bolton; ex parte Beane [(1987) CLR 514] at 523 in these terms:- 'Unless the Parliament makes unmistakably clear its intention to abrogate or suspend a fundamental freedom, the courts will not construe a statute as having that operation.' 
In Bropho v. Western Australia <case>; [(1990) 171 CLR 1] at p.18, Mason, CJ., Deane, Dawson, Toohey, Gaudron and
McHugh, JJ. pointed out that the rationale against the presumption against the modification or abrogation of fundamental rights is to be found in the assumption that it is:- '"In the last degree improbable that the legislature would overthrow fundamental principles, infringe rights, or depart from the general system of law, without expressing its intention with irresistible clearness; and to give any such effect to general words, simply because they have that meaning in their widest, or usual, or natural sense, would be to give them a meaning in which they were not really used" Potter v. Minahan <case>; [(1908) 7 CLR 277] at 304.'" 
The relevant sections of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) appear to me to be as follows:- "[s.9(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s9.html)
This Act does not effect the operation of a principle or rule of common law or equity in relation to evidence in a proceeding to which this Act applies, except so far as this Act provides otherwise expressly or by necessary intendment.
 ...
 s.11(1) The power of a court to control the conduct of a proceeding is not affected by this Act, except so far as this Act provides otherwise expressly or by necessary intendment.

In particular, the powers of a court with respect to abuse of process in a proceeding are not affected." "s.26 The court may make such orders as it considers just in relation to:- the way in which witnesses are to be questioned; ...
 s.27 A party may question any witness, except as provided by this Act.
 s.28 Unless the court otherwise directs:- cross-examination of a witness is not to take place before the examination in chief of the witness; ...
 s.29(1) A party may question a witness in any way the party thinks fit, except as provided by this chapter or as directed by the court." "s.192(1) If, because of this Act, a court may give any leave, permission or direction, the leave, permission or direction may be given on such terms as the court thinks fit.

Without limiting the matters that the court may take into account in deciding whether to give the leave, permission or direction, it is to take into account:- the extent to which to do so would be likely to add unduly to, or to shorten, the length of the hearing; and the extent to which to do so would be unfair to a party or to a witness; and the importance of the evidence in relation to which the leave, permission or direction is sought; and the nature of the proceeding; and the power (if any) of the court to adjourn the hearing or to make another order or to give a direction in relation to the evidence." 
Sub-clause 2(2) of Part 2 of the dictionary forming part of the Act provides:- "A reference in this Act to cross-examination of a witness is a reference to the questioning of a witness by a party other than the party who called the witness to give evidence." 
There are specific sections of the Act dealing further with cross-examination, for example, ss.41, 42, 43, 44 but they are not material to the issue in the present case.

In my judgment, none of the above provisions of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) can justify the imposition in advance as occurred in this case of a time limit upon cross- examination. In my view the principles enunciated in Wakeley v. R. &
Bartling v. R. (supra) and the other authorities referred to still apply.

All the parties before me were unanimous in submitting that the issues raised in the present case were such that a limit of 30 minutes for important witnesses per legal representative per party would not enable the magistrate properly to assess the evidence and in particular to decide whether the onus upon the first defendant had been discharged. It was further submitted by all parties that were the proceedings to continue subject to the restriction imposed by the magistrate, none of them would be able to support the ensuing decision as valid.

I have every sympathy with the magistrate who, in my view, was faced with the difficult situation of attempting to have the matter resolved as soon as possible in the interests of the children. However, in my judgment, it is equally in the interests of the children, as was submitted by all parties, that the validity of the allegations raised in this case are fully tested and examined for otherwise it is clear injustice could well result.

Accordingly in my view, the magistrate was in error in making the ruling limiting the time of cross-examination in advance of the witnesses being called and such ruling amounted to a denial of procedural fairness not only to the plaintiff but also to the other parties involved in the matter.

It may well be that as the matter continues it will be necessary for the magistrate to keep the questioning to matters of relevance. Indeed, nobody would suggest that that is not her duty. It is not possible for me to envisage how matters may develop, what issues may arise or what issues may become no longer of significance and accordingly it would not be appropriate for me to say any more about the future conduct of the matter, save to draw attention again to the observations quoted above in Wakeley v. R. & Bartling v.
R.

Accordingly I make the following orders:-
The plaintiff and the second defendants respectively be referred to in the proceedings by a pseudonym.
An order that the names and addresses of the each of the plaintiff and the second defendants respectively not be published.
A declaration that the third defendant denied the plaintiff procedural fairness by ruling on 5 March 1998 that cross-examination of witnesses by all parties' legal representative, including the plaintiff, be restricted to 30 minutes.
I will hear argument as to costs.
 * * * 
