

Fortbacon Pty Limited versus John Joseph Dickie and Anor No. 30069 of 1994 [1995] NSWSC 41 (19 September 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW DIVISION
SPENDER AJ
HRNG
SYDNEY, 18 April 1995 #DATE 23:6:1995 #ADD :9:1995
ORDER . The amended summons is dismissed. 
The plaintiff will pay the costs of the first and second defendants.
JUDGE1
SPENDER AJ:  These proceedings are brought by the plaintiff against the first defendant, the Chief Censor appointed under the Customs (Cinematograph Films)
Regulations made under the [Customs Act 1901](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/) (Cth) and the second defendant, the State of New South Wales, over a dispute concerning the classification of videos and fees payable on their classification.
Under the Customs (Cinematograph Films) Regulations ("the Regulations") a
Censorship Board is established.
That board consists of the Chief Censor and others: Regulation 5(2). Under Regulation 39D(1) the Censorship Board and a censor may, in relation to the censorship and classification of films, exercise such powers and perform such functions as are conferred on the
Censorship Board, or a censor by any arrangement or agreement ("arrangement") made under a law of any of the States or the Australian
Capital Territory, or as the Attorney-General directs, under a law of a Territory. Arrangements have been made between the Commonwealth, the States, and the Australian Capital
Territory, and the Attorney-General has made a direction and entered into arrangements in relation to the Northern Territory, by which the Censorship
Board, the Chief Censor and other censors perform film censorship and classification functions on behalf of the States and Territories.
The plaintiff is one of the largest holders of copyright of "X"-rated material in Australia. It has operational locations in the Northern Territory and the Australian Capital Territory, and has its administrative centre at
Darwin. It sells from Darwin "X"-rated videos by mail order into all States of
Australia and overseas.
Pursuant to legislative requirements (which I shall come to later) the plaintiff makes application to the Chief Censor for classification of its videos. It seeks an "X" classification of its material in the Northern
Territory and the Australian Capital
Territory. Those territories have an "X" classification; the States do not.
Typically, the plaintiff's application for classification, after a preliminary statement to the effect that the video in question is for sale or hire to adult persons on a restricted basis, and the name of the title and some other brief details continues: "This application is made under the A.C.T. Classification of
Publications Ordinance and the Northern Territory
Classification of Publications and Films Act. The category sought is an "X" rating. No other classification is sought and this film is not submitted for classification under respective New South
Wales, Queensland, South Australian,
Tasmanian, Victorian or Western Australian legislation."
I point out that there is no legislative or regulatory requirement that an applicant for classification under the Australian Capital Territory or
Northern
Territory laws must nominate a particular classification for a film.
The application under both laws is for classification only, not for a particular classification. The plaintiff's nomination of an "X" classification is legally irrelevant, just as if the plaintiff had nominated any other classification. Regardless of what is sought by the plaintiff, or any other applicant, the censor must exercise his or her own judgment within the applicable statutory framework.
Simply put, the plaintiff's case is to this effect: it wants only and applies only for "X" classifications for the Australian Capital Territory and the Northern Territory; for such classifications it should pay fees only referable to those two territories; such fees would amount to $70 for both applications for a single video tape, that is all that should be required of it; the first defendant however requires that the plaintiff pay an application fee of $280 for all applications pursuant to the laws of the States as well as the two territories. By December 1994 the plaintiff had some videos titles awaiting submission for classification. It will be required by the first defendant to pay application fees totalling $336,000. The plaintiff contends that only $84,000 should be payable by it. Each month, approximately further video titles are added to the stock awaiting classification.
The plaintiff by amended summons seeks these declarations: . A declaration that since the Film and Computer Game
Classification Act 1984 does not provide for an "X"
Classification of a film and whereas the Classification of
Publications Ordinance 1983 (A.C.T.) and the Classification of
Publications and Films Act (N.T.) make provision for "X"
Classifications of a film, the Film and Computer Game
Classification Act 1984 is not a "corresponding law" within the meaning of that term in section 7(3) of the Film and
Computer Game Classification Act 1984 .
A declaration that upon a proper construction of the provisions of the Film and Computer Game Classification Act , section 7(3) does not require the plaintiff to submit an application for classification and payment of the appropriate fee to the defendant pursuant to that Act where an application for "X" Classification is made only under the Classification of
Publications Ordinance 1983 (A.C.T.) and/or the Classification of Publications and Films Act (N.T.)
Alternatively, a declaration that by virtue of the operation of section 9A of the Film and Computer Game Classification Act , an application by the plaintiff for "X"
Classification of a film under the Classification of
Publications Ordinance 1983 (A.C.T.) and/or the Northern
Territory Classification of Publications and Films Act (N.T.), does not also require an application for classification and payment of the appropriate fee to the defendant pursuant to section 7(3) of the Film and Computer
Game Classification Act .
Alternatively, a declaration that upon the true construction of section 9A and section 7(3) of the Film and Computer Game
Classification Act 1984 , the operation of section 7(3) of that Act in respect of applications by the plaintiff for "X"
Classification of a film under the Classification of
Publications Ordinance 1983 (A.C.T.) and/or the Northern
Territory Classification of Publications and Films Act (N.T.) is invalid.
There are in force in each of the States and the Northern Territory and the Australian Capital Territory laws regulating the classifications of films.
Videotapes fall within this classification. The New South Wales, Northern
Territory and A.C.T. laws, which are the subject of this summons, are the Film and Computer Game Classification Act 1984 , the Classification of
Publications Ordinance 1983 (A.C.T.), and the Classification of Publications and Films Act (N.T.). These laws, and the laws of the other States, provide for the Censorship Board and/or censors appointed under the Regulations to classify films on behalf of the States and Territories. In each of the States there are five classifications. Application for classification of a film is made to the censor. These are: "G", suitable for general exhibition, "PG", parental guidance, "M", not recommended for viewing by under 15 year olds, "MA", unsuitable for their viewing, "R", unsuitable for viewing by anyone under the age of 18. In the Northern Territory and the Australian Capital
Territory there is a further classification: "X".
By Section 3 of the Film and Computer Game Classification Act 1984 "censor", and "film" are defined to mean: "'Censor' means: "officer or authority of the Commonwealth exercising and discharging on behalf of the State the functions of a censor of films and computer games pursuant to an arrangement under section 4; where no such arrangement is in operation, the censor appointed as referred to in section 5.
'Film' includes a cinematograph film, slide and video tape and any other form of recording from which a visual image can be produced."
It is common ground that sub-paragraph (b) of the definition of "censor" has no application. Section 4(1), whose operation is in issue in these proceedings states: "The Governor may arrange with the Governor-General of the Commonwealth for the exercise and discharge by officers or authorities of the Commonwealth, on behalf of the State, of the functions of a censor of films and computer games or of an appeal censor with respect to the classification of films and computer games under this Act."
No appointment has been made under section 4(1); the arrangement has been provided pursuant to a deeming provision in the 1984 Act which goes back to an arrangement made under previous legislation, to which I shall come. The effect of this arrangement is in issue.
In New South Wales, an application for classification is made under section 7 of the Film and
Computer Game Classification Act 1984 which relevantly, states: "(1) An application for the classification of a film ...
may be made to the censor by any person.

An application for the classification of a film: shall be in or to the effect of the form approved by the censor; and shall be lodged with the censor together with: a synopsis of the film; a copy of any advertisement proposed to be used in relation to the film; and the prescribed fee.
 
If an arrangement under section 4 is in force, the censor must not accept the application for classification of the film ... unless an application is made (and the appropriate fee paid) to the censor for classification of the film ... under the corresponding law in each State and
Territory in respect of which a corresponding arrangement is in force."
Section 9 deals with the classification of films. By section 9(2) the censor shall refuse to classify films which fall into various categories of violence, abhorrent sexual practices etc.
Section 9A of the Film and Computer Game Classification
Act 1984 is directly relevant. It states: "While a film is classified as an "X" film under the
Classification of Publications
Ordinance 1983 of the
Australian Capital Territory, it is taken to have been refused classification under this Act." .
Sections 23(3) of the Classification of Publications Ordinance 1983 (A.C.T.) and section 27(5) of the Classification of Publications
Act 1985 (N.T.) state:
Section 23(3): "The Censorship Board shall not accept an application for the classification of a film unless an application is made to the Board for the classification of a film under the law in each State and the Northern
Territory corresponding to this Ordinance." 
Section 27(5): "If an arrangement under section 25 is in force the censor shall not accept an application under this section unless it is made to the censor for the classification of the film under the law of each State and other Territory corresponding to this Act."
Put in a few words, the plaintiff's primary submission is to this effect: the plaintiff applies only for an "X" rated classification in the Northern
Territory and the Australian Capital
Territory; the Northern Territory and the
Australian Capital Territory have such classifications; the States do not; consequently the Film and Computer Game Classification Act 1984 is not a "corresponding law" within section 7(3) of that Act.
In my view the legislation identified by the plaintiff constitutes corresponding legislation.
The provisions in question, deal with a common subject matter: the classification of films. Each has the same person or body exercising the classification function.
Each has classifications which are the same in all material respects, save for the "X" classification which is to be found only in the Northern Territory and the Australian Capital Territory. In each of the
States and the two Territories the relevant legislation has been enacted as part of a common approach to the classification of films. This has been done in the context of Australia's federal system where corresponding legislation is a well-known legislative fact of life, and where corresponding legislation is often required so that, as a matter of agreed public policy, there can be a general commonality of approach to matters which are judged by the legislatures to require a national legislative framework, even though constitutionally the subject of particular legislative schemes is or may be - as here - one for the States alone. It is precisely because of the constitutional limitations on federal power that corresponding laws may be needed.
The word "correspond" does not mean identical: Sackville-West versus Viscount
Holmesdale [(1870) LR 4 HL 543] at 849, Lord Halsbury. The policy of the legislative provisions may be taken account of to determine whether they correspond: Samarkos v Commissioner for Corporate Affairs <case>; [(1988) 52 NTR 1] at , Asche CJ. It is sufficient if the "corresponding" provision is one which is similar to, or answering to in character and function:
Winter versus Ministry of
Transport [(1972) NZLR 539] at 541.
It is worthwhile quoting from two of the judgments to which I have referred. In Harbour Trustees Lord Halsbury (at ) said: "The words 'corresponding assessment' are not technical, and it must be admitted that such a mode of referring to other sections of other Acts of Parliament is calculated to confuse and embarrass. Still the very looseness of it is what makes it, I think, applicable here. I think one would say, colloquially, if you were referring to the two statutes in question, which are the two corresponding sections? And I think the answer would be favourable to the appellant's contention. They do correspond in object and purpose, though to some extent they may differ in machinery ...."
In Winter the New Zealand
Court of Appeal was examining what was meant by the expression "corresponding provision". Turner J, for the court, said (at )
in disposing of an argument that there was no provision of the relevant repeating Act which corresponded to the repealed provision: "This submission was founded upon the proposition that the 1970 provisions, taken as a whole, were different from those of .
But this must be so whenever a new statutory provision is substituted for an old one. We read 'corresponding' in s.20A as including a new section dealing with the same subject matter as the old one, in a manner or with a result not so far different from the old as to strain the accepted meaning of the word 'corresponding' as given in the Shorter Oxford English
Dictionary 'answering to in character and function; similar to'."
In my view the legislative provisions in question correspond in object and purpose, although to some extent (the "X" classification) they may differ in detail or in machinery, to adopt the words of Lord Cairns, and may be said to be similar to each other and to answer or correspond in character and function, to adopt the words from Winter. As a matter of policy, I think that when courts come to examine in the context of Australia's federal system whether one legislative provision corresponds to another in what is plainly a legislative scheme enacted by the States and Territories to achieve a general commonality of regulation of a particular subject matter, the courts should - without artificially straining the meaning of the expression "corresponding provision" - bring to bear the court's knowledge that in Australia's Federal system there will frequently be differences of detail and machinery between laws which the various legislatures intend should be regarded as corresponding laws.
I hold the provisions referred to in the first declaration to be corresponding provisions. I do not grant the first declaration.
The declaration sought in the second paragraph of the plaintiff's summons assumes that an application for an "X" classification is made only under the classification of Publications Ordinance 1983 (A.C.T.) and/or the
Classification of Publication and Films Act (N.T.) and, on this supposition, it is put that properly construed Section 7(3) of the New South Wales Act does not require the plaintiff to submit an application for classification and payment of the appropriate fee to the Chief Censor pursuant to that Act.
It is submitted by the plaintiff that the first defendant's construction of Section 7(3) is unjust and irrational.
Reliance was placed on Centronics
Systems Pty Ltd versus Nintendo Co. Ltd <case>; [(1992) 111 ALR 13] at 57, Beaumont and
Burchett JJ and Cooper Brookes Wollongong Pty Limited versus Federal Commissioner of Taxation <case>; [(1981) 147 CLR 297] and what their Honours Mason and Wilson JJ said (at 321) in rejecting the literal interpretation of a section of the [Income
Tax Assessment Act 1936](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/itaa1936240/) (Cth) which would have resulted "in an operation.....
which in our opinion is capricious and irrational."
The essence of the plaintiff's argument is summed up in these two paragraphs from its written submissions: "The first defendant's construction of section 7(3) and the equivalent sections pursuant to the legislation of the
Australian Capital Territory and the Northern
Territory produces a capricious and irrational result. By virtue of section 9A (of the New South Wales Act) any film classified "X" under the legislation of the Australian Capital Territory 'is taken to have been refused classification' under the New
South Wales Act.
Yet, the censor's construction of section 7(3) requires the plaintiff to apply for classification and pay an appropriate fee for classification under New South Wales law even though there can be no "X" classification under New
South Wales law and further, by virtue of Section 9A, any classification is deemed to have been refused once it is classified "X" under Australian
Capital Territory law.

The plaintiff must, therefore on the first defendant's construction of section (3) of the New South Wales legislation, pay a fee in respect of a service (i.e. "X" classification) which it does not seek under New South Wales law and cannot be granted under New South Wales law."
The deficiencies in this branch of the plaintiff's argument can be shortly expressed:
In the first place, it needs be kept steadily in mind that the plaintiff is choosing to apply for an "X" classification; its choice of the "X" classification - adopted for its own commercial purposes - is, as I have said, irrelevant and cannot have any bearing on the Chief Censor's decision. Shortly put, this is a legally irrelevant act. In theory, although this would no doubt come as a surprise to the plaintiff, videos submitted by it could be given another classification.
It is perfectly true that by virtue of section 9A of the New
South Wales Act while a film is classified as an "X" film under the Classifications of Publications Ordinance 1983 of the
Australian Capital Territory it is taken to have been refused classification under the New South Wales Act, but this happens only when the classification is made. That is something the
Chief Censor, under the various laws must do for all of the
States and Territories. In short, he wears all his hats when a video is submitted to him for classification.

The plaintiff cannot escape from the clear language of section 7(3) of the New South Wales Act. It leaves no room for application of the reasoning in cases such as Cooper Brookes.
Parliament can, if it wants, enact laws which are by most standards unjust or capricious so long as the language is sufficiently clear (as here) and the law is within power (which is not in dispute on this branch of the plaintiff's case). Nor is there anything capricious or irrational in the effect achieved by section 7(3), which is the corresponding provision to section (3) and section 27(5) of the Northern Territory and
Australian Capital Territory laws. The submission ignores a central feature of the national legislative scheme: by the one application a video is to be classified for each State or
Territory.
Forum selection or shopping is denied.
It is not under the New South Wales Act that the applicant applies, but under the Northern Territory and/or
Australian Capital Territory laws. By force of those laws sections 23(3) (N.T.) and section (5) (A.C.T.) apply with equally explicit effect. It is those laws which when application is made under them which require that an application be made in all other jurisdictions.
I hold that this claim for relief fails.
What is sought in paragraph 3 of the summons is an alternative to paragraph 2 and fails for the same reasons. Section 9A operates only a after a video is classified. Once again, the plaintiff's nomination of the desired classification is legally irrelevant.
Paragraph of the summons raises somewhat different considerations.
The plaintiff's argument is to this effect:
Section 7(3) of the New South Wales Act is predicated upon the existence of "an arrangement under section 4". The 1971 arrangement (there is no other) was made between the Government of New South Wales and the Governor-General of the Commonwealth pursuant to section 26C of the Theatres and Public Halls Act .
Under section 4 of the Film and Computer Game Classification
Act 1984, and clause 2 of Schedule 1 of that Act, that arrangement is deemed to be an arrangement under section 4.

At the time the 1971 arrangement was entered into the censorship and classification of films was prescribed by the
Theatres and Public Halls Act 1908 which relevantly did not deal with videos or videotapes.
The Film and Computer Game Classification
Act 1984, when enacted in 1984 included for the first time a definition of film as including a videotape.
Schedule of the 1984 Act can only deem the arrangement pursuant to section 26C of the 1908 Act to continue in as much as that arrangement relates to "films" only, not including videos. The 1984 Act cannot expand the effect of the former arrangement: Director of Public Prosecutions versus Makris (unreported, Batt J, Supreme Court of Victoria, 16 March 1994, at pages 4, 6 and 9 to 13 was relied on).
Consequently the Chief Censor cannot refuse to accept the plaintiff's application for "X" classifications on the basis that applications and appropriate fees must be paid under the "corresponding law in each State and Territory" for the reason that there is no arrangement under section 4 "in force" with respect to the classification of videos and section 7(3) has no operation and is invalid in respect of applications for classification of "X" videos.
In my opinion this argument fails.
Section 26B of the Theatres and Public Halls Act 1908 was amended by the Theatres and Public Halls and Cinematograph Films (Amendment) Act 1971 . Relevantly, the amendments had the effect of changing the definition of film to read: "'Film' means film or videotape used or proposed to be used for the purposes of exhibiting a picture."
By the same section picture was defined to mean "picture or other optical effect exhibited or proposed to be exhibited by means of a cinematograph". The amendment to the definition of film commenced operation on 14 May 1971; the arrangement between the Commonwealth and New South Wales was made on 28
October 1971 and commenced on 15 November 1971: New South Wales Government
Gazette No. 131, 1971, page 4367.
Looking at matters as they stood before the introduction of the 1984 Act, censorship under the 1908 Act was directed to films which were to be exhibited in public. See amongst other provisions Sections 26HA, 26R, and 26S of the
Theatre and Public
House Act 1908.
The 1984 Act changed things. It is important to note that under clause (1) of the First Schedule to the 1984
Act the 1971 arrangement is deemed to be "an arrangement and an agreement, respectively, under Section 4." The
Victorian legislation considered in Makris is different, and that decision is distinguishable. The distinction may be fine, but it is I think effective: the
Victorian law took the agreement as it was without altering the nature and effect of that agreement. It ook it warts, deficiencies, and all. The savings and transitional provision considered in that case stated that the prior agreement "as in force immediately before the commencement of the section has effect as if made under Section 4." In other words, as Batt J said at (page ), "section (1) simply treats the agreement in force (or currency) immediately before its commencement - in force, that is under an Act which has been repealed - as alive by making it deemed to have been made under section ". The New South Wales law goes further.
 .
Under the First Schedule to the New South Wales law the arrangements deemed to be made under section 4. Given the nature of the legislation, which was originally known as the Film and Video Tape Classification Act, it is my opinion that the deeming of an arrangement to be an arrangement within section 4 imports with it the notional effect that it was made under section
I repeat section 4(1): "The Governor may arrange with the Governor-General of the
Commonwealth for the exercise and discharge by officers or authorities of the Commonwealth, on behalf of the State, of the functions of a censor of films...... with respect to the classification of films .... under this Act."
The combined legislative purpose expressed in section 4(1) and clause 2 of the First Schedule is to deem for all purposes the 1971 arrangement to have been made under the 1984 Act. The net effect is that the 1971 arrangement under the 1908 Act is to be treated as if made under the 1984 Act.
If I am wrong in thinking that there is a distinction between the New
South Wales legislation, and the legislation Batt J considered, I would not, with all respect to
Batt J, have followed his decision and to have so confined the section 4(1) and clause 2 of the First Schedule as to wholly exempt video technology, and, it would necessarily seem, computer games. This would leave the new technology wholly outside the realm of regulation and classification.
This was not what the legislature had in mind; the purpose of the legislation is plain; that purpose should be given effect to.
Otherwise put, if Parliament mandates that an imaginary state of affairs is to be regarded as real, its intention must be given effect to. That is what the deeming provision does: it requires the court to imagine that the 1971 arrangement was made under the 1984 Act; and to accept and apply that deemed state of affairs for all purposes. Deeming provisions may be clumsy and loose ways of doing things, but they are well known legislative creatures of convenience, and should not be read so as to emasculate
Parliament's intention. See East End Dwelling Co. Limited versus Finsbury Borough Council [(1952)
AC 109] at 132-133 Lord Asquith of Bishopgate.
It follows that this aspect of the plaintiff's argument fails and on this basis alone the claim made in paragraph 4 of the summons fails. It is therefore unnecessary to consider in any detail the submission put to the effect that section 7(3) is in the circumstances referred to in the declaration sought in paragraph 4 of the summons invalid. It is sufficient to say that, on the basis on which this submission is put, it fails for the same reasons as it is dependent on the alleged non-existence of an arrangement, which argument I have rejected.
My orders are:
The amended summons is dismissed.
The plaintiff will pay the costs of the first and second defendants.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/41.html  
