

Regina versus Nguyen; Regina versus Tran Matter Nos Cca 60526/97; Cca 60539/97 [1998] NSWSC 507 (30 October 1998) 
Last Updated: 17 November 1998 
REGINA versus HUNG NGUYEN 
CCA 60526/97 
REGINA versus HUY LAM TRAN 
CCA 60539/97 October 1998 
Smart J, Ireland J, Dunford J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal against conviction and sentence 
FILE NO/S: CCA 60526/97; CCA 60539/97 
DELIVERED: Friday, 30 October 1998 
HEARING DATE: Friday, 26 June 1998; Wednesday, 8 July 1998 
PARTIES: REGINA versus Hung NGUYEN; REGINA versus Huy Lam TRAN 
JUDGMENT OF: SMART, IRELAND, DUNFORD JJ 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant (Nguyen): M Austin 
Appellant (Tran): K P Coorey & A Silink 
Respondent: R D Cogswell SC & M Latham 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant (Nguyen): Joan Baptie 
Appellant (Tran): Thomson Bentley & Partners 
Respondent: S E O'Connor 
CATCHWORDS: JUDGE RECALLING WITNESS AFTER SUMMING UP - JUDGE SPECULATES - IDENTIFICATION EVIDENCE - ADEQUACY OF COVERAGE OF DEFENCE IN SUMMING UP 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Allowed 
NO. OF PAGES: 46 
REGINA versus Hung NGUYEN 
REGINA versus Huy Lam TRAN 
HEADNOTE 
Judge describing photograph as perhaps misleading in Summing Up when matter never put to witness and never raised by either counsel - Judge recalling witness of his own motion after Summing Up concluded - course rarely to be taken and only in exceptional circumstances - faulty Jones v. Dunkel direction - judge speculates - identification evidence - judge not required to use phrase "may be unreliable" - Summing Up not covering defence adequately.

ORDERS 
In each appeal:
Appeal against conviction allowed. Conviction and the consequent sentence quashed.
There be a new trial.

REGINA v. Hung NGUYEN 
REGINA v. Huy Lam TRAN 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: Nguyen and Tran have appealed against their conviction of supplying not less than the commercial quantity of heroin at Lakemba on 13 June 1996. They have also sought leave to appeal against the severity of their sentences. 
The appellants challenge the course which the judge took at the trial and the directions which he gave to the jury.

During the late afternoon-early evening of 13 June 1996 a police undercover operative, Chris Harris, met Dung Luc Nguyen (Dung) and made arrangements to purchase some heroin. At one stage another police undercover operative, known as Dave Jones, who had some cash, joined them. I leave out some intermediate events in which, inter alia, Dung made some arrangements. Eventually, Dung joined Harris in his vehicle and they drove to a park in Canley Vale. Dung left Harris' car and walked about 100 metres to a white Celica motor vehicle and got into the rear of that vehicle. Dung then returned to Harris' vehicle and told Harris to follow the Celica. Harris saw two males in the front seats of the Celica with the one in the passenger seat wearing a baseball cap (allegedly Nguyen).

Harris and Dung followed the Celica to Lakemba where it drove three times around the block formed by MacDonald Street, Punchbowl Road and Lakemba. On the third trip the Celica stopped in MacDonald Street close to a phone box near the intersection of Punchbowl Road. At Dung's direction Harris parked in
MacDonald Street about 80 metres behind the Celica. According to Harris, this was about 8.50 pm.

Dung walked to and got into the rear of the Celica. A short time later Dung returned to Harris' car and said that the men would not bring "the thing" until they had seen the money. About 9.05 pm Dung walked back to the Celica and got into the rear of that vehicle. The passenger wearing the baseball cap left the Celica and walked to the phone booth. A short time later he left the phone booth. Harris could not tell whether the passenger used the telephone.
He walked to a point on the footpath about halfway between the two vehicles.
Dung and the driver of the Celica walked back to Harris and entered his vehicle. Dung introduced the driver as Cuong. The three men had a conversation about seeing the money before "any stuff" was seen. Harris telephoned Jones.
There were some further discussions and telephone calls.

About 9.20 pm Jones arrived at MacDonald Street and parked behind Harris.
Jones saw two Asian males (Dung and Cuong) in Harris' car and a third Asian male, who was wearing a baseball cap and light coloured trousers, standing on the footpath near Harris' car. Harris got out of his vehicle and spoke to
Jones. Dung stood on the footpath and Cuong returned to the Celica and stood in front of it on the road.

A BMW sedan drove along MacDonald Street past Harris and Jones and stopped at the Celica. The driver of the BMW (allegedly Tran) was seen to lean over towards the passenger side of that vehicle. Cuong was seen to walk to the BMW and take a light coloured object from the passenger side window. The BMW was driven away. Cuong walked back towards Harris and stopped about 20 metres away from Jones' vehicle. Neither Harris nor Jones saw Cuong carrying anything at that stage. Dung called to Cuong who walked to Jones' vehicle. Jones opened the boot of his vehicle and showed Cuong $135,000.

Dung and Cuong got into the rear of Jones' vehicle, Harris into the front passenger seat and Jones into the driver's seat. The third Asian male wearing the baseball cap remained on the footpath near Jones' car. Dung removed a pale coloured plastic shopping bag from under his jumper. Cuong handed the plastic bag to Harris. That bag contained two separate taped plastic bags and a third plastic bag taped into thirteen separate sections. Subsequent examination revealed that the plastic bags contained a total of 493.3 grams of heroin with a purity of 72% to 73%.

Police officers converged on the scene and Cuong was arrested. Dung got out of the car and he and the third Asian male wearing the baseball cap ran off down
MacDonald Street. Detective Rope said that about 9.36 pm, on arrival in
MacDonald Street, he saw a male person running away from the undercover operative's vehicle towards Lakemba Street. The person was wearing beige coloured trousers, a long sleeved blue coloured shirt and a dark baseball cap.
Det Rope said that he came within just less than 10 metres of the man in the baseball cap. He described that man as being of Asian appearance, with short dark coloured hair, of average height and average build, youngish, in his early twenties. Det Rope said that about 9.42 pm he saw this person walking across nearby McCourt Street towards Hillard Street. He was wearing the same trousers and shirt but was not wearing the baseball cap. When Det Rope called out "Police, come here" the person ran through a park towards Hillard Street.
Det Rope relayed that information to other police. Det Rope said that at 9.45 pm he went to King Georges Road nearby and that person, who was the accused
Nguyen, was in the custody of Detectives Owen and Stinson. He was conveyed to
Campsie Police Station where, because of his condition, it was unwise to interview him.

The Crown alleged that meetings between both appellants took place in
Punchbowl Road during the period 9 pm to 9.30 pm. There was an issue whether both appellants were in Punchbowl Road as alleged.

Det Cunningham was in a car on the Lakemba side of Punchbowl Road north of the intersection of Punchbowl Road and MacDonald Street. Det Cunningham said that at 9.02 pm he saw an Asian male (later ascertained to be Nguyen) wearing light coloured trousers, a long sleeved blue shirt and a blue baseball cap with a white logo walk out of MacDonald Street into Punchbowl Road. Det Cunningham was about 40 metres away from Nguyen at this point. Det Cunningham claimed that he had a good view of Nguyen. Det Cunningham saw Nguyen walk along
Punchbowl Road for about 80 metres where about 9.04 pm he met with another
Asian male (later ascertained to be Tran) who was wearing dark trousers and a dark sports coat. Det Cunningham, who would then have been 120 metres away, said that these two Asian males appeared to talk and that Tran handed a light coloured plastic bag to Nguyen who returned it to Tran. Det Cunningham stated that Nguyen walked back towards MacDonald Street, turned right into that street about 9.06 pm and disappeared from his sight. Tran sat on a brick fence.

About 9.09 pm Tran walked towards Colin Street and along that street disappearing from view. Det Cunningham claimed that about 9.15 pm he saw Tran walking along Punchbowl Road towards MacDonald Street and Nguyen walking from
MacDonald Street into Punchbowl Road where they met about 60 metres from that corner and appeared to converse. About 9.17 pm they separated, with Nguyen returning to MacDonald Street and Tran to Colin Street. They met again in
Punchbowl Road about 9.22 pm and walked towards Colin Street and out of the
Detective's sight. About 9.26 pm he saw Nguyen walking in Punchbowl Road towards MacDonald Street, with both hands up the front of his shirt.
Eventually he turned into MacDonald Street. Det. Cunningham said that about .34 pm he saw a BMW sedan turn left out of MacDonald Street onto Punchbowl
Road, travel along that road and turn left into Colin Street. About 9.37 pm he attended the undercover operative's vehicle where he handcuffed Cuong.

Detective Cunningham attended Campsie Police Station and saw each appellant.
They were in separate rooms. Det Cunningham identified each man by his clothing and his build as the man he had seen earlier. He did not have a view of Nguyen's face but could see an outline of Tran's face. He could not identify a feature on Mr Tran's face. Punchbowl Road was wet. The officer could not remember whether it had been raining continuously since 8.50 pm but it was raining on and off. Everything was wet. Punchbowl Road has six lanes and is well illuminated. There were also the lights of the cars. Det
Cunningham claimed that he used binoculars. This was challenged.

Det Cunningham stated that he looked inside the green BMW at Campsie Police
Station and found a cream coloured plastic bag.

Detective Stinson was in a vehicle in a car park area adjacent to Punchbowl
Road. He was on the park or opposite side of Punchbowl Road to Det
Cunningham's vehicle and looked across Punchbowl Road onto the area on the eastern side between MacDonald and Colin Streets. This vehicle was partly obscured by some bushes. Detective Stinson was in the front passenger seat and
Det Supt Owens was in the driver's seat. Det Stinson estimated that he was about 40 metres away from the area where the appellants met. He had to observe the appellants through the driver's side window and around the bushes. This was not difficult as he moved around inside the car. It was a wet night but he thought the rain stopped for a period and that it was during that period the plastic bag was handed by the man he subsequently believed was Tran to the man wearing the baseball cap (Nguyen). Nguyen held it for less than a minute before returning it to Tran. Det Stinson thought it commenced to rain again as
Tran made his way back to Colin Street. All this allegedly took place in a major well illuminated public street. The evidence of Det Stinson as to the events which occurred in Punchbowl Road between about 9.02 pm and 9.34 pm was along the same lines as that given by Det Cunningham. He also said that about .34 pm he saw a light green BMW turn left from MacDonald Street into
Punchbowl Road, proceed along that road and turn into Colin Street. He could not see who was in the BMW. About 9.45 pm he saw Hung Nguyen crossing King
Georges Road and arrested him.

Det Stinson said that he had Hung Nguyen under observation for about three minutes shortly after 9.02 pm and for about two minutes from 9.15 pm and for about three minutes from 9.21 pm and then for about 1 ½ minutes. During this fourth period the man wearing the baseball cap had his hands under his shirt.
He was adamant that the man he arrested was the man he had under observation during the periods mentioned. He also had the other man under observation for about three minutes from 9.21 pm.

At the committal proceedings Det Stinson said that he had trouble seeing up
MacDonald Street as it was particularly dark. He described Punchbowl Road as reasonably well lit. He could not see along Colin Street.

Det Stinson was able to tell that the man he saw other than Nguyen was Asian but was too far away to recognise his face. As to clothes all that Det Stinson could recall was that they were dark. Det Stinson did not record any physical descriptive features of Tran. Det Stinson agreed that when he made his statement he relied on the details in the surveillance sheet. His statement is dated 26 June 1996. The surveillance sheets contained the entries of a number of police officers. They were a composite effort. Officers made radio messages and the surveillance recording officer noted down the information and incorporated it in the surveillance sheets. Notes of observations were also dictated into recording machines.

Similarly with Nguyen, Det Stinson did not record any physical details. In his statement Det Stinson wrote that Nguyen was wearing light coloured trousers, a blue long sleeve shirt and a dark baseball cap. Det Stinson could not see the face of the man wearing the baseball cap. He said the he identified the man now known as Nguyen from his clothes and their nature (long and baggy), the way that they were worn and his slim to medium build. At the committal proceedings the emphasis was "Well it was mainly the clothing." 
During cross examination substantial challenges were mounted to the accuracy and truthfulness of the evidence of Detectives Cunningham and Stinson and what they claimed to have seen. Their distance from events, the rain and the improbability of a bag containing heroin being handled in the way suggested on a major well lit suburban road were canvassed. Their alleged identification of both appellants was also challenged.

It is a worry when so many police officers use the surveillance sheets to make their statements and then those sheets, which apparently contained a great deal of information including all the times, disappear or are destroyed. This makes it harder to check or test what has been said.

Detective Cooper stated that at 9.15 pm he walked past a green BMW which was parked in Colin Street and saw a cream coloured plastic bag on the front seat of the vehicle. At 9.35 pm he saw the vehicle parked in Colin Street. At 9.37 pm it drove east in Colin Street. When it reached the intersection of Lakemba
Street it was stopped by police. The appellant Tran was removed from the vehicle and taken to Campsie Police Station.

Detective Cooper said that the cream coloured plastic bag that he saw in the
BMW in Colin Street had something in it and was taken out of the BMW prior to the driver being arrested. It was his belief that the plastic bag which he saw should not have been in the BMW when it was taken back to the police station.
He believed that the plastic bag which Det Cunningham found in the back of the
BMW was a different bag.

Det Cooper agreed that Colin Street was particularly dark. He was not sure but did not think that the BMW had tinted windows. No evidence to the contrary was led. The appellants challenged Det Cooper's evidence that he saw a cream coloured plastic bag, apparently with something in it just lying on the front seat of the BMW at a point when Tran was in Punchbowl Road away from the BMW.

Det Middleton said that at 9.02 pm he saw the green BMW parked on the eastern kerb of Colin Street about 40 metres from Punchbowl Road facing Lakemba
Street. About 9.03 pm he saw Tran leave the driver's seat carrying a cream coloured plastic bag. Tran was wearing a maroon coloured jacket and dark coloured pants. Tran walked along Colin Street to Punchbowl Road and along that road towards MacDonald Street. About 9.10 pm Det Middleton saw Tran walk into Colin Street from Punchbowl Road carrying something in his right hand.
Tran entered the driver's seat of the BMW. About 9.14 Tran left the vehicle and walked along Colin Street to Punchbowl Road. About 9.19 pm Tran walked back along Colin Street and entered the BMW. About 9.21 pm he left the vehicle and walked along Colin Street to Punchbowl Road.

About 9.23 pm Det Middleton saw Tran in the company of an Asian male of slim build wearing a long sleeved blue shirt, light coloured trousers and a dark coloured baseball cap. He appeared to be in his late twenties to early thirties. The two men walked to the front passenger side of the BMW and one of them leant into the vehicle. About 9.24 pm Tran entered the driver's seat. The other male walked along Colin Street to Punchbowl Road. That male had both of his hands up the front of his shirt. About 9.31 pm Tran drove along Colin
Street towards Lakemba Street. About 9.35 pm Det Middleton saw Tran drive the
BMW into Colin Street from Punchbowl Road and park the BMW about 200 metres from Lakemba Street. About 9.37 pm the BMW was driven along Colin Street to
Lakemba Street followed by Det Middleton. At Lakemba Street Tran was stopped and arrested.

At the committal proceedings Det Middleton said that he recalled the police searching the BMW but he could not remember which officers did so. This appears to have been shortly after the BMW was stopped. If Det Cooper had reported that there was a plastic bag on the front seat of the BMW the police would have been looking for that bag when they seized the BMW.

Det Middleton dictated notes of his observations onto a micro-tape recorder.
The tape had either been re-used or given to the officer compiling the surveillance log. It was not available. Again the missing surveillance sheets are important in evaluating the evidence of Detective Cooper and Middleton.

Det Woods said that he was present at 11.40 pm, when Det Scott spoke to Tran through an interpreter. Tran denied that he was involved in the supply of heroin. Tran did not wish to be interviewed by the police without having his solicitor present. The attempts to contact the solicitor proved unsuccessful.
Tran then agreed to be interviewed.

In his record of interview Tran denied that he knew Dung and Cuong. He denied that earlier that evening he had met with a Vietnamese male person in
Punchbowl Road. He agreed that he drove into "Cullen" Street, Lakemba in a
BMW. Tran said that a female friend owned the car. His statement as to his movements that evening was evasive and not credible. He said that he did not stop in "Cullen" Street nor did he drive around other streets in Lakemba. He did not have communications with two other persons. He had not seen the contents of the plastic bag previously. The officer corrected the name of "Cullen" Street to "Collins" Street. Tran said that he did not stop in that street - he just drove past.

Tran denied that he parked his car in Colin Street, walked to Punchbowl Road carrying a plastic bag, engaged in a conversation with a man, returned to the
BMW with this man and then walked back to Punchbowl Road. Tran denied that he drove into MacDonald Street and parked close to where this man was involved in the negotiation of sales of heroin. Tran stated: "The situation was that after I drove along Collins Street, when I reached the
T - intersection with Lakemba Street, the police ... stopped my car and arrested me. They searched the car and found nothing." 
At no stage did the police put to Tran that a police officer had seen a cream coloured plastic bag apparently containing some item lying on the front seat of the BMW about 9.15 pm. Nor was it put that a cream coloured plastic bag had been found on the back seat of the BMW.

Further, it was not put to Tran that he had been seen to hand over a plastic bag to another Asian male in Punchbowl Road. The matter was left at Tran carrying a plastic bag the first time he met the Asian male. If the interrogating officer had known of the alleged handing over of the plastic bag that would have been put to the accused. Before an officer questions a suspect he endeavours to obtain all relevant information from other police officers.
An obvious person to speak to would be the officer collating the information and preparing the surveillance log and the surveillance sheets. It is unknown what the surveillance logs and sheets revealed. It is at least a reasonable possibility that the surveillance log and other notes made no reference to the plastic bag being handed over and none to a plastic bag being found in the vehicle at the time of the arrest of Tran subsequently.

Det Snr Sgt Brett removed Tran from the BMW when it was stopped. He was aware that the police had a cursory view inside the vehicle but he was unaware if the police search was comprehensive. Even on a cursory view it would be hard to miss a cream coloured plastic bag on either the front or back seats. He specifically recalled the police looking through the vehicle. They would be looking for weapons, drugs, bags and documents.

He recalled that Det Cooper said that he had looked into the BMW and seen a bag in the vehicle. Det Sgt Brett could not recall the colour.

Detectives Giles and White were not called and the judge refused to call them or direct that they be called. The accused sought to cross examine them as to the missing surveillance sheets.

During cross examination it was suggested that the surveillance sheets which went missing before the committal proceedings had been deliberately mislaid or destroyed to prevent weaknesses and inconsistencies in the Crown case being revealed. The police repelled this suggestion.

Neither of the appellants gave evidence. They contended that the police officers were untruthful and should not be accepted. In his record of interview Tran denied having anything to do with the supply of drugs. His account of his movements in the BMW differed radically from those of the police officers.

Tran called a character witness Mr Van Kiet Nguyen who had known Tran and his family for many years. This witness said that Tran was a person of good character. The Crown in cross examination sought to show that this witness did not have any useful recent knowledge of Tran.

The appellant, Nguyen, called Michael Thomas Easton, a law clerk in the employ of his solicitor. He was present when a group of photographs were taken by his counsel of Punchbowl Road in the vicinity of MacDonald Street and Colin Street about 6.30 pm on 28 September 1997. Apparently counsel also took some photographs early on 29 September 1997. Mr Easton said that there were sodium lights on both sides of the street and that these lights cast a very bright orange coloured light. By contrast both Colin and MacDonald Streets were dark.

Some 15 photographs were admitted into evidence and they covered views of
Punchbowl Road, MacDonald Street and Colin Street.

At the trial counsel for the appellant Nguyen challenged the accuracy and honesty of Middleton and Cunningham. Counsel relied on these points: 
The Crown had not proved that Nguyen was a participant in any joint enterprise. The Crown had not proved that the appellant Nguyen was present, knew that heroin was being supplied and that he was ready to assist or encourage. Nguyen had simply got out of the Celica and walked to the phone box and up and down the footpath in MacDonald Street. He did not get into the undercover operative's car and he did not take part in negotiations. He did not have any weapons and it was perfectly natural for him to take off when trouble arose with which he had nothing to do. The events in Punchbowl Road did not assist the Crown case and the Crown had effectively "dumped" that part of its case.

Harris said that about 9.05 pm Nguyen was around the phone box whereas the officers in Punchbowl Road said that he was around there. Perhaps there was more than one man involved.

It was highly improbable that anyone would select the brightly lit
Punchbowl Road as the place for passing or inspecting the plastic bag and its contents.

There was a lack of objective evidence of a plastic bag being passed as alleged. This was not put to Tran when he was interviewed.

Nguyen did not have a mobile phone, did not take part in the negotiations and no, tools of trade were found upon him.

The Crown had not proved the identification of Nguyen as one of the participants beyond reasonable doubt. Nguyen was a stranger and the police had limited opportunity to observe him. It was dark in MacDonald and Colin
Streets. The police in Punchbowl Road were too far away. The descriptions given of the man were varied and rudimentary.

The missing surveillance sheets and the other missing notes.

Tran relied on: 
The Crown had not proved that he was a participant in any joint enterprise. It was not disputed that there had been a supply of heroin by others. However, Tran was not involved.

His denials of involvement in the record of interview.

The police or some of them were lying.

The surveillance records were missing.

The search or lack of search by the police of the BMW and his assertion that the police searched the vehicle and found nothing.

The unsatisfactory police account of what allegedly happened in Punchbowl
Road and their inability to see much because of their distance from the events and the conditions on the night, the improbability of the alleged passing of the plastic bag in Punchbowl Road.

No messages being picked up on the mobile phone used by Tran.

The judge invited the jury to take the view that what happened in Punchbowl
Road was never really a major part of the Crown case and that the major part of the Crown case was the transfer of the heroin in MacDonald Street. The judge made it clear that this was a matter for them. The judge warned the jury of the dangers of identification evidence.

Tran's Appeal 
Appeal Ground 1 - His Honour erred in directing that a witness Michael
Easton be recalled after the trial judge's summing up to the jury had been completed.

At p 8 of his Summing Up the judge told the jury that they had to decide the case on the evidence which had been given and that they could not have more evidence. He explained that the system used was an adversarial not an inquisitorial system. He continued: "A case is presented as counsel see appropriate and I do not have any power myself except in the most exceptional circumstances to call witnesses." 
At SU 33 the judge said: "Be cautious of the photographs, or at least one of them. The photograph that was taken in MacDonald Street looking west to Punchbowl Road was taken by Mr
Easton standing on the footpath in line with the trees and not on the road, which was the position of Harris as he made his observations." 
That comment was unobjectionable.

Later, the judge in referring to Harris' evidence observed that the street lighting was on the other side of MacDonald Street to Harris but added that Mr
Harris said that the phone box was well illuminated. The judge then said at SU :
 "You might think, ladies and gentlemen, perhaps that Mr Easton took a misleading photograph in exhibit 12. If you have a look at it you will see quite clearly that the photographer has been on the footpath, if anything to the left of the line of trees, whereas Harris' position would have been on his evidence, in a car to the right of that kerb. You will see that the trees in these photographs, taken at the end of September, have a good deal of foliage on them, at that time of the year at least. That is photograph 12 in exhibit "3B".

The evidence was that photograph 12 depicted the view from MacDonald Street looking from a position opposite Holland Place towards Punchbowl Road and that a number of trees had been planted in the nature strip between the footpath and the road.

Counsel reminded the judge that it was counsel not Mr Easton who took the photographs. Counsel asked the judge to withdraw specifically his statement that the jury might think that Mr Easton took a misleading photograph and to tell the jury that Mr Easton was not questioned in relation to any misleading photograph and therefore was deprived of the opportunity of explaining the photograph.

Counsel also asked the judge to specifically tell the jury that the aspect of the photograph was not addressed upon by the Crown and therefore counsel for the defence had had no opportunity to counter the judge's remarks.

The Crown Prosecutor initially asked the judge not to say anything about photograph 12. The judge stated that he was going to invite counsel to re-call
Mr Easton and ask what questions they wish about that. The Crown Prosecutor stated that he did not cross examine on the photographs. As he started to explain the reason the judge intervened.

As to the recalling of Mr Easton the judge stated: "I don't think I will actually invite it so much. I will order it because it was Mr Coorey [for Tran] and not you [Mr Stratton] [for Nguyen] who was complaining about the matter and I want it to be clear that he has the opportunity to further cross examine Mr Easton about it." 
Mr Stratton advised the judge that he had had some discussions with the Crown and that there was a proposal that might short circuit what the judge proposed and avoid Mr Easton being called. The judge stated that it was not a matter between Mr Stratton and the Crown but between the judge and Mr Coorey.

Mr Coorey sought clarification. He wanted to know if the judge was calling Mr
Easton. The judge replied in the negative, stating that he was ordering Mr
Easton to come back to the witness box so Mr Coorey could ask him further questions.

Mr Coorey stated that he had no complaint with Mr Easton and that his complaint was with the judge's expression that Mr Easton had taken a misleading photograph. Mr Coorey reiterated that his complaint was with the judge and what he said to the jury, that topic not being the subject of cross examination by the Crown. Mr Coorey stated that he did not wish to ask Mr
Easton any further questions. The judge said that he would take his own course.

This was one of many matters to which objection had been taken. The judge gave the jury some further directions. His concluding remarks of those directions were: "You may recall that I made some observations to you concerning photograph 12 in exhibit `3B'. That was the photograph taken from the footpath in Macdonald
Street looking towards Punchbowl Road and which I suggested to you was taken left of the tree line whereas the more relevant place to have taken it would have been to the right of the tree line, bearing in mind that Harris was in the driver's seat of a car parked at the kerb. It has been put to me that by my saying that, and it not having been raised specifically by counsel for the
Crown, counsel for Mr Tran has been deprived of the opportunity of putting questions to explain the photograph. I am therefore going to order that Mr
Easton come back into the witness box now and be resworn so that Mr Coorey will have the opportunity, if he so wishes, to ask him further questions about that photograph." 
On Mr Easton being recalled both Mr Stratton and Mr Coorey declined the judge's invitation to ask any questions. Obviously keen to avert the situation caused by the judge's unfortunate remarks the Crown Prosecutor elicited from
Mr Easton that photograph 12 was taken just to provide a general view of
MacDonald Street from the eastern side of the street and that it was not suggested that it represented the view of any particular police officer. This was more explicit than the evidence originally given. That evidence did not suggest that that photograph represented the particular view which any nominated police officer had or would have had.

The judge gave the jury a few further directions extending over 2 pages.
Towards the end of these he corrected his earlier statement that the photographs had been taken by Mr Easton and accepted that they had been taken by counsel. Unfortunately, the judge did not deal with his earlier misguided remark. He did not withdraw it or tell the jury to ignore it. The photograph was not misleading if it was used for the purpose envisaged by Mr Easton. It was only misleading if used for the purpose envisaged by the judge and the person looking at the photograph did not realise the position on the footpath from which the photograph had been taken.

Counsel for the appellants made a twofold complaint. This was not a case where the judge was justified in calling or recalling a witness nor was he justified in allowing or re-opening the evidence after he had concluded his summing up and had reached the stage of correcting errors and repairing omissions. The problem which arose was one of the judge's own making and was not one in which counsel for the appellants or the Crown wished to be involved.

Counsel for Tran did not approach the matter on the basis that the District
Court lacked power to admit evidence after the Summing Up had concluded but counsel for Nguyen did . It is unnecessary for this Court to decide that point and to revisit Dryburgh v. The Queen <case>; [(1961) 105 CLR 532] at 534-5, Regina v. Picknell (1969) 90 WN (Pt 1) 731 at 734 and Shaw v. the Queen <case>; [(1952) 85 CLR 365.] This was not a case where any power to admit evidence after the Summing Up should have been exercised. My own view is that the Court does have a discretion but that it should be exercised sparingly and only in those cases where there would be a manifest injustice if the power were not exercised. One case would be where a witness has given evidence against an accused and seeks to return to the witness box to say that the evidence was false or that he made a major mistake. It would not be possible to give a comprehensive list. A court should be particularly hesitant about allowing the
Crown to re-open to strengthen its case.

In the present case the judge seems to have overlooked the initial evidence of
Mr Easton as to what photograph 12 showed. That photograph was not regarded as important by any counsel and was not relied upon by any of them for the purpose envisaged by the judge.

On no view was it correct for the judge to recall Mr Easton and certainly not after the Summing Up had been concluded, subject to corrections. Such a course fell well outside the bounds of a sound exercise of the judge's discretion.

The Crown submitted that the additional evidence of Mr Easton cleared the matter up and that the jury would have realised that there was nothing objectionable about the photograph given the purpose it was intended to serve.

The Crown submitted that the word "misleading" did not carry the overtone of "deceptive". There can be an innocent misrepresentation. In common parlance, however, the word "misleading" often carries the overtone of deception. At the very least a statement or photograph which is misleading, is unreliable and likely to give a wrong impression. If a statement or photograph is misleading the matter is serious whether the misrepresentation is deliberate or not. It is not the kind of description which a judge should employ if the parties have not addressed or raised the point.

The jury knew that counsel had taken the photographs. He had addressed them at length and been critical of the honesty and accuracy of the police evidence.
The judge's description of what counsel had done in taking photograph 12 as misleading could well have undermined the value of his submissions in the jury's eyes. Counsel for the appellants were not invited to address the jury after Mr Easton's evidence. That was a matter of complaint on appeal.

The Crown contended that the proviso should be applied as there was no miscarriage of justice. The submission was based on the evidence elicited from
Mr Easton by the Crown on his being recalled by the judge and also on the strength of the Crown case.

The course taken by the judge represented a significant departure from correct practice. Further, the departure was based on insubstantial grounds. The offending and erroneous description was never withdrawn. It is important in a criminal trial that correct practice and procedure be followed. It was a pity that so much attention was devoted to the matter of photograph 12 immediately before the jury retired. I would not apply the proviso. Reluctantly, I have come to the conclusion that there must be a new trial.

Appeal Ground 2 was not pressed.

Appeal Ground 3 - His Honour erred in inviting the jury to speculate as to possible reasons for the Crown's failure to call the witness Owens and in failing to give a Jones v. Dunkel direction about the inferences that could be drawn from the Crown's failure to call him.

Det Supt Owens was seated in the driver's seat of the stationary car in the car park area beside Punchbowl Road and opposite that part of Punchbowl Road between MacDonald and Colin Streets. The car was closer to the MacDonald
Street end of the block and it remained in its partly obscured position for some time. Owens would be expected to have a better view out of the driver's side window than Det Stinson. At SU 28-29 the judge said: "You remember that Stinson said he had to bob his head a bit to and fro to look out the driver's side to see what was going on in Punchbowl Road and Mr
Coorey said that you should also infer that Owens cannot assist the Crown case because he was not called. But in his case there may be an explanation. How many witnesses do you call in a case like this? We have heard that there were up to 30 police involved in this surveillance exercise. You might think it would be unreasonable to call each and every one of them. It is put, however, that Owens was a critical witness because he was the driver of that car and therefore closer to the alleged movements in Punchbowl Road than Stinson, the man sitting next to him. Well, that is a matter for you. The two men were pretty close to each other and you might think, for example, that it was appropriate for the person in the driver's seat to be concentrating on being able to drive his car away quickly if he had to do so, while the other man carried out the observations. One just does not know. However, there may be some explanation for that detective not giving evidence. If you do not think there is, well certainly you can in that situation assume that he would not have been able to assist the Crown case." 
No evidence was led by the Crown explaining why Owens was not called.

This Court has been furnished with a copy of the statement of Owens made on 3
July 1996. He was acting in a supervisory capacity in relation to the operation. His statement does not deal with the events which took place between 9.02 pm and 9.32 pm. He has written that shortly after 9.32 pm in company with Det Stinson he drove around the streets in the vicinity of
MacDonald Street, Lakemba. After hearing a radio message from Det Rope he drove up Lakemba Street to King Georges Road and pulled up in that road alongside the appellant Nguyen. Det Stinson alighted, spoke with Nguyen and arrested him.

Counsel for the appellant Tran contended that the statement of Owens did not support the evidence of Stinson. Owens makes no mention of the carrying and passing of the plastic bag. Counsel contended that Det Supt Owens was an important witness. This Court does not know why Owens does not deal with the events between 9.02 and 9.32 pm and the alleged passing along Punchbowl Road of the green BMW.

It is a matter of debate whether the evidence of what occurred in Punchbowl
Road was important. That was a question for the jury. On one view it was peripheral. However, what occurred in MacDonald Street was important and the heart of the Crown case.

The judge did give a direction that if the jury did not think there was an explanation for Owens not giving evidence they could assume that he would not have been able to assist the Crown case. However, the judge speculated about the reasons why Owens may not have been called. He said that there may be an explanation but one was never given in evidence. The jury should have been told that if they regarded Owens as potentially an important witness, they could, if they wished, draw the inference that he could not assist the Crown case by supporting what Stinson said. If the jury thought that Owens was not a potentially important witness the question of not calling him did not arise.
It would have been open to the jury to take the view that a senior officer such as a superintendent exercising overall supervision was not likely to be concentrating on making detailed surveillance observations and noting them.

The judge was asked to redirect the jury and tell them not to speculate and also that there was no evidence as to why Owens was not called. The judge did not re-direct the jury. The judge's treatment of the point in the Summing Up was not satisfactory.

Appeal Ground 4 - His Honour erred in failing to direct the jury that the failure of each appellant to give evidence did not constitute an admission of guilt by each appellant.

The judge explained to the jury that the Crown bore the onus of satisfying them beyond reasonable doubt that each appellant was part of a joint enterprise to supply heroin and that neither of them had to prove anything.
The judge stated that neither appellant was under any obligation to give evidence although each could have done so and been subject to cross examination. The judge continued at SU 19-21: "You are not permitted to infer guilt simply from the failure of each accused to give evidence. There may be reasons unknown to you and to me why the accused, if able to contradict or explain some of the Crown evidence, chose to remain silent. For example, they might have thought that they could not do justice to themselves under cross-examination. Or they might have simply preferred to put the prosecution to proof of its case beyond reasonable doubt, relying on their legal right to remain silent. There may have been other reasons.

The accused Tran may simply have wanted to rely on what he said to the police in the audio visual interview. However, notwithstanding all those points there is a way in which you may be entitled to have regard to the failure of either accused to give evidence. It is this. If you infer that the Crown case is clearly correct or strongly probable on any particular point which quite obviously must be within the knowledge of either accused such inference may be more safely drawn by you because it has not been added to, explained, varied or contradicted by oral evidence given in the witness box by either accused and subject to cross-examination. So a failure to deny or explain may make evidence which you already think clearly correct, or strongly probable, even more convincing.

However, the law is full of qualifications and "ifs and buts". I am sorry to complicate things but you must bear this in mind. The failure of either accused to give evidence cannot be used by you to makeup for any deficiency or deficiencies which you might think already exist in the Crown case. If you think that the Crown evidence is insufficient, either in quality or in extent you cannot use the failure of either accused to give evidence as a make weight to make good such insufficiency, that is, to fill in any gaps in the Crown case.

Let me give you two illustrations. If you believe that it is clearly to be inferred that Tran, that is the first accused was driving the BMW and handed from it to Cuong in MacDonald Street, the drug which Cuong then passed to
Harris, you could use the failure of Tran to give evidence in denial of that to strengthen your inference that Tran did in fact pass over the drug to
Cuong, Tran not having given evidence in the witness box to the contrary.

Second illustration. If you believe that it is clearly to be inferred that
Hung, the second accused, was standing on the footpath in MacDonald Street when the drug was handed by Cuong to Harris the undercover man, as a lookout, guard or protector or otherwise to assist, encourage or support the transaction, you could use the failure of Hung to give evidence in denial of that to strengthen your inference that Hung was there in that capacity and for that purpose, he not having given evidence on oath in the witness box, and subject to cross-examination, to the contrary.

The Crown evidence has not been contradicted by any other evidence on oath and subject to cross-examination. No other version of the facts than that put forward by the Crown has been put forward and supported on oath and subject to cross-examination.

Any suggestions put to Crown witnesses and denied by them remain as no more than suggestions. That brings me back to what I told you earlier, that leading questions put in cross-examination are not, unless adopted or agreed, evidence. They remain as suggestions. It is the evidence which binds you, not the suggestions.

That is all I wish to say about the failure of the accused to give evidence." [Section (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/s20.html) of the [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) empowers the judge to comment on a failure of an accused person to give evidence subject to the qualification that the comment must not suggest that the accused failed to give evidence because he was or believed that he was guilty of the offence. In R v. OGD, CCA, 3 June 1997, unreported, it was stated by Gleeson CJ (at 13) that the comment which was appropriate must always depend to an extent upon the facts and circumstances of the individual case. The Chief Justice explained that the failure of an accused person to give evidence cannot be treated as an admission, by conduct, of guilt and that this must be explained to a jury.

I would regard a direction to a jury that they were not permitted to infer guilt from the failure of the accused to give evidence as sufficient. It is not necessary to use the precise words employed by Gleeson CJ.

Counsel attacked the phrase "to infer guilt simply from the failure." The vice allegedly lay in the use of the word "simply". It was submitted that this meant that the jury could infer guilt from the failure to give evidence when there is some additional reason to infer guilt. This is reading too much into the word "simply".

I reject this ground.

Appeal Ground 5 - His Honour erred in failing to direct the jury that identification evidence may be unreliable.

The judge did not state in terms that the identification evidence may be unreliable. However, he gave the jury comprehensive directions about identification evidence and how it can be "mistaken" or "wholly mistaken" . He told the jury, "wrong identification evidence is sometimes given in courts."
He explained that there were dangers of convicting on identification evidence where its reliability was disputed and that it "should always be examined most carefully." He stated that it was "the experience of the courts ... that sometimes identification evidence has led to injustice." 
The directions given were an adequate compliance with [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s165.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) . It is not necessary for the judge to use any particular form of words.

I reject this ground.

Appeal Ground 6 - His Honour erred in failing to give the jury adequate directions in relation to identification evidence and ... in failing to direct the jury that a number of defective identifications do no necessarily support each other.

I have earlier expressed the view that the judge gave comprehensive directions as to identification.

The appellants relied on these passages in the Summing Up: "Two or more witnesses can be just as mistaken as one. [SU 22]....

In addition, you would be entitled to take into account in the present case the cumulative effect of different officers making corroborative observations and identifications. Just as I said to you that several persons as well as one person can be mistaken, so several persons can corroborate each other. It is a matter for you. It is a question of fact. [SU 25]" 
As the judge stated that witnesses can be highly mistaken and that two or more witnesses can be just as mistaken as one, it is apparent that two mistaken or defective identifications do not support one another. It is equally obvious that there can be a cumulative effect of corroborative observations as the judge remarked. Having been alerted to the problems it was for the jury to make its findings of fact. The judge correctly left the matter with the jury.

This ground of appeal is rejected.

Appeal Ground 6A - The trial judge failed to direct the jury adequately and erred in his directions in relation to the assessment of the Crown witnesses and in particular the contradictions in the evidence of the Crown witnesses.

Counsel explained that Ground 6A was linked with the complaint in Ground 6 that the judge had not given adequate directions as to identification evidence.

Tran noted that the trial judge told the jury that the police evidence was uncontradicted by other evidence (SU 30). He had expressed a similar view at
SU 23 and added that no version of the facts other than that advanced by the
Crown had been put forward, supported on oath and subjected to cross examination. At SU 30 the judge said: "Think about this, if the alleged crime did not happen the way the Crown alleged it to have happened how did it happen?" 
Tran complained that this was inappropriate when the Crown bore the onus of proof. In the context I do not think that this was impermissible. There was a supply of drugs. There was evidence of a green BMW stopping beside the Celica and a parcel in a plastic bag being delivered.

Tran also complained that the judge failed to tell the jury that the evidence of some police officers was contradicted by the evidence of other police officers. Many of the differences related to whether it was raining at particular times and the degree to which it was raining and the effect of the rain in making observations on a dark night. The overall effect of the evidence was that there was rain from time to time and that the streets were wet. I do not regard this matter as being of consequence. There was also the issue of where particular people were at particular times.

Tran asked the judge to inform the jury of the matters which may cause the evidence of the police officers to be unreliable. These included that the whole of the Crown case was presented by police officers, there was no objective evidence such as fingerprints, photographs, telephone records or weapons, the police officers had the opportunity to fabricate their statements when they got together at the Campsie Police Station, the police officers relied on the surveillance sheets to prepare their statements and such sheets, the tapes of recorded messages and entries and computer discs had disappeared.
Counsel contended that the jury should have been told that there was no explanation (or no adequate explanation) as to how the surveillance sheets were lost. The loss of the surveillance sheets and the computer disc is unusual. It was further submitted that the disappearance of the tapes, surveillance sheets and computer disc prevented effective cross examination of the police officers. That assumes that they would provide good material for cross examination.

Tran contended that the whole police system was unreliable and that the disappearance of all the material supporting the observations highlighted it.
[Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s165.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) required the judge to tell the jury what may cause the evidence to be unreliable and he did not do so. Counsel submitted that while the judge spoke about the problems with distance and the other usual factors he left out the biggest point of all, namely, the contradictions in the police evidence which made it unreliable. The judge did not go through the contradictions in the police evidence although specifically asked to do so.

The judge drew attention to the relevance of the weather in assessing the capacity of the witnesses to observe what was happening and the people involved.

The points made by counsel were made during the hearing and some also emerged from the Summing Up. The judge did not gather together all the discrepancies in the police evidence and discuss them. They involved a considerable amount of detail which was better dealt with in address than in Summing Up. However, matters such as different police officers placing Nguyen in MacDonald Street and Punchbowl Road at the same time were mentioned. The distance involved was small.

Counsel complained that the judge did not fairly summarise the evidence in that he did not point out the weaknesses in the police evidence and the inroads made in cross examination.

The central feature of this prosecution was the delivery of heroin for reward.
The heroin was seized. The critical aspect of the involvement of each appellant was proved by evidence of Tran driving the BMW and handing the parcel across to Cuong near the Celica and Nguyen being with and close by
Cuong and Dung including when they were in the vehicle of the undercover operative.

Neither appellant called any evidence which contradicted or put in issue the evidence given by the police as to what happened in MacDonald Street, Colin
Street or Punchbowl Road. The judge mentioned that there had been some inconsistencies between the evidence given at the committal proceedings and at the trial and reminded the jury that such inconsistencies were relevant to the credibility of the particular witnesses.

It is time to enter a caveat. Counsel wanted to make much out of the evidence of the police officers revealing differences as to whether it was raining at a particular point, how heavy the rain was and its effect on visibility. It is a subject that lends itself to differences of view. Some people are almost unaffected by rain especially if wearing a wind or rain cheater unless it is very heavy. They may not take particular notice of it. Others are very conscious of it. The question of the precise times at which events happened was not of importance.

The primary purpose of the police officers was to observe and note what the appellants, Cuong and Dung did and the delivery and supply of prohibited drugs. It was not to report on the weather or times. There was a surfeit of detail in the present case, much of it of no importance. When a lot of detail is given there are likely to be discrepancies. The main thrust of the evidence on the central matters needed to be kept well to the fore. The judge had to be careful not to attribute too much weight to matters of detail and elevate them to a position which was unwarranted.

The discrepancies on which the appellants relied could not be said to cause the evidence and the identification evidence to be unreliable. [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s165.html) applies to evidence of a kind that may be unreliable. The evidence in question was not of such a kind. [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s165.html) does not usually apply where witnesses make different contemporaneous observations and statements about the time the events occur. That is an every day experience. The use of the surveillance sheets by the police officers was permissible.

Police evidence as such is not evidence that may be unreliable. In many cases there is the opportunity to fabricate evidence and this applies to witnesses for the Crown and witnesses for the defence. The existence of an opportunity to fabricate evidence does not mean that the evidence given may be unreliable.

While the appellants attached far too much weight to the contradictions or discrepancies my overall impression on reading the Summing Up is that the weaknesses in the Crown case did not receive as much attention as they deserved. The case for Tran was dealt with in the Summing Up in 13 lines and in a sketchy fashion. The summary could not be described as informative or as adequately putting Tran's case. It was necessary for me to comb through the papers to ascertain his defence and the details of it. The record of interview helped me to do so. Curiously, the defence of Nguyen was put reasonably.

The judge did not direct the jury adequately as to the defence of Tran. The judge was asked to do so by a series of requests for further directions.

Appeal Ground 7 - The verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory.

Tran submitted that the Crown case depended entirely on the accuracy and honesty of police officers who observed his movements and those of others in
Colin and MacDonald Streets and Punchbowl Road. Police officers gave evidence that they recorded their observations and the times.

Tran contended that their evidence of surveillance could not be regarded as honest and accurate having regard to their different evidence as to the rain when they were making contemporaneous recordings of their observations. Nor could the alleged drug transfer which allegedly took place in Punchbowl Road be accepted. That was highly improbable. I do not share this view. An outsider would not have realised that a drug transfer was taking place. A plastic bag being handed from one person to another is not an unusual event. Nor is it unusual that it was being handed back. Emphasis was placed on the disappearance of the tapes and surveillance sheets and the difficulty, if not virtual impossibility of checking the surveillance sheets.

Having made my own independent assessment of the evidence I do not regard the verdict as unsafe and unsatisfactory. It was for the jury to decide whether to accept the police evidence that the disappearance of the surveillance sheets was not sinister but due to misadventure or carelessness. Even that was a subsidiary issue. There was ample evidence from an appreciable number of police officers spread over the three streets as to what took place and the involvement of the appellants, Cuoung and Dung culminating in the supply of heroin. Neither appellant gave evidence contradicting that of the police officers. The case against Tran was cogent.

This ground of appeal is rejected.

Regrettably, there must be a new trial. Tran did not have the trial which the law requires.

Nguyen's Appeal 
Many of Nguyen's grounds of appeal correspond with grounds taken by Tran. Much of what I have written in Tran's appeal applies to Nguyen's appeal.

Appeal Grounds 1, 3, 4, 7, 8 and 10A in Nguyen's appeal correspond with grounds 1, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 6A in Tran's appeal. The reasons given in relation to those grounds in Tran's appeal apply to the corresponding grounds of appeal in Nguyen's appeal. Nguyen did not press Appeal Ground 2.

Appeal Ground 5 - His Honour erred in failing to direct the jury adequately [or] at all in relation to the use the jury could make of evidence of the alleged flight of the accused Hung Nguyen.

In his Summing Up the judge included this in his summary of the Crown address: "Why did Hung run when the police arrived? It was put to you that you might well infer that it was because he had been involved in a drug deal" 
In his summary of the address of counsel for Hung Nguyen the judge said: "[Counsel] said when trouble arose he took off and why would he not? He had no weapon on him and it was a perfectly natural response for anyone to run off when trouble seemed brewing." 
Counsel for Nguyen asked the judge to withdraw the Crown's submission from the jury or direct the jury that they would only be entitled to use that evidence against Nguyen if they were satisfied that the only explanation for the accused running away was his consciousness of guilt. The Crown conceded that the accused was entitled to such a direction. The judge gave no direction.

The Crown pointed out that the appellant Nguyen did not challenge the evidence of Jones that Nguyen had run away with Dung but confirmed that they did not run side by side. Hung Nguyen did not dispute that he ran away from the scene.
His point is that the judge never told the jury how they should approach the use of that evidence. The Crown also relied on the circumstantial evidence direction but the general direction given fell far short of telling the jury that they could not use the evidence of flight as evidence of a consciousness of guilt unless they were satisfied that he ran away because he believed he was guilty and not for some other reason. The matter needed to be explained briefly. Flight can be a weighty matter against an accused and the jury should have been correctly and adequately directed.

Appeal Ground 6 - His Honour erred in failing to direct the jury that the accused crying was not evidence of his consciousness of guilt, or in failing to give the jury directions as to the proper use that could be made of the evidence that the appellant was crying.

At 3.35 am on the morning following his arrest when Nguyen was finally taken to an interview room he asked if he could do the interview later. He said that he felt sick and that his head was hurting. He had an injury to his head and was in police custody. He became upset and started to cry. An innocent man could become upset and cry in such circumstances.

The Crown Prosecutor conceded that he did say something about crying in his address to the jury "with a bit of a flurry." He suggested that the jury should be told that it was a possible explanation for crying that the accused was ill. The Crown Prosecutor did not believe that he used the expression "consciousness of guilt." The aspect of crying could not fairly be said to go to any issue in the case. In the circumstances it proved nothing and the jury should have been told so and told to ignore it.

Appeal Ground 9 - His Honour erred in admitting the identification evidence of the witnesses Cunningham and Rope on the basis that there was a relationship between the witnesses and the accused Hung Nguyen.

It is unnecessary to canvass the detailed arguments presented to the Court.
The judge relied on [s (3)(c)(ii)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s114.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) and was entitled to and right to do so. It was not reasonable to hold an identification parade because the identification was made about the time of the commission of the offence. In the case of Det Rope it was made in King
Georges Road within 15 minutes of the commission of the offence or less and in the case of Det Cunningham within a short period thereafter that evening at
Campsie Police Station.

Appeal Ground 10 - His Honour erred in failing to direct the jury that a weakness of the identification evidence of the witnesses was that they did not see the face of the suspect alleged to be the appellant Hung Nguyen.

That was a significant matter and the direction sought should have been given despite the fact that there was other cogent evidence of identification.

Appeal Ground 11 - The verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory.

I reject this ground. I rely on the reasons earlier given as to ground 7 in
Tran's appeal.

There was ample and cogent evidence of Nguyen's involvement in the supply of the heroin.

In each appeal I propose the following orders:
Appeal against conviction allowed; Conviction and the consequent sentence quashed;
There be a new trial.

IRELAND J: I agree with the orders proposed by Smart J for the reasons given by his Honour. 
DUNFORD J: I agree with the orders proposed by Smart J for the reasons given by his Honour. * * * 
