

Richardson versus Gill Matter No 2575/97 [1997] NSWSC 489 (16 October 1997) 
Last Updated: 4 March 1998 
Richardson versus Gill /97 October 1997 
Young J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: These proceedings, which were transferred from the Family Court of Australia, were heard concurrently with proceedings 1860 of 1997 involving the estate of the late Roger Kevin Pedler. The findings that I made as to credibility in 1860 of 1997, in which reasons for judment are being handed down concurrently with these present reasons, apply to the present suit without the necessity for repeating them. 
Essentially, the facts are that the plaintiff appeared to be the de facto wife of Roger Kevin Pedler who died on 25 August 1994. The plaintiff and Mr Pedler were living together in a property at 2 Woodward Road, Hunters Hill. Those premises had never been finished. After Mr Pedler died, the plaintiff retained the defendant, a builder, to bring the property up to a better standard. It would appear that whilst the defendant was working on the property he and the plaintiff became friendly and they married on 23 December 1996.

At the time of the proposal, the defendant was living with a lady called
Vanessa. Vanessa and the defendant had at least one child, and they were living at Ourimbah on the central coast. The plaintiff thought that the deal was that if she gave a car to the defendant to give to Vanessa, Vanessa would give up certain rights. She says she provided the car. However, it would seem that the defendant never ever told Vanessa that he had got married and did not implement the deal on his part.

The plaintiff's version of the wedding day is as follows. The wedding was a civil ceremony in the afternoon, after which the parties resorted to a hotel.
At the hotel the defendant rang home and then he said that one of the children had come home and that he needed to go back to Ourimbah. The plaintiff thus spent her wedding night alone. She says that the parties have never cohabited, but whether that is so or not does not really matter very much for present purposes.

The plaintiff had obtained considerable moneys from the estate of Roger
Pedler. As things have turned out and as a result of my decision in the allied proceedings, she will need to refund virtually all those moneys.

There is no dispute that the plaintiff handed the defendant $165,000 in cash over a period of about six to eight weeks. The defendant says that he has gambled the whole of that money away at various casinos. He says that the moneys were a gift and that he understood that they were to be used as he felt like it and that in due course the plaintiff would supply more money so that he and she could buy a hotel together.

By about 22 February 1997, relations between the parties had deteriorated to such an extent that they could both see the marriage was virtually over. The plaintiff says that this came about because she was asked to report as stolen a backhoe belonging to the estate and she refused to do so. The defendant says that it is because the plaintiff confessed to him that she had destroyed a valid will of Roger Pedler and he had told her that he was not going to become part of her fraud. Whatever the reason, on 6 March 1997, the plaintiff commenced proceedings in the Family Court of Australia to recover back her money.

The above sketches the dispute between the parties. I must now deal with the matter in greater detail, and evaluate the evidence.

The plaintiff says that the marriage came about because she told the defendant that she was 43 and always wanted to have a child and the defendant replied, "I can get you pregnant." They went to the IVF Clinic at Bondi Junction. At about the same time, the defendant produced a letter from the Building
Services Corporation showing that he needed to provide evidence that he had $30,000. The parties went to the National Australia Bank at Bondi Junction, and whilst the plaintiff was preparing to withdraw the $30,000, the defendant said, "Vanessa has demanded a car in exchange for allowing us to get married and for me to keep custody of my son Adam, so give me an extra $5,000, I've already put a deposit for it." The plaintiff said, "Okay." The defendant said, "You'll get it back." The plaintiff then transferred $35,000 from her cheque account to the defendant's cheque account.

The defendant said later that week, "I've bought Vanessa a Toyota Landcruiser.
It's a diesel and maroon colour." Later on that week he said, "I still haven't got the money to show the Building Services Corporation, can I borrow another $30,000. You will get it back." The plaintiff said "Yes". They went to the
National Australia Bank at Macquarie Centre and the plaintiff transferred $30,000 to the defendant's account.

The parties went away to Queensland during January 1997 and their relationship wasn't completely happy. Whilst they were in Queensland the defendant said, "When we get back just to prove you trust me you better give me the $100,000 that you've got left because you've been doling the money out in bits and pieces." The plaintiff says she said, "I am not real happy about that." On 24
January 1997, the defendant arrived at the plaintiff's Hunters Hill property and said, "We will go to the bank now and do something about that $100,000."
They both went to the National Australia Bank at Macquarie Centre. The defendant said, "I'll invest it for you. I'll put it in one of those 90 days deposits and give you the interest." The plaintiff wrote out five cheques each for the sum of $20,000 payable to the defendant.

The defendant says that the first $35,000 was paid to him for building work, $30,000 for work done in clearing 2 Woodward Road, Hunters Hill and $5,000 for building a retaining sea wall on that property. He says that the $30,000 was paid as a reward for his exertions in removing debris and rubbish from the
Hunters Hill property and for out of pocket expenses. He claims that the $100,000 was paid to him out of natural love and affection and was substantially expended in extravagant living and gambling at casinos. However, of this $100,000, he returned $30,000 to the plaintiff, being one payment of $20,000, a second payment of $2,000 and sundry other payments totalling $8,000. He says that he only has $9,000 left which he claims is "matrimonial property".

The plaintiff also asked for return of a Viscount caravan and a backhoe for a model Clark bobcat and that the defendant account for about $34,200 paid to him on other occasions. The defendant says as to these, that he sold the caravan for $1,200, the plaintiff had sold the backhoe and that not one of the payments referred to by the plaintiff in the claim for $34,200 was paid to him.

The defendant's affidavit repeated much of this material, but he says that as far as the $100,000 is concerned, he went to the Macquarie Centre branch of the National Australia Bank with the plaintiff where she wrote out five cheques, each for $20,000, and deposited them in his account, saying, "This will prove that I love you." She said, "I'll have to give you five cheques each for $20,000 as I can't write out $100,000 in one cheque." He says that on February 1997, the plaintiff said to him over the telephone, "I gave you the money, now I want it back." He denies that he did not spend his wedding night with the plaintiff. He also denies threatening to kill the plaintiff's cats, though he does admit he said, "If I find one of your cats on the dining room table I'll kick it off." 
In cross examination by Mr Willmott for the plaintiff, the defendant said that it was the plaintiff's idea that the five cheques were deposited into his account on 24 January 1997. He admitted he withdrew $20,000 on 29 January in cash. He said all his withdrawals were from the Gosford branch of the National
Australia Bank. He then took the $20,000 to the Sydney Harbour Casino and he played the roulette wheel for hours and lost the lot except "a few hundred to get home." Two days later he withdrew another $20,000, again in cash. He went to Jupiter's Gold Coast Casino with the plaintiff, the plaintiff had the $20,000 in her purse. The plaintiff, at the defendant's request, handed him $5,000 or $3,000 or $2,000 at a time. He was playing two-up during the night and lost the lot. On 7 February 1997, he withdrew another $20,000 which he thinks he gave to the plaintiff. The cross examination then passed on to the $65,000. It was put to Mr Gill that in fact the plaintiff had made substantial progress payments to the defendant whilst the building work was going on, out of which he paid sub-contractors and for materials. The defendant, to my mind, became rather vague about this, merely suggesting that the plaintiff was telling lies, that she did not give the money to him at all, that her records may have been invented, and that in any event, the plaintiff had no money before about December to pay him.

The defendant admitted that he paid $36,400 on 27 November 1996 to buy a car for Vanessa. He says, however, that the $5,000, being part of the $35,000, had nothing to do with that car. It was for putting up the sea wall. When asked whether it was the fact that the sea wall was actually put up after the payment, he acknowledged that it was a payment in advance. The defendant admitted that he did have his accountant show the Building Services
Corporation that he had at least $30,000 during January 1997, before he received $100,000.

The defendant gave his evidence in a fairly "devil may care" manner. He did not hesitate in just calling the plaintiff's evidence lies or saying that it was garbage and, generally speaking, was rather slim on detail. I recognize that the task of a person trying to establish a denial is harder than that of a person trying to establish an affirmative fact, but one still does expect defendants who are taking the proceedings seriously, to endeavour to put forward material which will back up their point of view. Everybody is familiar with the tactic "no case just abuse".

As I have said earlier, the defendant in his affidavit said that the plaintiff asked for the money back on 14 February 1997. However, when endeavouring to bounce cross examining counsel at T88, he was asked - 
Q. "In your affidavit you say she asked for the money to be paid back on 14 February?" 
A. "There must be a mistake in the print because there was no way I said 14 February. It was Valentine's Day. No wife would ever ask for money back on Valentine's Day. We were quite happy and it was not mentioned." 
Q. "Sometime in February she asked for the money back?" 
A. "No." 
Mr Gill said although he did not, by himself or his workmen, break into the plaintiff's house, he did go into the house in February and put two disks in the plaintiff's computer and copied what was on it.

The defendant did not make a good impression on me at all when giving his evidence. His basic attitude appeared to be fairly consistent with the picture of the person described in the plaintiff's affidavit, that is of a man who was accustomed to obtaining his way and resorting to devices to avoid his liabilities. Indeed, even the defendant said that he got a very rude shock when he found that the plaintiff had not only commenced proceedings in the
Family Court against him, but had also had the temerity to freeze his bank account. No-one had ever done that to him before! 
The plaintiff was strongly cross examined by Mr Shaw for the defendant. She did show that she was not a good book-keeper, and indeed, she had very great difficulty in showing that she had paid for the defendant's building work in addition to the moneys which she had paid to him in November/December.
Certainly she could not establish anything like the $34,200 she said she paid in bits and pieces. However, I cannot see sufficient evidence to make an order for the defendant to account for any part of the $34,200.

In general, although the plaintiff is not a particularly reliable witness, it seems to me the balance of probabilities favoured me accepting her evidence rather than the evidence of the defendant.

It seems to me that the evidence of the plaintiff touches reality more often than the evidence of the defendant. I am not so naive to ignore the rules that, "The best liar is he or she who makes the smallest amount of lying go the longest way", (Samuel Butler, Truth and Convenience) and that, "The real liar does not tell wanton and unnecessary lies. He tells wise and necessary lies" (The Paradoxes of Mr Pond by GK Chesterton). However, when one sees that some of the plaintiff's statements are anchored to concrete events but the defendant's are not, then one tends to favour the plaintiff.

The plaintiff says that the defendant needed $30,000 to show the Building
Services Corporation that he was a person of substance. The defendant does not deny this, but he says that his accountant showed the Building Services
Corporation that he had $30,000 and that this was payment for the work he did at Hunters Hill. I prefer the plaintiff's account. Next, the plaintiff says that the defendant asked for $35,000 to buy Vanessa a car. We know that the defendant did actually buy Vanessa a car at about this period.

To take another point, although it is always possibly true that someone won or lost money at the races or at a casino, the excuse is so often trotted out that people who rely on it must expect a court to look for some corroboration.
It may be difficult to find some corroboration, especially if one likes to gamble alone, and I have never heard it suggested that casinos give receipts.
The defendant says that the plaintiff was with him at Jupiter's Casino on the
Gold Coast and was handing him bundles of notes in one, two or five thousand dollar wads for him to gamble. In cross examination the plaintiff denied she had ever been with him at the casino on the Gold Coast. One would have thought that there might have been some corroboration provided one way or the other for this, but it never happened.

Moreover, the idea that the plaintiff was so smitten with love for the defendant that she would give him $100,000 to live a high life and to do with as he pleased seems quite contrary to the picture painted of the parties by the rest of the evidence. Although older women can get afflicted with lovesickness, the plaintiff showed no signs of it, and indeed, the experiences that she related showed that right from the beginning the marriage was not likely to be successful. However, it is far more likely that her story is correct that she gave the money to the defendant to invest at interest.
Indeed, reading between the lines, another reason for handing the cash to Mr
Gill was to ensure that the money would not be in the plaintiff's name so that it could be hidden from the late Mr Pedler's son if events turned out as they have turned out in the allied proceedings.

The $35,000 was, on the plaintiff's evidence, money to be used to buy a car for Vanessa in consideration of her granting custody of the child of the union between Vanessa and the defendant, and perhaps too, giving up her rights to the defendant's consortium. This was never implemented because the defendant says that although he bought Vanessa a car, it was not with this money, and indeed, the rest of the arrangement was not put into place in any event.
Accordingly, this money should be returned to the plaintiff on the basis of a total failure of consideration.

Accordingly, I find that it is more likely than not that the payments of $30,000, $35,000 and $100,000 made by the plaintiff to the defendant were loans repayable on demand.

As to the other amounts which the plaintiff says she gave to the defendant, I am not satisfied that these were loans or, indeed, anything else other than payments for building work. The parties both adopted a cash economy style of living and there is just no reliable way in which one can follow through the various payments.

So far as the caravan is concerned, it would seem that it was sold for $1,200.
There is a dispute about the backhoe. As to the backhoe, I prefer the evidence of the plaintiff, but even preferring this evidence does not give me sufficient satisfaction that the defendant did something with the backhoe which makes him liable to account to the plaintiff or to the estate of the late Roger Pedler.

So far I have dealt with this matter purely as one of fact.

If a husband hands money to his wife, then, ordinarily, a presumption of gift will apply; see Jacobs on Trusts 6th ed (Butterworths Sydney 1997) [1217]. However, where a wife hands money to her husband there is no such presumption; Jacobs ibid and Mercier versus Mercier [[1903] 2 Ch .]
Furthermore, if in contemplation of marriage or in contemplation of a long marriage, property is given by a woman to a man, then there is usually a presumption of resulting trust; see eg the decision of McLelland, J in this
Court in Jobson versus Beckingham [(1983) 9 Fam LR 169.] Thus, merely by applying the general principles of the law, one gets to the result that the defendant should repay the $165,000 to the plaintiff.

Counsel referred me to the matter of Re Slattery (1976) 27 FLR 115, where the Full Court of the Family Court at p 120, held that the provisions of ss 72 and 79 of the Family Law Act, as they then existed, did not confer any jurisdiction upon the Family Court "to enable one spouse to recover from the other spouse either before or after a decree dissolving the marriage money paid by one to the other by way of loan during the marriage." 
It may be that had the definition of "matrimonial cause" in <case> of the Family
Law Act been as wide as it is today, that result might not have been reached, but that is hardly a reason for going against what the Family Court there said. Again, there may be an argument that the Family Court has jurisdiction under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/mposa1996396/s6.html) of the [Married Persons (Equality of Status) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/mposa1996396/) and so the result in Re Slattery has been altered by statute. As the Family
Court is a statutory court of the Commonwealth, it is hard to see how State legislation could invest it with jurisdiction. Accordingly, this may be a hard argument to run if anyone in the future is instructed to put it to the Family
Court. I thus put these thoughts to one side.

However, not only is this action transferred from the Family Court so that I have the powers of the Family Court, but I also have the powers of this Court.

Under the general law, a husband and a wife could not sue each other because the husband and wife were considered one as a matter of law. Section 119 of the Family Law Act provides that "Either party to a marriage may bring proceedings in contract or tort against the other party." That section does not confer any cause of action: Re Saba [(1984) 9 Fam LR 780], 785;
Re Rzetelski & Johnson <case>; [[1988] FLC 91-945] at p 76,833. In my view <case> merely lifts the common law barrier. Despite some controvesy, it would seem that the cause of action existed at common law if a married person had suffered loss at the hands of a spouse, but there was a barrier against enforcing the cause of action; see
Schubert versus August Schubert Wagon Co [163 NE 42], 43 (1928) (NY Court of
Appeals) which was followed by the Full Court in NSW in Waugh versus Waugh <case>; [(1950) 50 SR 210.] 
A debt recoverable under a count of money had and received, is not a claim in contract Pavey & Matthews Pty Ltd versus Paul <case>; [(1987) 162 CLR 221], 227 and 259. Thus, neither under <case> of the Family Law Act nor under <case> of the Married Persons (Property and Torts) Act 1901 would the barrier have been lifted. It should be noted, however, that under <case> of the Act, the Supreme Court may determine any question between husband and wife as to title to or possession of property. A debt is probably property within this definition; see Re Schreiber (1977) 30 FLR 409, 420.

These proceedings were commenced, however, on 6 March 1997. On 1 March 1997, six days earlier, the 1901 Act was repealed and replaced by the [Married
Persons (Equality of Status) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/mposa1996396/).
[Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/mposa1996396/s6.html) of that Act says; "A married person is entitled to civil and criminal redress against the person's spouse for the protection of his or her property as if that person were not married." 
That clearly allows a wife to sue her husband for repayment of money lent or for any other civil debt.

In the ordinary case, the wife seeking to proceed against her husband to recover a debt has a problem because if there are proceedings between parties to a marriage with respect to the property of one of the parties to the marriage which arise out of the marital relationship, the proceedings are a matrimonial cause under <case> of the Family Law Act and, subject to cross vesting, the Family Court alone has jurisdiction. The Family Court applies
Re Slattery and can give no relief. It is only if the matter is not a matrimonial cause that the State jurisdiction can be invoked and the wife (or husband as the case may be) can rely on <case> of the 1996 Act. The position is complicated by the fact that as far as I am aware, no court has ever decided what is meant in <case>(ca)(i) of the Family Law Act when it refers to a dispute with respect to property of one of the parties of the marriage "arising out of the marital relationship." If a wide definition of these words is taken, as suggested by Mr Broun QC at p 30,352 of the CCH Australian Family
Law and Practice, then it would hardly be ever that a wife could obtain the benefit of the New South Wales legislation unless the proceedings were cross- vested to this Court. However, as I say, the problem does not arise in this case, because there was a cross vesting order made by consent.

As I have found that <case> of the 1996 Act applies, I can merely order that the defendant pay the plaintiff the sum of $165,000 plus interest from 6 March at the rate laid down in Schedule J to the Supreme Court Rules.

This being so, it does not seem to me that I need to get into the area covered by <case> of the Family Law Act. Indeed, it is wise not to do so, because there has not yet been dissolution of marriage proceedings and the upshot of the associated litigation may very well have an effect on any final and complete severance order that is made with respect to the property of the parties to this marriage in due course. It would seem from Re Jackson [[1988] FLC -904](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1988%5d%20FLC%2091%2d904 "View LawCiteRecord" ) and Re Beneke [(1996) 20 Fam LR 841], that if and when a court finally considers what adjustments should be made between the parties under <case> of the Family Law Act, the present payments and any payments made before marriage can be taken into account.

I should note that submissions were put as to whether the payments made by the plaintiff could be recovered by her because they were made whilst under a disability, namely her infatuation. I was referred to Louth versus Diprose <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 621] especially at p 638. In view of what I have already said, it is not really necessary to consider these submissions. However, in view of my finding as to the main factors motivating the payment of the $100,000, the plaintiff would have great difficulty in demonstrating the required degree of lovesickness that would lead to the transaction being set aside on that ground.

Accordingly, the plaintiff is entitled to relief as I have indicated. The defendant must pay the plaintiff's costs, but it may be necessary for some particular order to be made as to costs because the proceedings were heard at the same time as the associated proceedings. Short minutes of order in respect of these proceedings can be brought in at the same time as the short minutes are brought in in the associated proceedings.
 * * * 
