

Nicolson versus Fathers Matter No 30064/96 [1998] NSWSC 91 (9 April 1998) 
Last Updated: 21 April 1998 
TERESA CECINI NICOLSON versus PAUL and MARION FATHERS 
T/as DPG CONSTRUCTIONS /96 April 1998 
Howie AJ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Administrative Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is a claim for prerogative relief, declarations and injunctions in respect of orders made by the building disputes tribunal[1]. Generally determinations of the tribunal are not open to judicial review[2]. But relief can be granted where a tribunal has made an order under the Act without jurisdiction or where a party has been denied natural justice[3]. In the present case it was contended that the tribunal had both made an order without jurisdiction and denied the plaintiffs natural justice. The Minister for Fair Trading intervened in the case in order to support the validity of the procedures adopted by the tribunal and the orders it made[4]. 
I should make it clear at the outset that if this matter were to be determined upon a consideration of the honesty of the plaintiffs or the morality of their conduct, the plaintiffs would have no basis at all for any relief from this
Court. I believe that both the plaintiffs have been untruthful in their evidence before me and that they have both been party to an endeavour to mislead the tribunal and this Court. They have been the pawns of Mr Anthony
Veghelyi, a person who has connived to ensure that the proceedings before the tribunal have been frustrated at every turn. If I had any discretion at all in this matter I would not hesitate to refuse relief. Regardless of the merits of the actual claim before the tribunal, the first defendants in these proceedings have cause to feel sorely aggrieved by the course that the proceedings have so far taken before the tribunal and, perhaps, the judgment of this Court.

The tribunal made two orders in this matter which have been attacked in these proceedings. The first matter raised concerns the jurisdiction of the tribunal to make an order in favour of the first defendants on 1 December 1995. The proceedings on that date were determined in the absence of any respondent to the claim. The contention is that the tribunal had failed to join the plaintiffs as parties to the proceedings and, therefore, had no jurisdiction to make the order that it did. The other complaint concerns an order made by the tribunal refusing a rehearing of the claim. It was contended that the plaintiffs were denied natural justice in that certain submissions they wished to be considered were not placed before the referee determining that application. Other complaints were made about procedures adopted by the tribunal, but, as matters have transpired during the hearing before me, those complaints are no longer pressed.

On 1 September 1994 a contract for building services was entered into between the first defendants and Mrs Veghelyi. A dispute arose between them as to the quality of the work carried out and Mrs Veghelyi refused to pay the whole of the sum under the contract. Ultimately on 2 May 1995 the first defendants made a claim to the tribunal under the Consumer Claims Tribunal Act 1987[5]. Mrs
Veghelyi was noted as the respondent to that claim. The claim was for the sum of $14,883.00 which was said to be the balance owing under the building contract. On 24 May 1995 a copy of the claim was served by the tribunal on Mrs
Veghelyi at 180 Glebe Point Road[6]. The next day the tribunal served a notice of hearing for 19 June 1995.

Unfortunately, Mrs Veghelyi died on 19 May 1995. By her will dated 12 May , she appointed the two plaintiffs as executrices and trustees of her estate. They were also the beneficiaries under the will. The plaintiff Teresa
Nicolson was the daughter-in-law of Mrs Veghelyi, being married to Tony
Veghelyi, the deceased's son. The plaintiff Susan Westcombe was the deceased's daughter, sister of Tony Veghelyi.

On 19 June 1995 Tony Veghelyi appeared at the hearing of the claim and advised the tribunal of the death of his mother. He tendered a statutory declaration which had been sworn by him on that date. In that declaration he stated that no probate or letters of administration had been granted in respect of the estate. He also stated: "I have recently been handed letters and documents from the Registry of
Consumer Claims Tribunal Reference No BW095/39 which discloses that after my mother's death an action pursuant to the Consumers Claims Tribunal Act 1987 was listed for hearing in Bowral for 19 June 1995 at 11.30 am." 
The statutory declaration concluded with a statement that the action could not proceed as the respondent was deceased.

The referee hearing the matter made a written note of the fact that the respondent was deceased and the presentation of the statutory declaration of
Mr Veghelyi. He also noted: "The jurisdiction of the BDT has been questioned in the Stat. Dec attached.
No further action for 14 days. - Ruling given that BDT had no jurisdiction under <case>(a)." 
He then recorded a ruling that the tribunal has no jurisdiction in the matter.
He made a further note: "Mr Veghelyi advised of death of mother, submitted Stat Dec confirming. - I [unreadable] that I had no jurisdiction. Parties advised of the 14 days required by Sect 26(3)(a)." 
Section 26 of the Act contains provisions which are to apply where the jurisdiction of the tribunal to hear and determine a claim is disputed. In effect the section requires that the tribunal make a ruling as to whether or not it has jurisdiction, and, if it determines that it has no jurisdiction, it must not make an order dismissing a claim for want of jurisdiction without giving a ruling as to its jurisdiction. Section 26(3)(a) requires that where the tribunal has given a ruling as to whether or not it has jurisdiction, it must not determine the claim until at least 14 days has elapsed since the day on which the ruling was made.

The tribunal's file next contains the following note: "Peter rang; 
BWO 95/39 
The previous ruling made on 19/6/95 at Bowral now suspended as provided by section 30(7)[7] and the matter is to be relisted and dealt with under section 15(2)(c)[8].

Peter Browne[9] /6/95 per 
C Gibson" 
On 4 July 1995 the Registrar of the Consumer Claims Tribunal wrote to Mr
Veghelyi at Joy Farm, High Range NSW[10]. The letter set out what had occurred at the hearing on 19 June, the ruling made by the referee that the tribunal had no jurisdiction and the further determination made by the referee contained in the file note which has been set out above. The letter then went on to paraphrase the effects of <case> of the Act. It then inquired of Mr
Veghelyi whether any one had been appointed or was to be appointed in respect of the estate of his mother and, if so, the name and address of that person.
An identical letter was also sent to the address at 180 Glebe Point Rd Glebe, the deceased's address. A similar letter was addressed to the "Executor or
Administrator of the Estate of the Late Joyce Veghelyi" and also sent to the address in Glebe. There was no reply received to any of these letters.

However, on 5 July 1995 Mr Veghelyi rang Mr Gibson, a staff member at the tribunal, and inquired whether the determination made on 19 June was final.
The contents of the letter sent to Mr Veghelyi were read to him. He disputed the validity of the second determination and sought, and was given, advice as to the avenues of redress.

On 8 September 1995 probate of Mrs Veghelyi's will was granted to the plaintiffs. On 21 September an employee with the tribunal spoke to Mr Veghelyi by telephone. Notwithstanding that probate had already been granted, Mr
Veghelyi advised that probate had been applied for and that he would advise the tribunal within the next four to six weeks as to who were the executors.
However, he indicated he did not wish to discuss the matter as he was a beneficiary and stated that the trustees could not deal with the matter until probate had been granted. On 17 November 1995 the solicitor for the first defendants advised the tribunal that the plaintiffs were the executrices of
Mrs Veghelyi's estate.

On that day, 17 November, the registrar sent notices of hearing to the plaintiffs, as executrices of the estate. The notices were sent to two addresses:- 8 Ina Gregory Circuit Connor ACT and Joy Farm, Wombeyan Caves Road
High Range NSW[11]. The notices set out the first defendants as the claimants and the Estate of the late Joyce May Veghelyi as the respondent. They stated that the proceedings were to take place at Bowral Court House on 1 December
They contained a notice to the effect that, in the absence of any party, the case may be determined by the tribunal and an order made on the evidence available. The notices were sent by certified mail. Although the certified mail posting receipt indicates that the one of the notices was mailed to
Connor ACT, the envelope which was returned to the tribunal as unclaimed was addressed to Condor ACT. The correct address was Condor. These letters were returned to the tribunal as unclaimed in January 1996. The solicitor for the first defendants also sent letters dated 23 November 1995 to each of the plaintiffs advising them to contact the tribunal's registry at Wollongong.

On 1 December 1995 the tribunal proceeded with the hearing of the claim. It noted the non appearance of the respondents and that mail sent to them had been certified. It received written and oral evidence from the defendant, Paul
Fathers, and noted that he had received no contact from the other party. It determined the claim in the absence of the plaintiffs. It ordered that the plaintiffs pay the first defendants the sum of $14,553 within 28 days. Notices of the order made were sent to each of the plaintiffs at Joy Farm and at
Connor by certified mail. The notices were returned as unclaimed. The address on the envelope sent to Connor had been changed to Condor.

On 17 January 1996 the Registrar received a letter from Mr Veghelyi dated 13
January 1995[12]. He advised that he had been instructed to act for the plaintiffs and enclosed an authority and direction from Ms Nicolson to him to act on her behalf in the proceedings. This authority was also dated 13 January
He stated that he was waiting for a similar authority from Ms Westcombe.
He indicated that he was scheduled for surgery on 17 January 1996 and would be unable to attend to the matter until February. He asked that the matter not proceed until after his operation and convalescence. An authority and direction by Ms Westcombe dated 30 January 1996 was received by the registry on 2 February of that year. On 22 February Mr Veghelyi was advised by letter from the Registrar that the matter had been determined on 1 December and a copy of the order made by the tribunal was enclosed.

On 21 March 1996 the tribunal received an affidavit by Mr Veghelyi applying for a rehearing. Paragraph 4 of that affidavit was as follows: "I am informed by the executors of my late Mother's estate that neither received any documents nor were served with any documents relating to this matter nor were they aware of a hearing date in respect of this matter." 
On 26 March 1996 the application for a rehearing was refused by a referee on the basis that the application was not valid because it was not made by the parties involved and was not on an approved form[13]. It was noted that an agent was only permitted at a hearing if approval had been given under the
Act[14]. A file note indicates that the referee had instructed a tribunal staff member that, if Mr Veghelyi was to act for the respondents, a power of attorney was required for each of them. It was also indicated that the tribunal was prepared to send fresh notices to the respondents by certified mail if updates of their addresses were supplied. A further note indicates that on 26 March this information was conveyed to Mr Veghelyi. The plaintiffs' addresses were noted in the file as being: Teresa Nicolson PO Box 1116 Bowral , and Susan Westcombe, 8 Ina Gregory Circuit Condor ACT 2906.

On 27 March 1996 fresh notices of the order made by the tribunal on 1 December were sent to the plaintiffs at the addresses noted. On 4 April 1996 letters were sent by the Registrar to the plaintiffs at those addresses notifying them that they must personally apply for a rehearing and that Mr
Veghelyi would only be permitted to attend any rehearing on the following conditions: if the executors were unable to attend; if a power of attorney were supplied; and if the referee granted approval. Notwithstanding these letters, Mr Veghelyi attended at the registry on 19 April with further statutory declarations applying for a rehearing and powers of attorney for each of the plaintiffs. On 22 April the registry received applications for a rehearing on the appropriate forms.

On 24 April 1996, after the referee had considered the applications for a rehearing, letters were sent by the registrar to the plaintiffs indicating that a number of issues had arisen and asking each of the plaintiffs to attend at the Department of Fair Trading in Wollongong on 14 May 1996. The letter stated that they should attend personally and that an agent "would not be appropriate". The letters were sent by certified mail to each of the various addresses the tribunal had received for the plaintiffs. Letters sent to the addresses at Condor and Joy Farm were returned unclaimed.

On 9 May 1996 Mr Veghelyi wrote a long letter to the Senior Referee of the consumer Claims Tribunal in Sydney setting out what he alleged were a number of mistakes made by the building disputes tribunal in the matter and to suggest a way "in which it could be put back on the rails". The letter contains many of the arguments which have been placed before me to support the contention that the tribunal acted without jurisdiction. It also raised a number of matters which were raised initially before me but were abandoned during the course of hearing. During the course of the letter Mr Veghelyi indicated that he was legally qualified although barred from legal practice and asserted that this was a reason for a personal bias against him shown by the referee who insisted that there be personal appearance by the plaintiffs.
His suggestion was that the matter should be recommenced by a further complaint and that the present referee be disqualified. He also sent a copy of this letter to the referee in the matter and asked her to disqualify herself or make and order that the tribunal had no jurisdiction.

On 14 May 1996 the application for a rehearing was refused in the absence of the plaintiffs or Mr Veghelyi. The letter of 9 May sent by Mr Veghelyi was never placed before the referee who was determining the application for rehearing. The notes of the referee making that decision indicate that the reason for the respondents' absence at the original hearing was "did not receive hearing notice or other documents". The reasons for refusal were given as, in Ms Westcombe's case: "Mail has been sent as per Act & has not been collected by [respondents].
Insufficient reason to grant rehearing." 
In relation to Ms Nicolson the reason given for refusing the application was "Application is out of time". Notices of this decision were sent to the plaintiffs at the various addresses which had been given to the tribunal.
Letters sent to Joy Farm, the address at Condor, and Ms Nicolson's shop in
Bowral were returned unclaimed. On 4 June Mr Veghelyi sent a letter to the
Senior Referee asking him to interfere in the matter and threatening that otherwise action would be taken in the Supreme Court.

Affidavits were before me from each of the plaintiffs containing statements to the effect that they did not receive various letters and notices sent by the tribunal. Ms Nicolson swore an affidavit in which she stated that before she received the Notice of Order in April 1996 she had received no documents relating to the matter before the tribunal. She also swore an affidavit in which she denied ever receiving the Notice of Hearing and stating that she did not recall ever receiving any notification that a document was available for collection from Australia Post in November 1995. She also stated that there were no postal deliveries to Joy Farm and that there was no mail box on or near the front gate.

Ms Westcombe swore that, even though she lived at 8 Ina Gregory Circuit,
Condor in November and December 1995, she never received the Notice of Hearing dated 17 November 1995. She said she could not recall ever being notified in that period that a document was available for her to collect from Australian
Post. She also made an affidavit in which she swore that her affidavit for a rehearing placed before the tribunal was true. In the affidavit applying for a rehearing she swore that prior to receiving a Notice of Order on 12 April 1996 she received no documents relating to the claim before the tribunal.

There were also affidavits before me from an employee of Australian Post, Mr
Finch. He swore that in 1995 and 1996 mail was delivered to Joy Farm and there was no record of any request to redirect mail from that address. He stated that there was a drum sitting at the gate post of that property which was used as a mail box and there had been a receptacle for mail at that property in periods when he was present and mail was delivered to that address. He also swore that cards indicating that there was certified mail were left at that address in 1995 and 1996 but that the mail had been unclaimed.

Ms Nicolson gave evidence before me. She was evasive in many of her answers and it seemed clear to me that she had difficulty knowing what answer she should give to many questions. This was because she was not prepared to tell the truth and she was not sure what she should say to support the case that was being presented on her behalf. I had the clear impression that she knew little about the matter and was signing documents at the request of her husband or her solicitor without any real knowledge or appreciation of what those documents contained. She was clearly a puppet to her husband and without his guidance she did not know what to say or do to advance the claim that had been prepared for her. It reached the stage of high farce when she refused to acknowledge that a letter sent by her husband to the tribunal was misdated even though I attempted to indicate a matter in that letter which clearly indicated that the letter carried the wrong year. The actual date of the letter was of little or no significance but Ms Nicolson was not prepared to deviate from anything that her husband had written even though it was clearly wrong.

Ms Nicolson knew that she was to lie if necessary and this she did. The most obvious lie was that in relation to the mail situation at Joy Farm. In particular she lied in both her affidavit and her evidence as to whether there was a receptacle for mail at the farm. The evidence of Mr Finch (who was not required for cross-examination) is that there was. Further, the evidence of the defendant, Paul Fathers, was that he placed his card in a mail box at the farm in May 1995. He made a statement to this effect at the time he made his original claim, well before any issue arose as to the receipt of mail at that address. I have no doubt at all that Ms Nicolson was avoiding receipt of any documents from the tribunal or otherwise connected with the proceedings in this claim from the time her husband become aware of the revocation of the ruling that the tribunal lacked jurisdiction.

Ms Westcombe also gave evidence before me. She was not so palpably lying as was her sister-in-law but I have no doubt that her evidence was also untrue.
She said in the witness box what her brother required her to say just as she had done what he required her to do both in relation to the proceedings before the tribunal and in obtaining probate of her mother's will. Although she had never known mail to go astray before, she maintained that she had never received the Notice of Hearing, a letter from the first defendant's solicitor or any other mail from the tribunal. Although she said she had received a card notifying her of certified mail for collection, she said she received none in relation to documents sent by the tribunal. According to her evidence she learned nothing about any claim before the tribunal from her brother, the defendant's solicitor or any other source until April 1996. I have no doubt she lied in her evidence and she was deliberately avoiding receiving any documents concerned with this claim just as her sister-in-law had done.

These findings of fact lead me to dismiss any suggestion that there was any denial of natural justice arising in any of the proceedings before the tribunal in respect of the decision to refuse a rehearing. In particular there was no error by the tribunal in dismissing the application for a rehearing even without considering the letter of Mr Veghelyi of 9 May 1996. The only issue for the tribunal was whether there was a sufficient reason for the failure of the plaintiffs to appear at the hearing on 1 December. Putting aside any question as to whether the plaintiffs were properly joined as respondents, there was no sufficient reason for the plaintiffs failure to attend. I believe that they were avoiding service and did not want to be advised as to the proceedings before the tribunal simply so that could frustrate the determination of the claim. I am satisfied that this was part of an orchestrated campaign by Mr Veghelyi to confound the tribunal and defeat the operation of the Act. If it were necessary for me to do so, I would refuse relief in the exercise of my discretion. Any redetermination of the application for a rehearing would be futile as it would be determined in exactly the same way. When I indicated to the plaintiffs' counsel the finding of facts I was prepared to make, he sensibly conceded that it would follow that I would decline relief in respect of the decision of the tribunal to refuse a rehearing.

The significant issue, however, is whether the plaintiffs were properly joined as, or otherwise became, respondents to the claim. I should make it clear that
I am not concerned with mere errors of law made by the tribunal in the exercise of its jurisdiction under the Act. There is no relief to this court from any error of law no matter how egregious it may be unless that error of law goes to the jurisdiction of the tribunal to make the order it did under s [15]. Further, the tribunal is not to be bound by formalities which are not required by the Act. The whole purpose of the Act, and the establishment of the tribunals under it, is to provide a relatively informal, convenient, expeditious and inexpensive means for the determination of disputes involving minor amounts of money. The Act should be construed with this purpose in mind[16]. Many of the procedures imposed upon the tribunal under the Act are, therefore, to be considered to be merely directory only and not mandatory.

As I have already noted after the tribunal learned of the death of Ms Veghelyi a ruling was made that it had no jurisdiction. The ruling was later "suspended" by the tribunal. No point was taken before me that there was any irregularity in the tribunal setting aside its earlier ruling. There was no suggestion that it was functus officio. Clearly it was not because, acting in accordance with the Act, it had not determined the claim. The ruling was at most interlocutory. The referee indicated that the matter was to be dealt with under <case>(c).

Section 15 of the Act is relevantly as follows: 
Every person on whom notice of a consumer claim has been served in accordance with section 14 (other than a person joined as a claimant in accordance with that section) is a respondent.

If: ......
 ......
 a deceased person, is or would have a been eligible to lodge or be a respondent to a consumer claim, then: ......
 ......
 the executor or administrator of the estate of that deceased person, may, on behalf of that person or the estate of that person, lodge, or become a respondent to, a consumer claim and exercise all the rights and functions of a claimant or respondent under this Act.

By his reference to the matter being dealt with under <case>(c) the referee presumably had in mind that the executrices of the Mrs Veghelyi's estate would become the respondents to the claim instead of Mrs Veghelyi and the matter would then proceed. This is no doubt why he vacated his order that the tribunal had no jurisdiction. This decision was followed by the sending of
Notices of Hearing to the plaintiffs. However, <case> suggests that a person is made a respondent by the serving of a notice of a claim on the person, whereas <case> is a provision permitting a person to become a respondent by that person taking some voluntary action to make himself or herself a party to the proceedings. The definition of "respondent" contained in <case> of the
Act[17], which provides definitions of various words for the purposes of the
Act, confirms that generally a person is made a respondent by serving a notice of the claim on that person.

The provision of the Act which is generally concerned with the formalities which follow the lodging of a claim is <case>. The relevant subsections of that section are as follows: 
As soon as practicable after a consumer claim has been lodged with or transmitted to the registrar of consumer claims tribunals in accordance with section 13, the registrar must: subject to subsection (4), refer the claim to a tribunal for hearing and determination, fix a time for the initial hearing of the claim by the tribunal, cause notice of the claim to be served: on every person against whom the claim is made, and on every other person (other than the claimant) who appears from the claim to have an interest in resolving the dispute to which the claim relates, and cause notice of the time and place fixed for the initial hearing of the claim to be served on the claimant and on each person on whom notice of the claim is required to be served in accordance with paragraph (c).

If a referee, whether constituted as a tribunal or not, is of the opinion that a person has a sufficient interest in resolving the dispute to which a consumer claim relates but the person has not been served with notice of the claim in accordance with subsection (1)(c), the referee may make an order directing that the person be joined either as a claimant or as a respondent as appears to the referee to be appropriate.

If an order under subsection (2) is made joining a person as a claimant or as a respondent to a consumer claim, the registrar must cause notice of the claim and notice of the time and place for the initial or further hearing of the claim to be served on the person as soon as practicable after the making of the order.

It seems clear that the section imposes an obligation upon the registrar to cause a notice of the claim to be served on a person against whom the claim is made. In accordance with <case> the person served with a notice of the claim becomes a respondent to the claim. In respect of Mrs Veghelyi herself, a letter was sent to her by the registrar informing her of the claim and enclosing a copy of it. The letter also advised that she was being given the opportunity to settle the claim and that, if it were not settled, it would be listed for hearing. In truth no opportunity was given for settlement as a
Notice of Hearing was sent to her the very next day.

The Act does not indicate what form a notice of the claim should take but clearly it is envisaged that such a notice would be separate and distinct from the Notice of Hearing. One would expect that the notice of the claim would give sufficient information as to the claim to permit the person served with the notice to identify the matter to which the claim related and sufficient particulars of it to be in a position to meet the claim at the hearing of it.
No such notice or information was sent to the plaintiffs. All that the registry sent to the plaintiffs after the original ruling that the tribunal had no jurisdiction was vacated were notices informing them of the new hearing date. The only information contained in those notices regarding the claim was the name of the claimants. The serving of those notices did not itself make the plaintiffs respondents to the claim.

What the tribunal ought to have done when it learned that the plaintiffs were executrices of the estate of the respondent was to proceed under <case>.
Clearly that information would have led the tribunal to form the opinion that the plaintiffs had an interest in resolving the dispute before the tribunal and, as they had not been served with notice of the claim, an order could have been made directing that they be joined as respondents. Once the order had been made, the registrar was obliged under <case> to serve the plaintiffs with notice of the claim. Had this been done, the plaintiffs would have been made respondents to the claim. But because the referee referred to <case>, no order was made joining the plaintiffs and no notice of the claim was served upon them.

It was submitted that the plaintiffs should not be heard to complain about the failure of the tribunal to serve a notice of the claim upon them because they had waived any such requirement. I was referred to authorities where it was held that in some situations a person would not be heard to complain of procedural irregularities on the basis that by the person's conduct the person was taken to have waived the procedural requirements normally applying[18].
But in none of those cases is it suggested that a person can by his or her actions give jurisdiction to a court or tribunal where jurisdiction does not exist by waiving objection to the failure to take a procedural step upon which jurisdiction is based. I do not understand that a party can be estopped by its conduct from denying a tribunal's jurisdiction if in fact the tribunal had no jurisdiction.

It was next submitted that the plaintiffs, both directly and through Mr
Veghelyi, had actual notice of the claim before the tribunal and, therefore, there was no injustice by reason of the tribunal's failure to give them notice. But even if Mr Veghelyi's actions at the time of his appearance before the tribunal and later indicate that both he and the plaintiffs had knowledge of the claim before the tribunal at the time it made its order against the plaintiffs, it does not follow that the tribunal had jurisdiction to make the order. It seems to me that in respect of the procedures for the lodging of a claim and the creation of parties before the tribunal the formalities of the
Act must be complied with and the failure to serve a notice of claim is not merely a matter of procedural irregularity.

Counsel for the Minister argued that the appearance of Mr Veghelyi before the tribunal was sufficient to give it jurisdiction to make an order against the plaintiffs as respondents to the claim under <case>. It is a reasonable inference in the present case that Mr Veghelyi received both the notice of the claim and the Notice of Hearing sent to his mother. In his affidavit presented to the tribunal on the hearing date, Mr Veghelyi referred to having been handed "letters and documents from the Registry". In the absence of any evidence from Mr Veghelyi, I infer that the material to which he referred was that which had been sent by the registrar to his mother notifying her of the claim and the hearing date and place. In all the complaints raised by Mr
Veghelyi and by the plaintiffs at his behest, there is never a suggestion that his mother was not served with the notice of the claim or that he did not come into possession of it.

It was first submitted on behalf of the Minister that Mr Veghelyi had appeared as agent for his mother's estate when he intervened before the tribunal. The argument ran that, because he clearly acted for the plaintiffs as their agent and representative in all dealing with the tribunal after probate had been granted, he should be taken to have been acting on their behalf when he appeared before the tribunal on the initial hearing date. This submission is somewhat inconsistent with the tribunal's previous conduct because it had maintained throughout its dealings with the plaintiffs and Mr Veghelyi that it would not recognise him as the representative or agent of the plaintiffs. He was never given leave by the tribunal to appear on their behalf at any stage.
It seems incongruous that I should now do that which the tribunal refused to do and recognise him as their agent for the purposes of proceedings before the tribunal.

But the submission made is that I should find on all the evidence either that
Mr Veghelyi was acting as agent for the plaintiffs in their capacity as the potential executrices of his mother's estate or that his act in appearing before the tribunal was later ratified by the plaintiffs on the principles relating to an executor de son tort. But even if in some way his appearance before the tribunal could be visited upon the plaintiffs, Mr Veghelyi appeared only to deny the tribunal's jurisdiction to make an order against his mother because she was deceased. I fail to see how the appearance of a person in order to deny the jurisdiction of the tribunal to make an order against one person implicitly accepts the jurisdiction of the tribunal to make an order against him or some other person whom he represents.

The issue before me is not one of estoppel, or waiver or even a denial of natural justice. Nor I am concerned with the reasonableness of the tribunal's actions. The question is whether the tribunal had jurisdiction to make an order against the plaintiffs. It only had jurisdiction to make an order against them if they were respondents to the claim. They could only be made respondent's if notice of the claim was served on them under <case> of the
Act. No such notice was served on the plaintiffs. Alternatively they could become respondents by some act making them parties to the claim under <case>.
I can find no such act by the plaintiffs themselves or by Mr Veghelyi, even if his actions could in some way be said to bind the plaintiffs.

I quash the order of the tribunal of the 1 December 1995 made against the plaintiffs. The first defendants are to pay the costs of the proceedings. I grant an indemnity certificate to the first defendants under the Suitor's Fund
Act.

I refer the papers in this matter and the transcript of the evidence to the
Director of Public Prosecutions for consideration as to whether any person should be charged with perjury or any other offence arising from these proceedings.
 [1] "Building Disputes Tribunal" is defined by <case> of the Consumers Claims
Tribunal Act 1987 as meaning "a consumer claims tribunal which hears and determines a building claim as referred to in Part 3A". A tribunal which hears a building claim is to be known as a building disputes tribunal; <case> of the Act.
 [2] Section 12(1) of the Consumer Claims Tribunal Act 1987 [3] Ibid <case>.
 [4] By <case> of the Act the Minister is entitled to intervene and, if the right is exercised, the Minister thereupon becomes a party and has all the rights of a party.
 [5] The claim was a "building claim" as defined in <case> A of the Act. The definition includes a claim for the payment of a sum of money. A building claim is to be considered as a "consumer claim" for the purposes of the Act , see <case> B.
 [6] Section 40 of the Act provides that posting of a notice to the usual address or that address of that person last known to the registrar "shall be taken to be sufficient service for the purposes of the Act".
 [7] Section 30(7) permits the Tribunal to make a further order suspending the operation of an order which has been made by the Tribunal and which has not ceased to have effect for such reasons and for such period as the Tribunal specifies.
 [8] Section 15(2)(c) of the Act provides in effect that the executor or administer of the estate of a deceased person may become a respondent to a claim where the deceased person was a respondent to a claim. The section is se out later in this judgment.
 [9] Peter Brown was the referee who was conducting the proceedings on 19 June at Bowral.
 [10] This was the address given by Mr Veghelyi in the statutory declaration presented to the Tribunal by him on 19 June 1995.
 [11] The address at High Range was the address stated for Ms Nicolson in the probate. Ms Westcombe's address was stated in the probate as being 8 Ina
Circuit Condor ACT.
 [12] It is clear from the contents of the letter and the surrounding circumstances that this letter was wrongly dated 1995 instead of 1996. This fact assumed some importance at the hearing before me on the issue of the credibility of Ms Nicolson.
 [13] Under <case> of the Act where a tribunal has decided an issue in dispute in the absence of a party, a referee may, on application in the approved form lodged within 14 days after receiving notice of the decision, order that a claim be reheard if satisfied that there was sufficient reason for the party's absence.
 [14] Section 21 of the Act provides that generally a party is not entitled to be represented at a hearing although the tribunal has power to approve representation.
 [15] See <case> of the Act and Jet 60 Minute Cleaners versus Brownette [[1981] 2
NSWLR 232] at 237.
 [16] Jet 60 Minute Cleaners versus Brownette (1982) Aust CSCLR 55 - 203 at 56 - .
 [17] The section provides: "respondent, in relation to a consumer claim, means a person on whom a notice of the claim has been served under section 14, other than a person joined as a claimant in accordance with that section".
 [18] See Sheldon versus Brown Bayley's Steelworks Ltd [[1953] 2 QB 393]; Healey v
Ballarat East Bowling Club <case>; [[1961] VR 206]; Craine versus Colonial Mutual Fire Insurance Co Limited <case>; [(1920) 28 CLR 305.] * * * 
