

Regina versus Dyers Matter No Cca 60196/97 [1997] NSWSC 508 (24 October 1997) 
Regina versus Kenneth Emmanuel Dyers /97 October 1997 
Grove J, Newman J, Hidden J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal from District Court (Knight DCJ) 
FILE NO: 60196/97 
DELIVERED: Friday 24 October 1997 
HEARING DATE: Tuesday 8 July 1997 
PARTIES: REGINA versus KENNETH EMMANUEL DYERS 
JUDGMENT OF: Grove J, Newman J, Hidden J 
COUNSEL 
APPELLANT - I M Barker QC with H Di Suvero 
RESPONDENT - G E Smith 
SOLICITORS 
APPELLANT - Henry Davis York 
RESPONDENT - S E O'Connor 
RESULT: Leave to appeal refused 
CATCHWORDS 
CRIMINAL LAW AND PROCEDURE - DISTRICT COURT - PERMANENT STAY OF INDICTMENT
REFUSED - EARLIER INCONCLUSIVE TRIAL - INCIDENTS OF THAT TRIAL EXAMINED -
CIRCUMSTANCES NOT EXCEPTIONAL OR EXTREME - PROCEEDINGS NOT AN ABUSE OF PROCESS 
NO OF PAGES: 21 
REGINA versus KENNETH EMMANUEL DYERS 
JUDGMENT 
GROVE J: This is an application for leave to appeal pursuant to <case> of the
Criminal Appeal Act. The interlocutory order sought to be impugned was made by
Knight DCJ on 18 April 1997 when he refused the applicant a permanent stay of proceedings upon a proposed indictment which had been sought upon the ground that the intended trial would be an abuse of the processes of the District
Court. There is jurisdiction to make an order staying proceedings if their continuation would be so unfairly and unjustifiably oppressive as to constitute an abuse of process. It should be exercised only in an exceptional or extreme case: Walton versus Gardiner <case>; [1993 177 CLR 378.] The applicant contends that this is such a case.

The trial is proposed by the Crown to proceed upon counts identical to those in an indictment previously presented against the applicant before Karpin DCJ and a jury upon which the jury was unable to agree. The applicant was found not guilty upon three further counts contained in that indictment.

It is convenient to sketch some background. The Crown alleged sexual offences committed by the applicant between 1986 and 1988 against four girls. At pertinent times one complainant was aged 11 and three further complainants (who were sisters) were aged 15, 13 and 8 respectively. In the original indictment counts 1 to 6 concerned the firstnamed child, counts 7, 8 and 9 the eldest of the sisters, count 10 the middle sister and count 11 the youngest.
Not guilty verdicts were found by the jury on counts 8, 9 and 11 and they did not reach agreement on the balance.

The applicant was described as the founder and leader of an organization known as Kenja. He is now 75 years of age. Kenja is said to have aims of encouraging and supporting personal growth by meditative and other techniques. One of the latter is labelled "energy conversion" and involves "sessions" in which meditators are supposed to sit facing each other, hold still and stare into each other's eyes. The Crown allegation is that the offences occurred whilst the applicant was conducting such a session with each of the victims. As a matter of chronology, the complainants are said to have come forward after activity by a member of Parliament, a television programme and others. A theme of criticism of Kenja as a cult was presented. At the trial before Karpin DCJ and the jury it was the applicant's case that he denied any sexual touching of the complainants and further that the complaints had been falsified in circumstances that two women who were the mothers of the complainants had been formerly members of Kenja but asked to leave because one had apparently committed an assault and the other was suspected of dishonesty concerning some funds of the organization. Children were not permitted to be active in the organization unless an approving parent was also active.

The trial proceeded for some eight weeks. The jury deliberations extended over some seven days.

The applicant advanced three grounds in argument before Knight DCJ in support of the permanent stay which he was seeking. The first two grounds related to the original trial judge having declined to give the jury a direction or, more precisely, an exhortation in accordance with Black versus The Queen <case>; [1993 179 CLR 44.] Similar grounds were not pursued in this Court. The third ground contended that the combined effect of a number of allegedly erroneous rulings during the first trial was such as to create circumstances in which it would be an abuse of process to require the applicant again to stand trial.

In submissions to this Court that contention was expanded and I will turn to it in due course. However I deal initially with a submission concerning the onus on the applicant to show that a stay should be granted: Barton versus The
Queen [1981 47 CLR 75]; Jago versus New South Wales District Court <case>; <case>; [1986 161 CLR 423] was cited as authority for the lastmentioned. Murphy J stated that the onus rested squarely with the prosecution to show the Court (in such circumstances) that a new trial was the most appropriate remedy. He was in the minority in the appeal which did not turn upon the specific issue of onus.
Other judges who referred to the matter acknowledged that it was well established that the discretion to order a new trial should not be exercised when the evidence in the court below was not sufficiently cogent to justify a conviction or to allow the Crown to supplement a case which has proved to be defective. Dawson J (one of the majority) said that in particular the Crown should not be given an opportunity to make a new case which was not made at the first trial. The exercise of such discretion was acknowledged by all to involve the weighing of competing considerations.

Mr Barker QC who appeared with Mr Di Suvero for the applicant acknowledged that the proposition now sought to be advanced was novel and that King was not directly in point. This Court is not exercising a discretion concerning the ordering of a new trial. The present application involves assertion of error in the refusal of Knight DCJ to make an order for stay. It was not part of Knight DCJ's jurisdiction to exercise a discretion akin to that discussed by the High Court in King. His investigation was focussed, and correctly focussed upon whether the decision of the Director of Public Prosecutions to present again an indictment upon the counts unresolved by the jury amounted in the circumstances to an abuse of process.

There was no onus on the Crown in the proceedings below nor does it carry any onus in the present application. As Knight DCJ correctly observed: "The question whether criminal proceedings should be stayed permanently because they constitute an abuse of power, falls to be determined by a weighing process involving a subjective balancing of a variety of factors and considerations, including the requirements of fairness to the applicant, the legitimate public interest in the disposition of charges of serious offences and in the conviction of those guilty of crime and the need to maintain public confidence in the administration of justice." 
The Court received argument directed at demonstrating errors in the conduct of the trial before Karpin DCJ in order to allow the applicant to seek to demonstrate that the accumulation of error was such that retrial would be exceptionally and unacceptably oppressive. It was expressly received provisionally on the basis that the question of the grant of leave would remain for determination: Criminal Appeal Act <case>(a). The application is in respect of the decision of Knight DCJ and the events of the inconclusive trial are not directly in focus. The counts upon which the verdicts of not guilty were returned are res judicata and are not, of course, included in the references to inconclusiveness.

The complaints of the applicant about the incidents at the trial are academic in the sense that it is by no means inevitable that error (if error there has been) will be repeated at retrial. It is, to say the least, unusual for this
Court to be called upon to examine "grounds of appeal" which relate to matters which have not led to verdict. In my opinion, however, examination should take place for the limited purpose of determining whether they demonstrate that the continuation of proceedings amounts to abuse of process. Such investigation would accord with the provisos mentioned in Maxwell versus The Queen <case>; [1996 184 CLR 501.] 
Dawson and McHugh JJ wrote: "Our courts do not purport to exercise control over the institution or continuation of criminal proceedings, save where it is necessary to do so to prevent an abuse of process or to ensure a fair trial.": @ 512.

Gaudron and Gummow JJ wrote: "It ought now be accepted, in our view, that certain decisions involved in the prosecution process are, of their nature, insusceptible of judicial review.
They include decisions whether or not to prosecute, to enter a nolle prosequi, to proceed ex officio, whether or not to present evidence and, which is usually an aspect of one or other of those decisions, decisions as to the particular charge to be laid or prosecuted. The integrity of the judicial process - particularly, its independence and impartiality and the public perception thereof - would be compromised if the courts were to decide or were to be in any way concerned with decisions as to who is to be prosecuted and for what.": @ 534.

Maxwell was specifically about the acceptance by the Crown of a plea of guilty to a lesser charge than a more serious one charged in an indictment but the second qualification mentioned by their Honours would be of wider application, namely: "The second qualification is that, of necessity, a court always retains power to prevent abuse of its process, including its criminal process.": @ 535.

The balancing of factors to determine whether continuation would be an abuse of process must include the consideration that any identified error might be expected not to be repeated in the continued proceedings.

The first alleged error was rejection by Karpin DCJ of an ERISP video tape between the applicant and investigating police. The responses of the applicant were favourable to his case. Some of the submissions confused two separate issues, the first being whether the Crown must or ought to have tendered the tape and the second, whether it was admissible irrespective of by whom it was tendered. Reference was made to apparently divergent views expressed in New
South Wales and in Queensland: R versus Callaghan [1993 70 A Crim R 350]; R v
Familic [1994 75 A Crim R 229]; R v
Keevers CCA unreported 19 July 1994. I consider that, bearing in mind the nature of this application and the purpose of examining the incidents of an inconclusive trial, it suffices to express an opinion that such a tape would not appear to have been inadmissible. In so saying I do not purport to pre- empt the ruling of a presiding judge at any new trial who would need to reach a judgment whether the tape (if tendered) should be admitted in the context of the circumstances pertaining at that trial. I do not consider that the rejection of the tape by Karpin DCJ had the result that a decision to continue the proceedings by presentation of the proposed indictment makes that continuation an abuse of process. I am conscious of course that the applicant's submission is based upon asserted accumulation and not individual error.

The second matter involved a contention that the Crown case changed its course in relation to whether or not the events leading to a charge occurred when the particular complainant was absent from school because the teachers were having a student free day. The evidence, including any contradictions, is available to be canvassed at a future trial. The essence of what is alleged is that the reason given by the complainant for locating events at a time is demonstrably wrong and the Crown was permitted to deal with apparent discrepancy by expanding the time frame. Reference was made to R versus Anderson [1991 53 A Crim
R 421] where the trial miscarried because the Crown "changed course" and no new trial was ordered. The latter decision however was clearly based on a combination of matters and the case does not stand as authority for the proposition that where a conviction is quashed because a Crown case has materially altered during a hearing, a new trial will never be ordered. So much is plain from an examination of the circumstances in King which are conveniently found in the judgment in this Court: [1985 17 A Crim R 184] where new trial followed the quashing of a conviction after an alternative basis for finding of guilt was raised by the Crown after the close of evidence.

The third alleged error relates to two matters dealt with by Karpin DCJ in her charge to the jury. She invited the jury to reject a submission by defence counsel that certain depictions of the complainants (after the alleged offences) were inconsistent with their allegations because they (the jury) had no basis upon which to make what was, in effect, a psychological assessment. I consider the direction was erroneous but that it not to say that, had there been convictions, I would have regarded it (standing alone) as a reason to quash them but, in any event, I see no reason why new trial would not have been ordered. The other aspect was her Honour's comment about the designation by defence counsel of the proceedings as a political trial. She said: "It has been designated a political trial; it is not a political trial, members of the jury, and no amount of calling it so will make it so. The fact that a person who is a politician may have been involved and was involved in bringing the complainants' complaints to the notice of police does not, of itself, make it a political trial and certainly I regard as a misuse of the term in any historical sense that I understand it. Similarly, it has nothing to do with the witches of Salem, or The Crucible, nor does it have anything to do with that marvellously Damon Runyon-esque case Harry "The Hat" Blackburn.
It is a trial about a quite ordinary charge. The essential question of this trial is whether the accused, then a middle-aged man, sexually assaulted four young girls when were then children, under the age of sixteen. It is not about the ideals, or otherwise, of Kenja. You have heard a great deal about that,
Kenja is not on trial and you should not be in any doubt about that. I ask you, please, to think in ordinary and common sense terms about the issues in this trial, not in emotive terms." 
I see no error in her Honour's observations in the context of the material concerning the trial which I have had the opportunity to examine. Whether any comment at all would be appropriate at a new trial will depend upon the exigencies of what emerged at that trial.

The fourth error concerns orders made by Karpin DCJ closing the court to the public during the giving of evidence by all former members of Kenja. A voir dire had been held a week before the jury was empanelled which led to a ruling which is recorded in the transcript in these terms: "Throughout the evidence of persons who had previously been members of Kenja, they stared very intently at those witnesses and in my view produced an atmosphere of pressure, bordering on, if not actually arriving at, intimidation, and I am not prepared to have witnesses give their evidence in those circumstances. That is the reason that I am proposing to close the Court during the evidence of those persons. I am not going to have people whose evidence is affected by circumstances more onerous, more nerve-wracking than the ordinary circumstances of having to give their evidence in open Court and in a Court of law. That is why the Court will be closed and your application for a stay is refused." 
We were informed that as a result the entire prosecution case with the exception of police and only two non police witnesses was presented in a closed court. That appears to have been a serious error, and, had there been convictions, it would have provoked grave concern. There is abundant authority that justice is not to be administered out of the public gaze except in exceptional circumstances or where specifically required or authorized by statute: see David Syme & Co versus General Motors Holdens Limited [1984 2
NSWLR 294.]
Clearly the power which a Court should invoke against misconducting members of the public is to deal with them, by charge of contempt if need be, not by removing the hearing from public scrutiny.

The fifth matter relates to asserted suggestions of bad character of the applicant in the opening address of the Crown Prosecutor. Such a complaint is a little anomalous when directed to circumstances where convictions did not follow. There is no reason to predict that the Crown Prosecutor at any new trial will raise impermissible matter in opening. It is a matter for supervision by a trial judge. The same comments apply to any matter raised in final address.

The sixth asserted error complains that the defence case was not sufficiently put to the jury by Karpin DCJ in her summing up. It can be said with hindsight that it must not have been so unbalanced as to persuade the jury to convict.
The content of a charge to the jury is a matter to be raised at trial and examined in this Court if a conviction has followed. No doubt counsel at any new trial would be alert to see to the protection of the applicant's interests.

Finally submissions were made about "inconsistent verdicts". This is something of a misnomer as the only verdicts reached were the three acquittals previously mentioned. I see no basis for analysis of evidence which resulted in acquittal and that which resulted in no verdict being found in order to reach conclusions of inconsistency as might be available if there had been some convictions. Mackenzie versus The Queen 1996 71 ALJR 91 is no authority for the suggested exercise.

At the hearing of this application a very large volume of written material was placed before the Court. It is unnecessary to dilate upon every aspect raised or explored in it. For example, complaint was made of the calling by the Crown of witnesses, said to have come forward as a result of publicity, who testified to engaging in "energy processing" with the applicant while they were both naked. It was not unforeshadowed evidence. Counsel for the applicant at trial opened by referring to this anticipated evidence as the source of false allegation of "naked processing" in connection with matter charged in the indictment. Objection to such material, like many of the arguments canvassed on behalf of the applicant, is an issue to be dealt with in the ordinary course of trial and not an issue upon which this Court should engage in pre judgment on an interlocutory application.

I return to the specific application before the Court. Examination shows that there were several matters as above indicated which were capable of and even likely to have provoked intervention by this Court in the event that there had been convictions. I am unpersuaded however that any or all of them in combination would have attracted exercise of discretion to decline to order a new trial. As earlier stated, I do not propose this as a relevant test but as an indication that, even on the basis advanced by the applicant, this application must fail. Knight DCJ did not err in refusing the order for stay.
Further, I am of the opinion that the balancing process of factors and considerations relative to whether a stay should be granted should be resolved against any order preventing the Crown from proceeding to present the intended indictment. In addition I am unsatisfied that the whole of the circumstances manifest an exceptional or extreme case such as would justify preventing the process of trial.

I propose the following orders:
Application for leave to appeal against the decision of Knight DCJ of 18
April 1997 refused.
That the order made on 8 July 1997 staying the relisting of trial in the
District Court be discharged.

REGINA versus Kenneth Emmanuel DYERS 
JUDGMENT 
NEWMAN J: I have had the advantage of reading in draft form the judgment of Mr
Justice Grove. I agree with both the reasons he gives and the orders he proposes.

REGINA versus Kenneth Emmanuel DYERS 
JUDGMENT 
HIDDEN J: I agree with Grove J.
 * * * 
