

Jiwira Pty Ltd and Anor versus Phillips Fox and Anor; Baker and Anor versus Salier and Ors Matter Nos 13901/96 [1997] NSWSC 577 (24 November 1997) 
Last Updated: 6 March 1998 
Jiwira Pty Ltd & Anor versus Phillips Fox & Anor 
Baker & Anor versus Salier & Ors /96 /95 November 1997 
Simpson J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division  of 1996 
JIWIRA PTY LIMITED and ANOR versus PHILLIPS FOX and ANOR of 1995 
Alan BAKER and ANOR versus Gordon A SALIER and ORS 
JUDGMENT 
HER HONOUR: Two proceedings are before the court. They were referred to in argument as the 1995 proceeding and the 1996 proceeding and I will continue, at times, to adopt this terminology. By agreement between the parties the evidence in each, about which there is little if any factual dispute, is taken to be evidence in the other. Both proceedings arise out of a single set of circumstances and revolve around the provisions of [Part 11](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/index.html#p11) of the [Legal Profession Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/) ("the Act"). The Act was extensively amended by the Legal Profession Reform Act 1993 (to which I shall sometimes refer as the 1993 legislation). The amendments took effect on 1 July 1994. The application and construction of the pre-amendment, post-amendment and transitional provisions are central to the determination of all issues presently before me. 
Part 11 of the Act, both in its unamended and amended forms, is concerned with the supervision and review of fees charged by legal practitioners. Pre amendment, Division 5 applied to costs charged by solicitors. A "bill of costs" was defined as a bill of costs given to a person in accordance with s , which in turn laid down certain requirements that had to be met before proceedings for recovery were commenced by a legal practitioner.

S 199 (1)(a) provided that application may be made to this court for taxation of a bill of costs by, relevantly, "any person who has paid, or who is liable to pay, those costs". Taxation was by officers, and in accordance with the
Rules, of this court. Although not directly material to the provisions with which I am presently concerned, "client" was defined as including: "(a) Any person who (whether as principal or agent and whether in the capacity of a trustee or otherwise) retains, or is about to retain, a solicitor; and any other person who is, or who may become, liable to pay a solicitor's costs;" 
The 1993 Act introduced significant changes. A "bill of costs" is defined as meaning a bill of costs for providing legal services, and as including a memorandum of fees. It may be taken to have a wider and less technical meaning than it had under the 1987 provision.

The system of taxation is replaced by a system of assessment, to be conducted, not by officers of the court, but by costs assessors appointed pursuant to s
S. The task of a costs assessor is to consider whether it was reasonable to carry out the work to which the costs relate, whether the work was carried out in a reasonable manner, and the fairness and reasonableness of the amount of costs in relation to the work. The costs assessor determines the application by confirming the bill of costs, or, if satisfied that the disputed costs are unfair or unreasonable, by substituting an amount that is, in his or her opinion, a fair and reasonable amount (s 208A), and issues to each party a certificate setting out the determination (s 208 J(1)) 
Under the new provisions application for assessment of costs may be made by "a client who is given a bill of costs" (s199(1)). For the purpose of that section, "client" is defined to include any person who is a party to a costs agreement [see <case>] relating to legal services for which the bill of costs is given, other than the barrister or solicitor who gave the bill or provided the services. The 1987 definition was deleted from the Act by the amendments.
By <case> J (2) where costs have been paid, the amount (if any) by which the amount paid exceeds the amount specified in the costs assessor's certificate may be recovered as a debt in a court of competent jurisdiction.

It is appropriate to relate the circumstances giving rise to these proceedings at this point, pausing only to note that, should the 1995 proceeding be concluded favourably to the initiators, it will be unnecessary to consider the proceeding. It is for that reason that, while the evidence is common to both proceedings, they have not, in the usual sense, been heard together.

The Factual Background 
Jiwira Pty Limited was a company of which Alan Baker was a director and shareholder. Jiwira was indebted to the Primary Industry Bank of Australia ("PIBA"), its indebtedness being secured by mortgages over real estate of which Jiwira was the registered proprietor. Baker had entered into personal contracts of guarantee of Jiwira's obligations to PIBA under the mortgages.

By reason of the terms of the mortgage agreements between Jiwira and PIBA,
PIBA was entitled to debit to Jiwira's account any costs incurred by it in relation to the mortgages, including costs of litigation or other legal proceedings. Such costs were incurred during 1992 and 1993 when there was litigation concerning the mortgages between PIBA and Jiwira. In this litigation Messrs Phillips Fox and Company, solicitors provided legal services to PIBA, in respect of which the firm rendered accounts to PIBA in amounts totalling $223,896. PIBA paid the accounts and, acting on its entitlement under the mortgage agreements, debited those amounts in full to Jiwira. Given the terms of the mortgage agreements, PIBA had little or no interest in challenging the quantum of fees charged by Phillips Fox and did not do so.
Jiwira and Baker did have such an interest. By summons filed in this court on October 1993 Baker sought: an order that Phillips Fox deliver to him a bill of costs for all legal work done by the firm in relation to the proceedings identified in the summons; and an order that the bill so delivered be referred for taxation.

In so doing he relied upon the then existing provisions of <case> (1)(a) of the
Act. No question was then raised concerning his standing to make the application: that proceeding was finalised by terms of settlement filed on 9
March 1994, the salient term of which was: "Defendants [that is, Phillips Fox] agree that on request by Jiwira P/L or ("PIBA") Primary Industry Bank of Australia the defendants will provide bills of costs in taxable form in respect of all costs paid by PIBA and debited to the account of Jiwira P/L as soon as reasonably practicable." 
The terms envisaged delivery of a "bill of costs" as then contemplated by ss and 199.

On 18 March 1994 Jiwira requested such a bill of costs and during October and
November 1994 a series of bills were delivered to Jiwira by Phillips Fox.
These totalled, not the $223,896 originally charged, but $166,724. In November
Baker applied to this court for assessment of the costs. In doing so he relied upon the provisions of <case> of the Act in its amended form. It will be necessary to consider the application of this section at a later point in this judgment. No objection was taken by Phillips Fox, or PIBA, to Baker's application, and the bills were referred to Mr Gordon Salier, a costs assessor appointed under <case>.

Having considered the bills of costs in accordance with the current provisions of the Act, Salier substituted for the amount claimed an amount of $108, 296, the amount he determined to be fair and reasonable costs for the legal services represented by the bills delivered by Phillips Fox to Jiwira. On 23
November 1995 he issued a certificate in respect of each individual bill delivered, and on 8 January 1996, and he issued amended certificates. The amendments do not appear to be material for present purposes, and no issue is raised in that regard.

As a consequence of the certificates PIBA refunded to Jiwira a sum of almost $86,000. The difference between the amount initially debited by PIBA to
Jiwira's account and the amount ultimately assessed by Salier as fair and reasonable costs of the legal services for which Jiwira became liable is $115,600. The circumstances and quantum of the refund are among the many matters in dispute between the parties.

By summons dated 21 December 1995 Baker and Jiwira claimed a variety of orders and declarations concerning Salier's assessments of which ultimately only one was pursued. This was a declaration that Salier's determination should have contained an additional provision ordering Phillips Fox to pay Jiwira's costs of the assessment, and an assessment of those costs. The summons was, in fact, an appeal to this court pursuant to <case> L of the Act and commenced the proceedings which became known as the 1995 proceedings, but it is not the declaration there sought which is of present concern.

On 9 February 1996 Baker and Jiwira commenced proceedings in the District
Court, naming Phillips Fox as defendants, in which proceedings they sought to recover a sum of $65,723, said to represent the difference between the amount claimed in the bills of costs delivered by Phillips Fox and the amount ultimately substituted by Salier. (The mathematics do not appear to be accurate, but can safely be ignored for present purposes.) In this claim Baker and Jiwira relied upon <case> J of the Act. On 8 October 1996 this statement of claim was struck out in circumstances that do not preclude recommencement.

The 1995 summons was met by a cross-claim filed on behalf of Phillips Fox on April 1996 raising the questions that now fall to be determined. These questions concern the validity of Salier's determination and certificates, the power of Salier to make the determinations and issue the certificates, and the standing of Baker to make the application that the bills of cost be referred for assessment. Consequential orders were sought, specifically an order restraining Baker and Jiwira from taking any further steps to recover moneys from Phillips Fox on the basis of the certificates, including the further prosecution of the District Court proceedings. The summons and cross claim came before Master Greenwood, who, on 9 August 1996, upheld the contentions of
Phillips Fox in the cross claim and declared Salier's determinations to be null and void, and, accordingly, dismissed the appeal constituted by Baker and
Jiwira's summons. Pursuant to SCR Part 60 Rule 10 Baker and Jiwira now appeal those decisions of the Master. When it is not necessary to refer separately to
Baker and Jiwira they will be referred to as the appellants. As mentioned above, if this appeal is resolved in favour of the appellants, it will be unnecessary to proceed to deal with the 1996 proceeding. Only if the decision of the Master is confirmed will it be necessary to proceed to deal with that matter.

The orders made by the Master were framed as follows: "I therefore dismiss the appeal of the plaintiffs. I declare that the determinations of the costs assessor are null and void. I declare that proceeding with the assessments the assessor acted ultra vires. I restrain the plaintiffs from taking any further steps to recover moneys from the cross- claimant or taking any further steps to prosecute the proceedings No.455 of
I order that the determinations be delivered up for cancellation. I stand the question of costs over for further argument." 
Except for the opening sentence, these orders and declarations were all made, and the reasons which preceded them were given, in relation to the cross-claim and not in relation to the summons. Having made these orders and declarations the Master then proceeded to give brief reasons for dismissing the summons which was, as I have said, an appeal under <case> L of the Act.

The 1995 proceeding with which I am concerned is an appeal against the orders made on the cross-claim and not an appeal against the dismissal of the <case> L appeal. It is important specifically to note this because, while an appeal lies to a single judge in a Division against certain decisions of a Master pursuant to SCR Part 60 r 10, an appeal from the decision of a Master under s L of the Act lies only to the Court of Appeal (Part 60, r 17). The matters with which I am dealing are only those issues which arose on the cross claim.

The 1995 Proceeding 
Master Greenwood held that the appellants had no rights under the present Part , to have the bills assessed. It will be remembered that the entitlement to apply for assessment is, by <case>, given to "a client who is given a bill of costs." Master Greenwood held as he did, essentially, because neither Baker nor Jiwira was a "client" such as to entitle him or it to seek assessment under <case>. Under the 1987 legislation Jiwira at least, as a person liable to pay the costs (by reason of the mortgage agreements) would have been entitled to apply for taxation, but this entitlement did not survive the amendments, and all counsel agreed that the relevant provisions for this purpose are the 1993 provisions.

I respectfully agree with the decision of Master Greenwood. "Client" is, as I have noted above, defined inclusively for the purposes of <case>, but not in such a way as to incorporate either Baker or Jiwira. Neither was a party to a costs agreement. Nor were they "clients" within the ordinary meaning of the word. There was nothing that could remotely come within the description of a solicitor-client relationship between Phillips Fox and either appellant; indeed, Phillips Fox were acting for, and giving advice to, their adversary in the litigation, PIBA.

It was argued that the definition of "client" that appeared in the 1987 Act should be imported into the present legislation. If that were done, Jiwira, as a person liable to pay Phillips Fox's costs, would have the requisite standing to apply for assessment, and, arguably, Baker, who as guarantor was a person who may have become liable to pay the costs, might have a like entitlement.

I cannot accept the submission. The legislature cannot have intended that a repealed definition be used to extend the class of persons entitled to make application under <case> in its amended form . Had it intended that the class of person so entitled be extended in the manner suggested, it was a simple legislative matter to leave the definition as part of the Act. The repeal must be taken to have been intentional. Neither Baker nor Jiwira was a "client" within the meaning of <case> as amended.

In any event, to import the repealed definition in the way suggested would not avail the appellants. It was Baker who made the application, but, "client" or not, Baker was never given a bill of costs. This is so even though, by the amendment to <case>, "bill of costs" is given a less restricted meaning than it previously had. Phillips Fox's "client" was PIBA, which was rendered an account. Pursuant to the terms of settlement of March 1994 Jiwira requested and was given bills of costs but such a right did not extend to Baker by means of the terms of settlement. He was neither a "client" nor a "client who (had been) given a bill of costs". He therefore had no standing to make the application for assessment. The procedures which were set in train by his application for assessment were flawed from their commencement, unless they can be shown to have been saved by the transitional provisions that accompanied the amending legislation.

Transitional Provisions 
Counsel for the appellants therefore sought to rely also upon the transitional provisions enacted pursuant to Schedule 8 of the Act. These provisions are to be found in the Legal Profession Regulation 1994, clause 79 of which provides: "79(1) This clause applies in respect of costs which are the subject of a bill given to a client (or which are the subject of an order of a court or tribunal made) on or after 1 July 1994.

An assessment of those costs under Division 6 of new Part 11 of the Act, to the extent that the costs relate to any work done by a solicitor or barrister, or action taken, before 1 July 1994, is to be made by a costs assessor in accordance with new Part 11 of the Act. However, the former taxation principles apply to any such assessment and that Part is to be construed accordingly." 
Sub clause (1) defines the application of the substantive provisions of the clause. Those provisions apply only to costs subject to a bill given to a client (or subject to an order of a court or tribunal made) on or after 1 July
The words in parentheses can be disregarded. They refer to an order of a court or tribunal for the payment of costs, as contemplated by <case>. In order to make clause 79 applicable the appellants must show that the costs in question were the subject of a bill given to a client on or after 1 July 1994.
They cannot do so. The client was PIBA; the bill was given to PIBA well before July 1994. Bills were given, in accordance with the terms of settlement, to
Jiwira in October and November 1994, but Jiwira was not a client.

An argument was advanced by PIBA that the "bill" that was given to that company was not a "bill" within the meaning of the Act in either its amended or unamended forms but it is unnecessary to consider this question. Clause 79 has no application.

Even if all this were not so, clause 79 would not help the appellants. The clause was relied upon for the purpose of seeking to take advantage of the application of "the former taxation principles" and the construction of Part as amended in accordance with those principles. It was argued that "former taxation principles" should be construed to include the repealed statutory provisions, and that therefore, in relation to costs the subject of a bill given to a client after 1 July 1994, but relating to work done prior to that date, the position is governed by the Act in its unamended form. If this was so, the former definition of "client" would apply, Jiwira would be a client within that extended definition and would be entitled to apply for assessment, and Baker may also be a client in that sense.

For two reasons the submission must fail. Firstly, "former taxation principles" cannot be extended to include "former taxation provisions". A reading of clause 71 of the Regulation puts that beyond doubt. The two phrases are given separate definitions and appear in separate clauses in the
Regulation. It is quite plain that the one was not intended to encompass the other. Secondly, clause 79(2) is concerned only with the task to be undertaken by a costs assessor, and the principles and provisions to be applied in the assessment. The clause is not concerned with the identification of persons entitled to apply for assessment.

Clause 79 is not effective to bring either Baker or Jiwira into <case> (1) as amended and to confer on either of them an entitlement to apply for an assessment of costs.
 [Interpretation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/) 
Finally, reliance was placed upon the [Interpretation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/) , [ss ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/s30.html) (c) and [33](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/s33.html). [S (1)(c)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/s30.html) provides: "30(1) The amendment or repeal of an Act or statutory rule does not: affect any privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under the Act or statutory rule, ..." 
S 33 provides: "33 In the interpretation of an Act or statutory rule, a construction that would promote the purpose or object underlying the Act or statutory rule (whether or not that purpose or object is expressly stated in the Act or statutory rule or, in the case of a statutory rule, in the Act under which the rule was made) shall be preferred to a construction that would not promote that purpose or object." 
S 30(1)(c) 
It was argued that, at the time the amendments took effect, the appellants had accrued a right under the unamended <case>(a) and this right was preserved by <case>(c). The right said to have been so accrued was identified as a right to have a bill of costs taxed in accordance with the then current provisions of the Act. For reasons already explained, this may well have been so in the case of Jiwira, and may arguably have been so in the case of Baker, but this is not the right upon which they now seek to rely. They seek to rely upon an entirely different right, a right to apply for assessment under the new provisions. Such a right had certainly not and could not have accrued when the amendment took effect. S 30(1)(c) is of no assistance to the appellants in this regard.

S 33 
No purpose or object was identified as a purpose or object underlying the amending legislation such as to suggest a construction in accordance with s
The long title of the Legal Profession Reform Act 1987 (1993) is: "An Act to amend the [Legal Profession
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/) in relation to the structure, regulation and discipline of the legal profession, the making and handling of complaints about legal practitioners and the regulation of legal fees and other costs; and for other purposes." 
It was argued that the legislature, far from intending to extinguish rights which existed prior to the date of commencement of the amending legislation, intended to create powerful new rights for "clients" and to preserve rights that existed prior to July 1994. Certainly, the 1993 Act was designed to bring about a restructuring in the supervision and operation of the legal profession, but I do not see in that Act any indication that would suggest a construction other than that which emerges from the natural and ordinary meaning of its provisions.

None of the arguments advanced on appeal withstands analysis, and the Master's decision must, in general, be confirmed. It does not, however, follow that all orders made by him should stand. Having regard to the conclusion I have reached in relation to the 1996 proceedings, the order restraining the appellants from pursuing further steps to recover moneys from Phillips Fox must be set aside. In other respects the order I propose to make will have the effect of confirming the Master's decision.

It will be necessary to move to the 1996 proceeding.

The 1996 Proceedings 
Against the possibility of failure in the appeal Baker and Jiwira (the plaintiffs in these proceedings) filed a further summons on 20 September 1996.
Phillips Fox and PIBA are named as defendants. The plaintiffs seek orders: that identified bills of costs be referred for taxation; that such taxation be on a common fund basis; that the bills of costs be moderated; that the bills of costs be referred for assessment; that such assessment be carried out by Salier; that Salier be at liberty to adopt his earlier assessments.

Other orders sought were either of a procedural nature or were not pursued.

The Application for Taxation 
The plaintiffs relied upon clause 80 of the Legal Profession Regulation 1994 (the transitional provisions) which provides: "80(1) This clause applies to costs which are the subject of a bill given to a client (or which were the subject of an order of a court or tribunal made) before 1 July 1994.

The former taxation provisions continue to apply (and new Part 11 of the
Act does not apply) in respect of costs if application is made before 1 July , whether for the taxation or assessment of the costs.

If, however, application is made on or after 1 July 1995 (whether for the taxation or assessment of the costs), the costs are to be assessed in accordance with new Part 11 of the Act. However, the former taxation principles apply to any such assessment and that Part is to be construed accordingly." 
The defendants argued that the plaintiffs do not, for a variety of reasons, come within clause 80. Firstly, it was said, the "bill" referred to in the sub clause is to be read as a "bill of costs" as defined in 1987 legislation, and the "bill" which was given to the client (PIBA) did not come within that definition. I do not accept this argument. The sub clause does not refer to a "bill of costs" as defined in either the pre-amendment or the post-amendment legislation and I see no reason to read "bill" as meaning anything other than a bill, or an account in its ordinary sense. Such a bill was given to a client before 1 July 1994 and the clause applies.

The defendants next argued that sub clause (2) does not benefit the plaintiffs because Baker, who made the application for assessment of costs in November , lacked standing to do so. The phrase "former taxation provisions" is defined in clause 71 to include the provisions of Part 11 Division 5 of the
Act as in force immediately before 1 July 1994. S 199 was one such provision.
It is therefore now necessary to determine whether, as guarantor of Jiwira's obligations under the mortgage agreements, Baker was " a person who [was] liable to pay" the costs. I do not think he was. He was, at most, a person with a potential liability. That liability would crystallise only on default by Jiwira. I note in passing that the defendants pointed to correspondence dated October 1993 in which Phillips Fox, acting on behalf of PIBA, advised the plaintiffs' solicitors that, as a result of sums raised by the sale of certain properties, PIBA would not pursue its rights under Baker's guarantee and confirmed that Baker was released from all obligations he had assumed thereunder. Having regard to the conclusion I have earlier reached, it is unnecessary to consider whether this release affected Baker's liability to pay the costs.

Jiwira, which did, in my opinion, have relevant standing, was not a party to the application made before 1 July 1995. I therefore accept the defendant's argument that sub-clause (2) does not apply.

That leaves only sub clause (3). That sub clause envisages application for taxation or assessment where the bill was delivered before 1 July 1994, but application is made after 1 July 1995. In these circumstances the costs are to be assessed in accordance with the new provisions, but with the application of "the former taxation principles".

The question which arises is whether, by reason of the words "the costs are to be assessed in accordance with new Part 11 of the Act", standing to make the application is governed by the new legislation. I do not accept that that was the intent of the legislature. In my opinion, sub clause (3) is directed to providing guidance to costs assessors as to the processes, rules, principles and provisions which are to be applied in the assessment of costs during the transitional period. It was not intended to substitute the standing provisions of the new s199 for those which existed previously. It did not alter or remove the right of a person who had standing to seek taxation.

In this respect, <case>(c) of the Interpretation Act 1268 does have application. As at 1 July 1994 Jiwira did have a right under <case>(a) to seek taxation of the costs for which it was liable. That right was not taken away by the new legislation and the new sub clause 3 does not prevent Jiwira from exercising that right.

I am of the view that Jiwira has standing to apply for taxation of the bills.
Should an order for taxation be made, the costs will be assessed in the manner laid down by sub clause(s).

The defendants next argued, on discretionary grounds, that an order for assessment should not be made. Three arguments were advanced to support this position. In the first place, it was argued, PIBA has refunded to Jiwira the amount of costs held by Salier to have been excessive. Counsel for PIBA was not in a position to inform me whether or not, should the appeal in relation to the 1995 proceedings be dismissed, PIBA would seek to recover from Jiwira the amount refunded, although such a course would be open to it. Jiwira is, therefore, as I perceive it, at some risk that PIBA might proceed to some such action. Moreover, I was informed that the amount of the refund and the manner in which it was calculated is in dispute. It was acknowledged that, from the $115,000 that would have been due to Jiwira on a direct calculation of the difference between the amount originally debited and the amount certified by
Salier, PIBA had deducted some sums representing additional costs of other proceedings in respect of which costs orders in favour of PIBA had been made against Jiwira. In other words, the $86,000 refunded was not a true reflection of the amounts Salier found to have been excessive but was arrived at after set-off of other amounts as to which there is no agreement between the parties. The fact that a refund, calculated by PIBA and without agreement as to accuracy by Jiwira has been made is not sufficient reason to deny Jiwira the relief to which it would otherwise be entitled. Further, it is entirely possible that a taxation of costs, if ordered, will produce a result different from that of Salier, whether more or less favourable to Jiwira. Jiwira is entitled, the assessments having been declared null and void at the instigation of Phillips Fox, with the support of PIBA, to pursue the remedies that remain open to it.

The second argument against ordering taxation was that the application constitutes an abuse of process. Reference was made to the District Court proceedings (now struck out, but possibly still able to be reinstated or recommenced), and to proceedings on foot in the Equity Division of this court in which Baker and Jiwira seek, against PIBA, among other things, an accounting that includes an assessment of the fees properly payable to
Phillips Fox by Jiwira.

AGC (Advances) Limited versus West [(1986) 5 NSWLR 301] was advanced as authority for the proposition that the taking of accounts in the Equity proceedings is the appropriate and preferred means of resolving the disputes between the parties over the bills. At least in part this was said to be because PIBA has no quarrel with the quantum of bills rendered to it by Phillips Fox, and those parties are entitled to enter into whatever contractual arrangements suit them. The only concern to Jiwira is the amount in which it is obliged to indemnify PIBA and this can best be done by the application of the principles in West. I do not read West as authority for the proposition for which it was cited. Nor do I accept that the taking of accounts between PIBA and Jiwira in this court is a preferred means of finally resolving the proper amount of legal costs for which Jiwira is liable. The procedures provided for in the Act are specifically designed for that purpose and are, in my view, the preferred means to that end. 
PIBA further argued that as the plaintiffs accept that the assessments are correct in amount it would be inappropriate and unnecessary to refer them for taxation, and that to seek to do so is vexatious. The foundation for this argument was the appeal against the decision of Master Greenwood, and the attempt on the part of the plaintiffs by means of the appeal to preserve the assessments. The argument, of course, cuts both ways. PIBA supported Phillips
Fox in its successful attempt to nullify Salier's assessments. It can hardly now, having been successful in that endeavour, argue that the plaintiffs are bound by the assessments that have been declared void. That Jiwira failed in its attempt to have the assessments maintained does not prevent it, on its failure, from seeking an alternative result which may ultimately turn out to be more or less favourable to it.

Jiwira has, I conclude, established its entitlement to an order that the bills be taxed. Baker has not, but that is immaterial.

Jiwira sought an additional order that the costs be taxed on a common fund basis, and, for that purpose, also relied upon West. While I think
West does support such an approach to the taxation, I am of the view that the application of the appropriate principles can safely be left to the assessor.

In addition to the other orders, Jiwira sought an order that the bills be moderated, relying upon Storer and Co versus Johnson and Weatherall [[1890] AC 203.] Having regard to the conclusions I have reached it is unnecessary to deal with this argument.

The remaining orders sought were that the assessments be carried out by
Salier, and that he be at liberty to adopt his previous assessments. While it would be a practical use of resources if Salier, with his familiarity with the matters raised in the assessments, were to undertake the task, it is not appropriate to direct that the assessments be carried out by any particular person, and I decline so to order. Similarly, it would be inappropriate to make any orders about the use of the previous assessments; the costs assessor will apply the provisions of clause 80(3) as he or she considers proper.

The orders I make are:
The 1995 Proceeding 
Order that the certificates as to determination of costs numbered /1994, 12794/1994, 12795/1994, 12796/1994, and 12797/1994 issued by Gordon A Salier on 23 November 1995, and the amended certificates bearing the same numbers issued by him on 8 January 1996 be set aside.
The 1996 Proceeding 
Order that the bills of costs referred to in Schedule B (as amended by amendment filed in court on 30 October 1997) of the summons dated 20 September be referred for assessment.

I will hear the parties in relation to any further or consequential orders sought, including questions of costs.
 * * * 
