

Costantinidis and Ors versus Jgl Nos. Ca 40193/95; Ed 1828/95 Companies [1995]
NSWSC 141 (8 November 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
KIRBY P(1) MEAGHER(2) AND POWELL(3) JJA
HRNG
SYDNEY, 28 April and 12
May 1995 #DATE 19:5:1995 #ADD 8:11:1995 
Counsel for the Appellant      D M J Bennett QC with :    
A C Bennett SC and
S C G Burley 
Solicitors for the Appellant     Abbott
Tout :
 
Counsel for the Appellant      D M J Bennett QC and (Semlow):
P R Graham QC 
Solicitors for the
Appellant     Parish Patience :
 
Counsel for the Respondent (JGL):  R C McDougall QC and 
A G Bell 
Solicitors for the Respondent (JGL): Minter Ellison
ORDER
Appeal allowed
JUDGE1
KIRBY P Before the
Court is an appeal from orders of Rolfe J, in the Equity
Division of the Supreme Court, appointing a provisional liquidator to Elenium.
Pty Limited (Elenium). The appellants are Mr Achilles Constantinidis, who is a director of Elenium, and two companies associated with Mr Constantinidis,
Sephrenia Pty Limited (Sephrenia) and Semlow Pty Limited (Semlow). The effective respondent to the appeal is JGL Pte Limited (JGL), a Hong Kong based company. It owns 50 per cent of the shares in Elenium. JGL was the plaintiff in the proceedings before Rolfe J.
The proceedings first came before this Court as a matter of urgency on a summons for leave to appeal against
Rolfe J's decision appointing a provisional liquidator to Elenium. The Court expedited the hearing of the summons. It required notice to be given to the Australian Securities
Commission, which elected not to intervene. On 12 May 1995, at the conclusion of the summons hearing, the Court granted the appellants leave to appeal. It is important that the appeal be determined quickly, for reasons which will become obvious.
 
A joint venture involved in the business of a piggery
The facts are complicated. The dispute involves a number of related and unrelated companies. The proceedings at first instance were commenced when, on April 1995, JGL, issued a summons seeking certain orders. These were orders that Elenium be wound up under the Corporations Law, that a liquidator be appointed, that an order be made pursuant to <case> of the Law that JGL purchase the shares of Mr Achilles Constantinidis (the first appellant before this Court) and Sephrenia (the second appellant) in Euphron Pty Limited (Euphron, the third respondent), and, alternatively, an order pursuant to s of the Law that Euphron purchase the shares of Mr Constantinidis and
Sephrenia in Euphron, and for the reduction, accordingly, in Euphron's capital and consequential relief. Following criticism by this Court arguendo about the combination of some of these claims, action was apparently taken in the Equity
Division to sever the claim for the reduction of capital and the relief consequential thereon.
Elenium is a New South Wales company formed in July 1994. It is 50 per cent owned by Semlow (a company which is controlled by Mrs Constantinidis, the wife of Mr Achilles Constantinidis) and 50 per cent owned by JGL. The directors of Elenium are Mr Constantinidis, Mr Bradley Kerr (an officer of JGL
Pte Limited) and Mr Michael Carnegie who is an alternate director of Mr Kerr.
Mr Kerr lives outside Australia.
Elenium fattens pigs at two piggeries located at Warwick, in Queensland, and Scone, in New South Wales. At any time a total of 4,000 sows are kept at the two piggeries. The piggery at Warwick is owned by Darling Downs
Piggery
Pty Limited (DDP). The piggery at Scone is owned by Hunter Valley Piggeries
Pty Limited (HVP). Both of these companies are wholly owned subsidiaries of
Euphron. DDP and HVP own the breeding stock of pigs at the piggeries. However
Elenium feeds both its own floor stock (the piglets being reared for sale) and this breeding stock.
Danpork Australia Pty Limited (DPA) is a New South
Wales company which was set up to be the corporate vehicle for a joint venture entered into between
Euphron and a Danish company,
Danpork A/S. The joint venture was established to facilitate the introduction to Australia of the Danish Slaughterhouse
Method for the processing of pigs. The DPA joint venture agreement requires
Danpork A/S and Euphron to make equal financial contributions to the project.
One half of the pig carcasses supplied to DPA are supplied by Elenium. This comprises 80 per cent of the pigs which
Elenium fattens at the piggeries.
I set out below the chart showing the corporate structure of the companies affected by this litigation. (Chart omitted)
Until mid 1994 Sephrenia owned 100 per cent of the shares in Euphron.
However, on 17 March 1994,
JGL and Sephrenia entered into a Subscription and
Shareholders' Agreement pursuant to which JGL purchased 50 per cent of the issued share capital of Euphron. The directors of Euphron are Mr Kerr and Mr
Constantinidis, with Mr Carnegie as an alternate director to
Mr Kerr.
 
Disputes arise between the joint venturers affecting cash flow
In recent months Elenium has been faced with some financial difficulties.
Rolfe J accepted that Elenium currently owes approximately $1.7 million to two suppliers of stock feed, namely, Mill
Master Feeds Pty Limited, and Farm Stock
Pty Limited. On Mr Constantinidis' evidence the weekly cost of the feed is between $110,000 and $130,000. On Mr Carnegie's evidence, it is approximately $150,000. Farm Stock Pty Limited recently made a demand for payment of some $700,000. However, this demand was not pressed after Mr Constantinidis offered a personal guarantee of 50 per cent of this amount.
In the week before the original hearing of this matter, JGL paid $300,000 to the creditors of Elenium. There was a dispute between the parties as to whether or not this payment represented a loan or a settlement of cross obligations.
In
December 1994 the directors of Elenium agreed that a "due diligence" inquiry should be conducted into the financial affairs of the company.
Subsequently, KPMG Peat Marwick, the company of accountants appointed for the purpose of the inquiry, produced a set of draft financial records for Elenium.
The draft balance sheet showed total current assets of some $4.2 million and total current liabilities of some $5.1 million, including $2.3 million owing at call to Euphron.
There was also a financial dispute between DPA and
Elenium. On 24
February 1995 DPA ceased to pay Elenium for pigs supplied to it allegedly because of the failure by Euphron to make the contributions to DPA required under the joint venture agreement. By 10 April 1995, DPA owed Elenium approximately $652,000 for pigs supplied.
 
The findings of the primary judge
Rolfe J found that it was likely that on the hearing of the winding up summons, it would be found that Elenium was insolvent within the terms of s
A of the Corporations Law. That section provides: "95A(1)
A person is solvent if, and only if, the person is able to pay all the person's debts, as and when they become due and payable.

A person who is not solvent is insolvent."
Rolfe J found that the information contained in the draft balance sheet accurately reflected the financial position of the company. Although the accounts prepared by KPMG Peat Marwick were only in draft form, Rolfe J noted that Mr Constantinidis had given evidence that the accounts had not been finalised only because of two outstanding issues which related to Euphron. Mr
Constantinidis did not raise any comment as to the draft accounts of Elenium when given the opportunity to do so.
Rolfe J examined the question of whether JGL was entitled to bring these proceedings. He noted that, although it was not clear from the summons what status JGL claimed to have to bring the proceedings, it was made clear in the evidence, and the submissions, that it brought the proceedings both as a contributory and as a creditor of Elenium. As to the question of whether JGL was entitled to bring the proceedings in its capacity as a contributory, counsel for Mr Constantinidis relied on three English decisions to support a proposition that proceedings might only be brought by a contributory where it could show that there would be some assets available after winding up. The decisions relied upon were In re Rica Gold Washing Company [(1879) 11 Ch D 36]; and In re Chesterfield
Catering Co Limited [(1977) Ch D 373.] However it was conceded that the decision of Needham J in Re Campbells Corporation Limited and the Company's Act [(1978) ACLR 519] was to the contrary. Rolfe J decided that it was appropriate to follow the decision of Needham J. He said that he had some difficulty on understanding how the opposite conclusion was reached in Re Chesterfield
Catering Co Limited. Thus Rolfe J considered there was no bar to JGL bringing these proceedings in its capacity as a contributory. His Honour noted that it had not been suggested that
JGL was not entitled to bring the proceedings in its capacity as a creditor.
It was submitted on behalf of Mr Constantinidis that the financial troubles of Elenium had been resolved by the giving of personal guarantees and the normalisation of the trading situation. Rolfe J rejected these claims. His
Honour found that it had become necessary to "prop up" Elenium. by these personal guarantees.
Furthermore, Rolfe J said that he was unable to see how the company would be able to discharge the debts it already owed from current income, particularly the $1.7 million owed to the feed companies.
Rolfe J stated that Elenium stood aloof from the particular commercial arrangements between JGL and the companies controlled by Mr Constantinidis.
There was no obligation on JGL to pay funds to Elenium. His Honour concluded that the significance of the overall dispute between these parties was outweighed by the financial consequences which might flow from allowing
Elenium to continue to trade.
Rolfe J also considered the effects which the appointment of a provisional liquidator would have on the Elenium. His Honour found no evidence, in this case, that such an appointment would bring about breaches of any security documents. He considered the submission that the appointment of a provisional liquidator would jeopardise certain development which the company was undertaking in Queensland. However, he felt that this consideration, if established, was not sufficient to outweigh the factors supporting the appointment. Nor did Rolfe J think that the potential jeopardy of DPA's supply of pigs was a sufficient reason for not appointing a provisional liquidator.
Finally, Rolfe J considered the claim that these proceedings had been brought by JGL for the improper purpose of bringing commercial pressure to bear upon Mr Constantinidis with a view to forcing the resolution of the overall commercial dispute between the parties favourably to JGL. That dispute included the question of whether JGL had made the appropriate contributions to the DPA joint venture, as required by the Subscription and
Shareholders'
Agreement. Rolfe J rejected this argument. His Honour was of the opinion that if this claim were to be properly made, the suggestion that there had been an ulterior purpose in bringing the proceedings should have been put directly to
Mr Carnegie during cross-examination, as it had not been. He proceeded to order that a provisional liquidator be appointed.
 
The appellants' criticisms of the appointment of a provisional liquidator
The appellants presented four major arguments in support of their claim that this Court should reverse the decision of Rolfe J.
First, the appellants argued that it was clear that Elenium had been at all relevant times, and remained, solvent within the terms of <case> of the
Law. The appellants submitted that Rolfe J's analysis of the solvency of
Elenium was vitiated by three factors. The first was a mathematical error.
Rolfe J stated that, given the weekly cost of feed, it was "difficult to see" how the $1.7 million debt to the feed companies had arisen. The appellants argued that this was not the case. They claimed that the weekly cost of feed multiplied by the pig feeding cycle (19 weeks) produced a total of between $2.09 million and $2.85 million. Given that DPA had held back its payments for some time, the appellant's argued that it was "easy to see" how the debt of $1.7 million could have arisen. They argued that Rolfe J's supposed error was based on his Honour's original misreading of the evidence whereby he initially thought that the period of feeding was 19 days rather than 19 weeks. It was common ground that this was what his Honour had originally said when giving judgment and that the mistake had to be corrected. The appellants argued that it infected his Honour's approach to the projected cumulation of debts and cashflow obligations on a cycle of 19 days rather than 19 weeks.
The second problem with Rolfe J's approach to the issue of solvency, so it was argued, was that his
Honour had failed to recognise that the debt to the feed stock companies had been present for many years. Yet the company had continued its profitable trading over that time. Finally, the appellants submitted that, in his analysis of Elenium's solvency, Rolfe J had failed to take into account the fact that the real reason why money had not been flowing onto Elenium was that JGL had been refusing to meet its share of the DPA joint venture liabilities. That is, the appellants argued, the major factor which his Honour relied on to establish insolvency had been deliberately induced by
JGL, the party which now sought to establish such insolvency. Such reliance upon its own wrongful conduct should have been a reason to refuse the relief sought in the exercise of the Court's discretion.
In addition to these supposed errors in Rolfe J's analysis of Elenium's solvency, the appellants argued that an analysis of the company's balance sheet showed that it had an ability to meet its debts as they fell due. To this end, while acknowledging that the balance sheet showed total assets of $4.3 million and total current liabilities of $5.1 million, the appellants argued that a number of items appearing as current liabilities were not presently payable, or likely to become so in the near future. In particular, the appellants argued that the debt owed to Euphron of $2.3 million should not be taken into account since Mr Constantinidis had one half of the shareholding and one half of the board representation on Euphron, as well as the casting vote. Thus, it was submitted, there could be no suggestion that this internal debt would be demanded in the near future. Mr Constantinidis was scarcely likely to make a demand which would damage his corporate interests. This factor had not been taken into account, or sufficiently into account, by Rolfe
J in viewing the commercial realities of Elenium's trading position. The appellants also argued that a number of other items recorded in the balance sheet as liabilities should not have been taken into account because they were either provisions, they were backed by guarantees and thus not presently demanded, or they were owed to companies controlled by Mr Constantinidis. The appellants maintained that the fact that these creditors were not pressing their claims meant that the debts were not "due" within the meaning of <case> of the Law. To this end, they argued that the expression "able to pay as and when they become due and payable" in <case> of the Law was a composite phrase which had always been so interpreted to relate to a continuing situation. The only item which the appellants acknowledged as presently payable was the $300,000 put in by JGL. But it was argued that this debt alone, in the circumstances in which it was paid, could not justify a finding of insolvency with the grave and possibly commercially fatal step of appointing a
provisional liquidator as Rolfe J had done.
The second major issue relied upon by the appellants was the alleged failure by Rolfe J to deal with their major legal argument. This argument was that JGL had basically engineered the financial difficulties of Elenium by refusing to pay its share of the money owed to DPA under the joint venture agreement between Euphron and Danpork A/S.
This failure resulted in DPA withholding the money which it owed to Elenium for the supply of pigs. The appellants sought to draw an analogy between the situation which had then arisen affecting Elenium, and the suggested rule in bankruptcy that a person who is privy to an act of bankruptcy cannot petition on the basis of it. They cited the decisions in Bamford versus Baron and Ors [(1788) 2 TR 594n] at in support of this proposition. It was submitted that Rolfe J should, at the very least, have considered this argument in the exercise of his discretion to appoint a provisional liquidator.
The appellants also alleged that Mr Carnegie arranged to offset the money owed by JGL (through its interest in Euphron) against the money owed to
Elenium. This, it was claimed, represented a clear breach of duty by Mr
Carnegie as a director of Elenium. The appellants argued that Rolfe J erred in rejecting this argument on the basis that Mr Carnegie had not been cross-examined on the issue of any ulterior purpose. They submitted that, in interlocutory proceedings, parties were not obliged to establish facts finally, merely to establish or negate prima facie evidence of facts.
Therefore, it was argued, rules such as those in Browne versus Dunn and Jones v
Dunkel had a very limited application in such interlocutory proceedings.
Moreover, the appellants argued that the person against whom the allegations of mala fides were made was not Mr Carnegie, but Mr
Kerr, given that Mr
Carnegie had said that the relevant decisions were made not by him, but by Mr
Kerr, overseas. Thus, there was nothing which could have been usefully put to
Mr Carnegie. The appellants submitted that if one of the evidentiary rules were to be applied, it would be an application of Jones versus Dunkel against JGL for its failure to call Mr Kerr, and not a Browne versus Dunn comment that mala were not put to Mr Carnegie.
The third major argument put forward by the appellants related to the standing of JGL to bring the proceedings in this case. The appellants noted that JGL had not made clear, on its application to Rolfe J, either the basis on which it claimed to have standing, or the grounds on which it asserted that the company should be wound up. They argued that while JGL was clearly a contributory of Elenium, it was not a creditor. In support of this submission, the appellants argued that the $300,000 paid by JGL to or on behalf of Elenium did not constitute a "debt", since, given the circumstances in which the money was advanced, it could not be said that it was advanced "at the request of"
Elenium. They argued that conversations between
Mr Carnegie and Mr
Constantinidis showed that the $300,000 was only to be treated as a "debt" if the amounts previously forwarded by Mr Constantinidis were to be treated in a similar manner. Since no such agreement was ever finalised on that point, it was argued, the $300,000 should not be considered a "debt" of Elenium.
Therefore, JGL should not be considered a "creditor" of that company.
Thus, the appellants reasoned, JGL only had standing to make on application for the winding up of Elenium as a contributory.
 .
The appellants then submitted that JGL's application was not really brought on the grounds of insolvency, given that, in his affidavit,
Mr
Carnegie indicated that JGL made no demand for the repayment of the monies owing, and that in the same paragraph, Mr Carnegie expressed a concern to ensure that thereafter the company could be "effectively managed". The appellants argued that these statements clearly showed that JGL contemplated that the business of Elenium would continue, but under the control of persons other than the current directors. This led the appellants to conclude that rather than being founded on alleged insolvency, JGL's application was actually based on the "just and equitable ground", as expressed in <case> of the Law.
Therefore, the appellants alleged that not only did JGL not finally seek the winding-up of Elenium on the ground that it was insolvent but also that, since it had to base its standing on its status as a contributory, it did not have the leave of the Court to make such an application in accordance with the requirements of paragraph 459P (2)(b) of the Law. It is common ground that
Rolfe J did not expressly grant such leave. For JGL it was argued that the grant of any such leave must necessarily be inferred by what Rolfe J proceeded to do.
If the application for winding-up was, in fact, founded on the "just and equitable" ground (e.g. on the basis of the management deadlock), JGL would not need leave to bring the application, regardless of whether it was considered to be a contributory or a creditor. However, the appellants maintained that if it was accepted that Rolfe J ordered the winding-up of
Elenium on that basis, then his Honour should have given more weight to the alleged competing equitable considerations associated with JGL's conduct in allegedly causing Elenium's financial difficulties in the first place.
As well as the three preceding major arguments, the appellants ultimately argued that certain discretionary considerations strongly weighed against the appointment of a provisional liquidator. These considerations included the absence of urgency in the case, the risk of prejudice to the developments being undertaken in Queensland, the potential disruption to DPA's supply of pigs, and the impact on the guarantees given by Mr Constantinidis to the feed suppliers.
 
The respondent's defence of the orders of the primary judge
The first respondent, JGL, in substance submitted that Rolfe J had dealt with this case correctly and by reference to all relevant considerations. The second respondent, Elenium, was before the Court as the subject of the litigation.
JGL submitted that Rolfe J had correctly concluded that it was likely, on the hearing of the winding up summons, that Elenium would be found to be insolvent. That was all that his Honour had decided. He had not finally resolved the issue of insolvency, leaving that to the final hearing. The respondent noted the discretionary considerations which supported the making of the order, namely, the de facto existence of a management deadlock, the refusal of Mr Constantinidis to agree to the appointment of a voluntary administrator, the need to prevent continued insolvent trading, and the need to protect the continued existence of the company and the welfare of its creditors and employees and the public. It submitted that, in light of all of these factors, and the considerations which his Honour noted in his judgment
Rolfe J had correctly exercised his discretion. This Court should respect its discretionary character and not disturb it, save for a clearly established error of fact or law or the exercise of the discretion by reference to an incorrect principle.
During the hearing of the summons, the respondent submitted that the appellants should not be allowed to lead the fresh evidence which they tendered, namely, certain affidavits sworn after the original proceedings by
Mr Constantinidis and by Mr Anthony Norman, a consultant accountant to Ferrier
Hodgson, chartered accountants. These were tendered supposedly to establish the absence of insolvency at present and the current viability of Elenium. The
Court rejected the attempt to read these affidavits as relevant to the principal dispute in the summons, now in the appeal. The Court must, as a matter of principle, confine its review of the orders of Rolfe J to the material which was before his Honour and upon which he made the orders which are now challenged.
The respondent finally submitted that as to factual issues, not only was the conclusion to which Rolfe J came one which was open to him. It was, in all in the circumstances, the only view which was reasonably open to him. It also argued that
Rolfe J had applied the appropriate principles in this case. It stressed that the laws of insolvency are enacted, not primarily to protect the rights of shareholders and directors, but to protect the public interest, and in particular, those parties which deal with companies upon the faith of their solvency. In light of this, the respondent submitted that the private interests of the parties in this case, which were undoubtedly in dispute, should not be allowed to stand in the way of the proper exercise of the relevant provisions of the Law. This was the way Rolfe J had approached the matter. It was the correct approach. So went the submission of the respondent,
JGL.
 
Appointment of provisional liquidator - a serious step
I have set out a summary of the arguments of the parties in order to illustrate the complexity of the issues raised by this appeal and the finely balanced nature of the dispute between the parties. The hearing of the appeal was only expedited by cancelling, in turn, two other appeals awaiting their hearing in the
Court. It is the nature of applications of this kind, both at first instance and on appeal, that they must be dealt with very quickly.
See
Re McLennan Holdings Pty Limited [(1983) 1 ACLC 786 (SCQ)], 787. To those who would urge upon primary judges, or appellate courts, a deeper and longer reflection upon the nuances of argument,
I respond with something of the impatience which Harman J expressed in In re Harrods (Buenos Aires) Limited [(1992) Ch 72.] His Lordship remarked that part of the instruction of the House of Lords on a matter of practice was "wholly out of touch with reality".
See ibid, 80f. This Court cannot delay a decision in a case such as the present, however complex and fascinating the multiple issues argued may be.
The invocation of the jurisdiction of the Court is, as JGL pointed out, ultimately for the protection of the public. It also safeguards creditors, employees and others who deal with a company upon an assumption that it is viable and solvent.
A great deal of latitude must be allowed by an appellate court to primary judges in determining, even in a preliminary way, questions as to the solvency of a company. This is not only because of the disputable character of such issues and the frequent complexity of evaluating detailed financial evidence. It is also out of respect for the proper function of the primary judge and deference to the general rules against interference in discretionary decisions. Although many of the issues raised by the appellants in this appeal were not discretionary in character, the ultimate decision to appoint a provisional liquidator was. That decision did not involve a final determination that Elenium was insolvent. It merely involved a conclusion by
Rolfe J that it was likely, on the hearing of the winding up summons, that
Elenium would be so found.
I mean no disrespect to the arguments, of the parties by proceeding directly to the basis upon which I have concluded that an error has occurred which warrants the interference of this Court. Many of the arguments of the appellants I would reject. Some of them were demonstrated during argument to be without merit. But I will not stay to deal with them all because there simply is not the time. I regard it as imperative that this Court should fulfil its function without a delay which would be unjust to all parties.
The considerations which lead me to the conclusion that Rolfe
J's discretion miscarried, when he appointed a liquidator provisionally to Elenium on the ground of insolvency, rests upon my understanding of the very great care which must be exercised in taking that step.
In Zempilas and Ors versus J N Taylor Holdings Limited and
Ors [(1990) 3 ACSR (SCSA)], King CJ (with the agreement of Cox and Olsson JJ) stressed that: "The appointment of a provisional liquidator pending adjudication upon the petition for winding up, is a drastic intrusion into the affairs of the company and is not to be contemplated if other measures would be adequate to preserve the status quo."
In making a decision to appoint a provisional liquidator, as preliminary to a possible order to wind up a company for alleged insolvency, the court with the decision is dutybound to "take into account the reality of the trading position" of the company. See Re Newark Pty Limited (In Liq) (1993) 1
Qd R 409 (FCQ), 414.
The court will not look in a narrow and particular way only at the position of identified debts or specified creditors. It will consider "the debtor's financial position in its entirety". A conclusion of insolvency "generally speaking ought not to be drawn simply from evidence of a temporary lack of liquidity". See Sandell versus Porter and Anor <case>; [(1966) 115 CLR ], 670. In judging the question and in prognosticating its likely resolution, the court does not forfeit its evaluation and characterisation of the solvency of the company either to balance sheets and financial statements (which can be misleading) or to the evidence of accountants or company officers. The court adopts a realistic assessment and takes "into account the times extended to the company to pay its creditors, and in turn ... the times within which it might reasonably expect to receive payments of debts owing to it.".
See Re Newark (above) at 413. Cf Calzaturificio Zenith Pty Limited (In
Liq) versus NSW Leather and Trading Co Pty Limited <case>; [(1970) VR 605 (VSC).]
All parties to the present dispute were content to accept, as applicable, the principles stated by Master Lee (as Lee J then was) in Re McLennan
Holdings Pty Limited [(1983) 1 ACLC 786 (SCQ).] I am also content to accept those principles. They include, at 790f: "1. A provisional liquidator is not automatically appointed by the Court for the mere asking ... even when the company presents its own petition.
A provisional liquidator may only be appointed after presentation of a duly authorised petition which must disclose a good ground for winding up ...
Whilst the ultimate fate of the petition must be left to the
Court finally hearing the matter, a provisional liquidator will not usually be appointed unless it appears in the material that a winding-up order is likely ... This presupposes that there should be adequate evidence adduced on an application for appointment of a provisional liquidator lo show that a winding-up is, in the absence of material to the contrary, likely.
A company seeking the appointment of a provisional liquidator after presentation of its own petition must at least show that the application is for a bona fide purpose ...
The power to appoint a provisional liquidator is in no way limited; ... The circumstances (which may constitute sufficient ground) under which a provisional liquidator may be appointed are infinite: Re Club Mediterranean Pty Limited [(1975) 11 WR ], 484 ... There is no reason why the public interest should not operate in favour of or against the making of an appointment in particular circumstances ...
Whilst mere evidence of insolvency alone is usually insufficient to justify the appointment of a provisional liquidator at the instance of a creditor ... such evidence in the case of an application by a company may be sufficient to show that the application is bona fide and may be capable of constituting a 'sufficient ground' ..." .
In the present case, I am prepared to assume, without finally deciding, that the foundation for the consideration of the appointment of a provisional liquidator was established in the material put before Rolfe J and that JGL had, technically, the standing and entitlement in law to move the court for that purpose. However, with every respect to Rolfe J (who had to deal with the summons as one of great urgency) I have come to the conclusion that the drastic step of appointing a provisional liquidator was not warranted by the material placed before him in this case. The most important considerations which have led me to that view are as follows: 
No evidence was given that any creditors of Elenium were pressing for the payment of due debts. Those feed companies which were owed money had reached an accommodation with Mr Constantinidis which was apparently completely acceptable to them; 
To the contention that the personal guarantee of Mr Constantinidis was necessary to "prop up" the feed companies which had made a demand for payment, it is necessary to recognise the circumstances of that demand. The provision of the guarantee was not, in those circumstances, exceptional.
The creditors were immediately satisfied once the guarantee was given. Most importantly, they have continued to trade with Elenium.
There is no suggestion in the evidence before Rolfe J (nor in anything received by this Court) that the feed companies wished to join, as creditors, in the assertion that Elenium was insolvent. There was every reason why Mr Constantinidis, who had given the personal guarantee, would continue to ensure that it was honoured; 
There was no evidence that the trading pattern of Elenium had lately altered in any way adverse to the company. No particular event had occurred, such as the loss of a major customer which suggested the need for the Court to intervene. On the contrary, the evidence suggested the continuation of past commercial arrangements which had subsisted for some time and during which none of the creditors of Elenium, external to the joint venture, had ever suggested a problem with the company's liquidity;
This case is not determined by the balance sheets or the accounts. But what the accounts do arguably show is that, ignoring intra-group assets and liabilities, there are assets of $4,019,517 and liabilities of $1,800,218 (together with the disputed provision of $352,940). I do not consider that it was "taking into account the reality of the trading position" of Elenium to ignore these commercial arrangements within which Elenium was trading. Cf
Riviana (Aust) Pty Ltd versus Laospac
Trading Pty Ltd [(1986) 10 ACLR 865 (NSWSC)], 
There is at least a possibility that Rolfe J, in reaching his determination that a crisis of liquidity and insolvency was facing Elenium, was affected by his initial assumption that the feeding cycle of pigs (for which feed must be provided and paid) was nineteen days rather than nineteen weeks. If, indeed, the feeding cycle were nineteen days, it would be easy to understand a prediction of the rapid escalation of the debts owing to the feed companies and to raise a doubt as to how that debt could be serviced from the established income flow; 
Such dispute as had arisen occurred exclusively within the corporations involved in the joint venture operation. Clearly, a dispute had arisen between the JGL interests (on the one hand) and Mr Constantinidis and his companies (on the other). It is possible that that difference was approaching (if it had not reached) "deadlock", requiring intervention of the Court. I accept the submission of the respondent that in some cases of extended "deadlock", the inability of the directors to agree may itself cause insolvent trading and to that extent, if other expedients fail, will warrant appointment of a provisional liquidator. See Re Club Mediterranean Pty Limited [(1975) 11 SASR ], 484 cited in B. McPherson, The Law of Company Liquidation, 3rd ed., -111. Cf Alessi versus The Original Australian Art Co Pty Limited [(1989) 7 ACLC (SC)], 598. But the matter was dealt with by Rolfe J on the footing of the insolvency of Elenium. The provisional liquidator was appointed on that ground. Given the very drastic consequences of such a step, even as preliminary to the hearing of the winding up summons,
I am of the view, on the evidence placed before his Honour, that there was insufficient foundation for such an order to be made;
With respect to Rolfe J, I have concluded that, in making the order which he did, he gave insufficient consideration to the seriously adverse consequences which would necessarily follow from the appointment of a provisional liquidator. These included the possible loss of the benefit of a third party offer to purchase the Constantinidis interests; the risk of losing the advantage of the favourable completion of the environmental inquiry into the proposed Queensland development thereby substantially devaluing a major asset of the company, allegedly to an extent of many millions of dollars; the risk to HVP and DDP (wholly owned subsidiaries of Euphron) which owe the
Commonwealth Banking Corporation approximately $11 million, with guarantees from Mr Constantinidis personally, which debt may be called up if Elenium suffers the appointment of a provisional liquidator; the major disruption to the Danpork pig distribution programme which would ensue; and the possible adverse consequences to the fifty-five employees of Elenium. There are other serious adverse consequences which would arise from the appointment of a provisional liquidator. Were the liquidator to sell off the Elenium stock, there would, of necessity, be interference with the breeding stock owned by
HVP and DDP. There would a major disruption of the joint venture. There could also be disturbance of a substantial advance to the joint venture by the
National Australia
Bank Limited which the evidence suggested was to be secured by, amongst other things, stock and which was contingent upon a favourable environmental impact statement on the proposed Queensland development. I do not overlook the fact that the respondent contested the evidence that the bank was actually going to advance the loans.
I am very conscious of the restraints which the law imposes upon the disturbance of a discretionary decision to appoint a provisional liquidator.
However, having come to the firm conclusion that such a drastic interference in the operations of Elenium were not warranted on the material before Rolfe
J, I am driven to the opinion that his Honour must have acted on the wrong principle in taking the final step of ordering the appointment. Although reference was made, directly or indirectly, to the need for a practical view of the trading position of the company voiced in Re Newark and a need for hesitation and care voiced in Zempilas, McLennan Holdings and other cases, I have concluded, with respect, that these wen established principles were not sufficiently taken into account by Rolfe J in making the substantive order which is the subject of this appeal. Conclusions and orders
During the hearing of the summons, the appellants, as stated, sought to read fresh evidence concerning the solvency of Elenium, including fresh accounting evidence which was tendered to this Court but rejected.
It is clear, from the material which was placed before Rolfe J that there is a serious dispute between the JGL interests and those of the Constantinidis family. It is equally clear that it is in the public interest (as wen as that of shareholders, creditors and employees) that the dispute between these interests should be resolved as quickly as possible. The appointment of a provisional liquidator should not, on the material, have been the vehicle for the resolution of that dispute. Nor should either of the contestant groups secure advantage in the negotiations which win follow to resolve their differences by the appointment of a provisional liquidator on the ground of the insolvency of Elenium. There are various ways, including under the Law, otherwise than by the appointment of a provisional liquidator, that the dispute could be resolved. Least of all should it be resolved on the basis of a claim of insolvency by an alleged debtor whose own conduct has, in part at least brought about immediate problems in the cash flow of Elenium.
 .
I entirely agree that it is appropriate to take into account the position of the public and the long term interests of the shareholders, other creditors and of employees who are dealing with a company upon an assumption of viability and solvency. However, in the circumstances of this case there is no conceivable possibility that Mr Carnegie will be at personal risk of prosecution or personal liability if
Elenium continues to trade, at least at this stage. Nor do I consider that the risk of the directors to personal liability was a real motivation behind the initiation of the proceedings in the Court.
It is not appropriate for this Court to dismiss entirely the proceedings originally brought by JGL. The better course is to return the proceedings to the Division, where they have now been reconstituted following suggestions made during argument in this Court. In the Division it will be possible for Mr
Constantinidis and his interests to offer fresh evidence on the liquidity of
Elenium. It may also be hoped that the suggested "deadlock" between the parties may be resolved by agreement. It is important once again to emphasise that in the primary hearing, Rolfe J did not deal with the case as one of deadlock. Cf Rural Industries Cooperative Society Limited versus Porky Pigs Pty
Limited [(1988) 12 ACLR 794 (SASC)], 798. In these circumstances, the appellants rightly objected to this Court's dealing with the matter on that footing. See
Louinder v Leis <case>; [(1982) 149 CLR 509], 438. If the dispute of the parties cannot be resolved, consideration can be given, in the Division, to the steps which would then be appropriate to resolve the dispute in a way less damaging to the viability of the joint venture and its participants, and to their value as trading concerns. Such a course would be in the best interests not only of JGL but of
Elenium, its shareholders, creditors and employees, as well as of the
Constantinidis interests.
The orders which I favour are: 
Grant leave to appeal (as announced by the Court on 12 May 1995); 
Allow the appeal from the orders of Rolfe J of 12 April 1995; 
Set aside his Honour's orders; 
Order that the summons filed by the first respondent be returned to the
Equity Division of the Supreme Court for hearing conformably with the decision of this Court; 
Order that the costs of the proceedings at first instance be determined by the judge hearing the summons so returned; and 
Order that the first respondent pay the costs of the appellant of the appeal and of the summons for leave to appeal.
JUDGE2
MEAGHER JA In this matter I have read, and I agree with, the President's judgment. The appellants raised many issues, but only one, I think, of substance. That was that Rolfe J erred in law in failing to consider that the judicial remedy he granted was one of a wholly extraordinary nature, and the material in front of him fell far short of justifying that remedy.
JUDGE3
POWELL JA I have had the opportunity to read, in draft, the Judgment which has been prepared by Kirby P, with which Judgment, and the Orders proposed by
Kirby P for the disposition this Application and Appeal, I understand Meagher
JA to agree.
I regret that I am unable to agree with the conclusions to which
Kirby P has come, and, thus, am unable to join in the Orders which he has proposed for the disposition of this Application and Appeal.
Despite the multiplicity, and variety, of complaints which the Claimants sought to raise on the hearing of this Application and Appeal, the questions which, according to the Summons pursuant to which leave to appeal was sought, were involved were limited to the following: - "4. Whether JGL as a contributory of Elenium had standing to obtain a winding-up order at the final hearing of the proceedings.
Whether the decision of Needham
J in Re Campbells Corporation
Limited and The Companies Act [(1978) 3 ACLR 519] represents the law in New South Wales in light of the decision in Re
Chesterfield Catering Co. Limited [(1977) 1 Ch D 373.]
Whether in light of breaches of joint venture obligation owed by JGL to Euphron, it was permissible to regard Elenium as a distinct corporate entity in considering the appointment of a provisional liquidator.
Whether Rolfe J's discretion miscarried in appointing a provisional liquidator to Elenium." "The "Reasons Why Leave Should Be Given" being limited to: "1. His Honour's discretion miscarried and the effect of the order is to create irreversible damage to the businesses of
Elenium Pty. Limited and Euphron Pty. Limited and the likely collapse of their trading operations.
If leave is not given the collapse of the businesses of the company will overtake any practical right of appeal."
This statement of the "Questions Involved" and "The Reasons Why Leave
Should Be Given" in my view, demonstrate that, at the time, when the Summons was filed, in this Court, the only questions which the Claimants sought to raise were: - whether, by reason of the general law - as opposed to the provisions of the Corporations Law or the Rules of Court - a contributory was to be regarded as having a sufficient locus standi to present a Summons seeking the winding-up of a company on the ground of insolvency; whether Rolfe J ought to have dismissed the Motion for the appointment of a provisional liquidator upon the ground that the winding-up Summons had not been presented bona fide, but had been presented in order to achieve some ulterior, or collateral, purpose, and not with the genuine object of bringing about a winding-up; and whether, for any other reason, Rolfe J's discretion to appoint, or to decline to appoint a provisional liquidator, miscarried.
As will be apparent from this statement of the issues which, in my view, the Claimants, at the time of the filing of the Summons in this Court sought to raise, the question of Elenium's insolvency was not one of them.
Despite this fact, a great deal of time was devoted during the course of the hearing of the Summons in an endeavour to demonstrate that Elenium was not insolvent, great stress being placed upon what was described as "the reality of the trading position" (reference being made to the Judgment of the Full Court of the Supreme Court in Queensland in Re Newark Pty. Limited (in Liq.) ((1) [(1992) 1 Qd R 409], 414). Despite the efforts of the Claimants to establish to the contrary, and with respect to those who may hold a different view on the question, it seems to me that there was ample evidence upon which Rolfe J could, as he did, find that it was likely that, on the hearing of the winding-up Summons for, it would be found that Elenium was insolvent. In this regard, I need point only to the following: - 
Elenium was incorporated on 14th June 1994 as a "shelf company" its issued capital then - as it still seems to be - being $2.00. although such material as was before the Court does not include any relevant agreement, or agreements, pursuant to which the result is said to have been achieved, it is said that, as at 1 July 1994, Elenium acquired from another company,
Brown and Hatton Rural Pty. Limited ("Brown and Hatton") the whole of its assets - which appear to have been limited to production pig stock, feed stock and stocks of medication and also assumed responsibility for the liabilities of Brown and Hatton but whether by means of a novation with that company's suppliers, or by way of an agreement to indemnify that company in respect of its liabilities to its suppliers, is not clear - "for no consideration". Neither the value of the assets so transferred, nor the amount of the liabilities for which - whether directly or indirectly - liability was assumed by Elenium is revealed by the material which was before the Court.
in the period of six months, to 31st December 1994, Elenium sustained a gross loss on trading of $24,623.00. for the same period, Elenium sustained an operating loss of $822,721.00, the amount of such losses then being transferred to the balance sheet as at 31
December 1994.
that balance sheet disclosed total assets of $4,307,199.00 - current assets of $4,245,199.00 and non-current assets of $62,000.00 - the current assets being cash on hand and at bank - $76,120.00 - trade debtors - $427,007.00 - loans - to related companies - at call $287,682.00 - inventories - being livestock at cost - $3,292,641.00 feed on hand at cost - $121,946.00 - and medication at cost $34,129.00 - and pre-payments - $5,674.00. the same balance sheet disclosed current liabilities of $5,129,918.00 the principal liabilities - omitting provisions for annual leave and long service leave of $352,940.00 - being trade creditors - seemingly almost entirely for feed - $1,800,218.00 - accrued charges $212,214.00 - lease liability $62,002.00 - a total of $2,074,434,00 and loans - substantially, if not wholly, from related companies - at call $2,702,544,00 - the major creditor being Euphron in the sum of $2,322,829.00. the nett result was that, at 31st December 1994 - but a little over 6 months from its incorporation - Elenium had a nett deficiency in shareholders' funds in the sum of $822,719.00. the evidence which had been placed before Rolfe J at first instance did not suggest that there had been any, let alone any significant, improvement in the position revealed by the draft balance sheet of Elenium as at, and the accounts of Elenium for the period to, 31st December 1994.
Thus, it seems to have been accepted that the amount owing - whether directly or indirectly is not clear - to the suppliers of feed was of the order of $1,700,000.00 plus or minus $50,000.00, that a statutory demand had then but recently been served upon Elenium by Farmstock Pty. Limited, a supplier of feed which some $700,000.00 was owned, which demand was withdrawn only when Mr. Constantinidis provided to that company a guarantee for half of the debt.
I turn, then, to deal with the particular questions which the Claimants had argued on the hearing at first instance before Rolfe J and which in their
Summons in this Court they suggested were involved.
Of those questions, the first, as I have already noted, raised the question of the locus standi of the First Opponent ("JGL") to present a
Summons seeking an Order that Elenium be wound-up. Further, as I have already noted it, and as Rolfe J appears to have recorded it in his Judgment, the submission was based, not upon any provision of the Corporations Law, but upon the general law which had been developed over the years, and, in particular, had been developed prior to 1971. This being so, two observations might readily be made, they being: - in the circumstances, the submission was misconceived and irrelevant; and insofar as it asserted that Needham J's decision in Re Campbells
Corporation Limited ((2) [(1978) 3 ACLR 519)] was erroneous, it was based upon a failure to appreciate the differences between the language of the Companies
Act 1948 (UK) and the [Companies Act 1961](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/ca1961107/), and, in particular, a failure to appreciate that, in 1971, there had been introduced into the [Companies Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/ca1961107/) sub-s. 3A of s.225, the provisions of which sub-s. were directed toward overcoming the "rule" which had been developed over the years.
That this is so is readily demonstrated. In the forefront of the submission which appears to have been advanced before Rolfe
J, and in the
Claimant's Written Submissions in support of this Summons, reliance is placed in particular upon the decision of Oliver
J (as Lord Oliver of Aylmerton then was) in Re Chesterfield Catering Co. Limited ((3) [(1977) Ch 373)] in which case
His Lordship held that notwithstanding that s.225(1) of the Companies Act 1948 included - as had the predecessor of the section since 1908 - the words "the Court shall not refuse to make a winding up order on the ground only that the assets of the company have been mortgaged to an amount equal to or in excess of those assets or that the company had no assets", the old rule of the general law to the effect that a fully paid shareholder could only establish his locus standi to petition for the winding-up of a company by showing that he would, as a member of the company, achieve some advantage, or avoid or minimise some disadvantage, accruing to him by virtue of his membership, and that, accordingly, he must show, on the face of his petition, a prima facie probability that there would be assets available for distribution among the shareholders, remained good law. Although s.225(1) of the Companies
Act 1948 was reproduced in s.225 of the [Companies Act 1961](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/ca1961107/), s.225 of the latter
Act was amended in 1971 by the addition of sub-s. 3A which was in the following terms: - "(3A) Notwithstanding any rule of law to the contrary, the court shall not refuse to make an order for winding up on the application of a person under paragraph (c) of sub-section of section 221 on the ground that if the order were made no assets of the company would be available for distribution among the contributories."
This being the basis upon which in Re Campbells Corporation
Limited ((4) ) Needham J overruled the objection taken, in that case, to the locus standi of the petitioner, which objection was based upon the old law, it is, as I have suggested above, clear that the submission made before Rolfe J, and repeated before this Court, that Needham J's Judgment was erroneous was misconceived, and revealed a failure to appreciate the differences in language between the relevant statutory provisions.
But even if the submission had been well founded, it would, as I have earlier suggested, have been irrelevant given the terms of the Corporations
Law as they now are. As the result of the amendment made to the Corporations
Law in 1992, the law, so far as is relevant, provides, inter alia, as follows: - "Part 5.4 - Winding up in insolvency.
 ...

Order that insolvent company be wound up in insolvency ...

A On an application under section 459P, the Court may order that an insolvent company be wound up in insolvency.
 ...

P(1) Any one or more of the following may apply to the
Court for a company to be wound up in insolvency: - ...
 a creditor (even if the creditor is a secured creditor or is only a contingent or prospective creditor); a contributory.
 ...

An application by any of the following, or by persons including any of the following, may only be made with the leave of the Court: a person who is a creditor only because of a contingent or prospective debt; a contributory.
 ...

The Court may give leave if satisfied that there is a prima facie case that the company is insolvent but not otherwise.
 ...

Except as permitted by this section a person cannot apply for a company to be wound up in insolvency.
 ...
 
Part 5.4A - Winding up by the Court on other grounds ...

General grounds on which company may be wound up by court.
The court may order the winding up of a company if: ...

The court is of opinion that its just and equitable that the company be wound up.
 
Standing to apply for winding up (1) A reference in this section to an order to wind up a company is a reference to an order to wind up the company on a ground provided for by section 461.

Subject to this section any one or more of the following may apply for an order to wind up a company: ...

A creditor (including a contingent or prospective creditor) of the company;
A contributory.
 ...

The Court shall not hear an application by a person being, or persons including, a contingent or prospective creditor of a company for an order to wind up the company unless and until: - 
Such security for costs has been given as the Court thinks reasonable; and a prima facie case for winding up the company has been established to the courts satisfaction.

Except as permitted by this section a person is not entitled to apply for an order to wind up a company."
Two things, as it seems to me, seem to flow from the provisions which I have set out above, they being: - that a person who, or a company which, is a creditor of a company may - even though he, or it, may also be a contributory of the company - without the leave of the Court seek to have the company wound up in insolvency; and .
that the fact that a company may be insolvent does not preclude a person who, or a company which, is a contributory, seeking to have the company wound up, albeit that, if the application is to have the company wound up in insolvency, the leave of the Court so to do must be obtained, the Court seemingly being obliged to give leave once it is shown that there is a prima facie case that the company is insolvent.
All this notwithstanding, however, it is to be observed that, although, as I have recorded above, the Claimants, basing themself on the old law, challenged JGL's locus standi to present a winding up Summons, they did not raise any challenge based upon provisions of ss.459A, 459P of the Corporations
Law. Lest there be any doubt about this, I record that in the course of his
Judgment, Rolfe J, after referring to the old authorities and, as well, to Re
Chesterfield Catering Co. Limited ((5) (supra)) and
Re Campbell Corporation
Limited ((6) (supra)) concluded: - "In those circumstances I consider that JGL is entitled to bring these proceedings in its capacity as contributory. It is not suggested it is not entitled to bring the proceedings in its capacity as a creditor, subject to the qualification which appeared in the affidavit of Mr. Carnegie and to which
I have referred."
Although, at the hearing at first instance before Rolfe J, the Claimants objected that JGL had not complied with the requirements of Pt 80A r.18(a)(i) of the [Supreme Court Rules 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/scr1970232/), it seems to me, with respect, that that objection provided no ground upon which Rolfe J could properly have dismissed the proceedings.
I say this for the following reasons: - [Rule 18(a)(i)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/scr1970232/s18.html) relevantly provides: "18. The evidence in support of an application for the winding up of a corporation shall include: an affidavit stating: unless the plaintiff is the subject corporation, the capacity in which the plaintiff makes the application under s.459P or s.462(2); being part of the Rules of Court, [Pt 80A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/scr1970232/index.html#p80a) r 18 is subject to the provisions of [Pt 1](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/scr1970232/index.html#p1) r 12 which provides that the Court may dispense with compliance with any of the requirements of the rules either before, or after, the occasion for compliance arises; in the Affidavit sworn by Mr. Carnegie on 3rd April 1995, and filed in support of the winding-up
Summons and Notice of Motion seeking the appointment of a provisional liquidator, Mr. Carnegie deposed (inter alia): - that the Opponent was a 50% shareholder in the First Defendant (para. 2) that, following conversations with Mr. Constantinidis,
JGL had made payments to an amount in excess of $300,000.00 on behalf of Elenium to pay for feed to be supplied - Millmaster and
Farmstock having refused to deliver feed except on a cash with order basis - wages and for other purposes of Elenium (paras. 20-24), that he believed that, if it were not then unable to do so, Elenium would shortly be unable to pay its debts as and when they fell due (para. 21), that, pending the resolution of disputes between the Claimants and the
Opponents as to their respective obligations to provide funds to Euphron, the management of Elenium was, and he believed that it would continue to be, deadlocked (paras. 30-31). in the light of these matters, so it seems to me, it was clear that the
Opponent brought the proceedings in its several capacities of creditor and shareholder, a fact which Rolfe J recognised, as is apparent from the passage from his Judgment which I have set out above (see p. 12 (above)).
I turn, next, to consider the second of the "Questions Involved" which the
Claimants, at the time of the filing of the Summons in this Court, sought to raise, that is, whether Rolfe J ought to have dismissed the Motion for the appointment of a provisional liquidator upon the ground that the winding-up
Summons had not been presented bone fide, but had been presented in order to achieve some ulterior, or collateral, purpose, and not with the genuine object of bringing about a winding-up.
That the Court has jurisdiction, in an appropriate case, to restrain the presentation of a winding-up
Summons (see, for example, Charles Forte
Investments Limited v. Amanda ((7)(1964) 1 Ch 240)) and to stay the further prosecution of (see In re a Company ((8) [(1984) 2 Ch 349))], or to dismiss (see, for example, In re Thomas Edward Brinsmead and Sons ((9) [(1897) 1 Ch )] a winding-up Summons which has been brought in an attempt to achieve such a purpose is clear, the jurisdiction of the Court so to do being derived from its inherent jurisdiction to prevent its process being abused.
It is, however, to be noted that, while, on the hearing at first instance before Rolfe J, complaint was made as to JGL's conduct - it being submitted that by reason of that conduct relief ought to be refused - it does not appear to have been submitted that the conduct on the part of JGL which was complained of evidenced some ulterior motive on its part. That this appears to have been so is suggested by the Written Submissions which were prepared on behalf of the Claimants, at the time which Written Submissions, so far as is relevant, were to the following effect: - 
The relief which the plaintiff claims is discretionary equitable relief. It is a primary principle of equity that a
party will not be granted discretionary relief where that party itself has engendered the state of affairs which produces the argument (sic) for that relief. The steadfast actions of Mr.
Carnegie and JSL (sic) to frustrate the objects of the joint venture and to place financial strain upon Elenium should not be rewarded by a successful result in this cynical application." the reference to "the steadfast action of Mr. Carnegie and JSL (sic)" being a reference to the dispute as to the extent of the contribution required to be made to the joint venture by JGL, and the failure by JGL to make contributions pending the determination of that dispute.
Further, although the authorities upon which the Claimants then relied to support that submission were not referred to in their then
Written Submissions, or in the Judgment of Rolfe J, the authorities (Bamford v. Baron ((11) [(1788) 2 TR 594n]; Re Kennedy ((13) [(1908) St R Qd ], 129)) upon which the Claimants have sought to rely to support a similar submission made on the hearing of this application are based, not on any alleged abuse of process, but upon what is said to be "an old rule in bankruptcy" to the effect that a person who is privy to an act of bankruptcy as, for example, by being party to a Deed of Assignment - is not entitled thereafter to seek to found a bankruptcy petition upon that act of bankruptcy.
It seems to me, with respect, that the submission which in this respect appears to have been made on the hearing before Rolfe J fails for two reasons:- far from it being the case that what JGL sought was "discretionary equitable relief" - a submission which seems to have been based solely on the fact that proceedings under the Corporations Law are assigned to the Equity
Division of the Court - what was sought was relief pursuant to the provisions of the Corporations Law. This being so, it would, as I understand it, not be open to the Court to refuse, on purely equitable principles, relief sought under the statute (see, for example, Kasumu v. Barba-Egbe ((14) [(1956) AC )]; in any event, the evidence in the present proceedings would not, in my view, have brought the conduct of which complaint was made within the reach of the principle sought to be relied upon.
While seeking to maintain in this Court the submission to which I have just referred, which had been made on the hearing before Rolfe J, the
Claimants have sought also to submit - but in a way which I found difficult to follow - that the winding-up Summons had been filed, not for the purpose of obtaining an order that
Elenium be wound-up, but for the improper purpose of bringing commercial pressure to bear upon the various Defendants with a view to resolving the overall commercial dispute between the parties.
It seems to me, with respect, that there were, and are, two answers to this latter submission, they being: - that no such suggestion appears to have been put to Mr. Carnegie during the course of his cross-examination on the hearing before Rolfe J - it being no answer to this to submit, as the Claimants sought to submit on the hearing of this application, that "the person against whom the allegations of mala fides were made was not Mr. Carnegie but Mr. Kerr"; and that, prior to the filing of the winding-up Summons, JGL had proposed that there be appointed pursuant to the provisions of [Part 5.3A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/scr1970232/index.html#p5.3a) of the
Corporations Law an administrator of Elenium (see AB 10.4; 175-6; 179-181) which proposal had been rebuffed by Mr. Constantinidis and those associated with him.
I turn, finally, to the question whether, in the event, Rolfe J's discretion to appoint, or to decline to appoint, a provisional liquidator miscarried.
If I may, with respect, say so, I have found it difficult to discern among the multiplicity, and variety, of submissions which have been advanced on behalf of the Claimants on the hearing of this application upon what basis it is said that Rolfe J's discretion in this respect miscarried - as best as I can judge it, the submission appears to be that his Honour failed to understand that the appointment of a provisional liquidator would have disastrous consequences, not merely for Elenium, but for all the other persons and companies involved in what might compendiously be called the DanPork
Australia joint ventures. That this appears to be so is suggested by the heavy stress placed by the Claimants upon the statement by King CJ (with whom Cox and Olsson JJ agreed) in Zempilas v. J. N. Taylor Holdings Limited ((1990) [3
ACSR 518], 522): - "The appointment of a provisional liquidator pending adjudication upon the petition for winding up is a drastic intrusion into the affairs of the company and is not to be contemplated if other measures would be adequate to preserve the status quo."
Accepting, as I do, the statement of King CJ, it nonetheless seems to me that, in the circumstances of this case, that statement did not preclude the making of an Order for the appointment of a provisional liquidator and that, on the contrary, in determining to make the Order, Rolfe J did not fall into error. The matters which have led me to this view may be shortly stated, they being: - as will be apparent from what I have earlier recorded, there was evidence before Rolfe J that, during the course of the short period of time which had passed since its incorporation, Elenium had suffered substantial operating losses, and that there was a substantial deficiency in shareholders funds; further, as will be apparent from what I have recorded above, there was evidence before Rolfe J which appeared to demonstrate that, at best, that position has not deteriorated, but that, at worst it was at least likely, if not probable - income from the sale of pigs being roughly equivalent to the cost of purchase of production pigs and feed - that that situation had deteriorated; that, whether or not the cause could be laid at the door of JGL, or of those associated with Mr. Constantinidis, or of those representing Dan Pork A
S, the undoubted fact was that there was a deadlock in the management of
Elenium and, to the extent to which this fact was relevant, that there were continuing disputes which had affected, and would, in the future, affect the operations of Euphron and of Dan Pork Australia; that, as a result of the deadlock, and of those disputes, irregularities directly relating to the financial affairs of Elenium had already occurred, it being sufficient for this purpose to point, first, to the fact that DanPork
Australia - ultimately, because of the dispute between JGL and Sephrenia, and thus, without lawful justification - had withheld from Elenium moneys payable by DanPork Australia for pigs supplied to it; and, second, that, notwithstanding, and in defiance of, a resolution of the Board of Elenium as to the manner of operation of its banking accounts, Mr. Constantinidis had diverted funds payable to Elenium from Elenium's bank account to an account which he had opened in his own name and had operated on that account as a sole signatory; as the present proceedings seen to have made only painfully obvious, the deadlock in the management of Elenium, and the disputes to which I have earlier referred, will inevitably continue;
Mr. Constantinidis and those associated with him have rebuffed JGL's offer, or proposal, to have an independent administrator of Elenium appointed pursuant to the provisions of [Part 5.3A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/scr1970232/index.html#p5.3a) of the Corporations Law; meantime, as best as one can judge it, the de facto control of the affairs of Elenium appears to be exercised by Mr. Constantinidis without reference to the Board; in all the circumstances there was, and I believe still is, an urgent need for the appointment of a competent person who is completely independent of JGL and the Complainants - as the provisional liquidator appointed by Rolfe
J undoubtedly is - to take control of, and to manage, the affairs of Elenium pending the final determination of the winding-up Summons.
In all the circumstances, therefore, it is my view that the Appeal should be dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/141.html  
