

Australian Telephone Distributors P/L versus Nfa Technical Services P/L [1996]
NSWSC 209 (20 June 1996) 
AUSTRALIAN TELEPHONE DISTRIBUTORS PTY LTD V NFA TECHNICAL SERVICES PTY LTD /93 
Thursday 20 June 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG, J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is a matter which has come into the Duty Judge list because there was no Master available when it was referred from the Registrar. There are, before the Court, a motion by the plaintiff that the cross claimant provide security for costs and a motion by the cross claimant that it be given leave to proceed against the plaintiff in liquidation. There is no argument that if security for costs were given, then the leave to proceed should also be given.

The dealings between the parties are complicated and it is not really necessary to delve into all those complications in these reasons. The plaintiff, which is now in liquidation, conducted a business importing telephone products and electronic equipment and distributing that equipment to retail outlets. In about March 1987, the plaintiff appointed the cross claimant as its agent for the repair of cordless telephones, answering machines, telephone accessories and the like.

Up until February 1993, one MB Maydwell was the cross claimant's managing director.

In February 1993, the plaintiff complained that the cross claimant had failed to return and repair its product. On 2 April 1993, the plaintiff commenced these proceedings, initially for the return of its units allegedly wrongfully withheld by the cross claimant. Powell, J made orders on 16 April 1993 ordering return upon payment by the plaintiff into a joint trust account of the sum of $95,000. The plaintiff went into liquidation on 23 December 1993.

The cross claim, which was filed on 23 August 1993, pleaded a distribution agreement and various representations made in connection with the distribution agreement. It said that acting on the faith of those representations, the cross claimant entered into a five year lease of premises at Lidcombe, expended money on fitting out the premises and incurred a contingent liability to retailers for stocks of faulty telephones. It went on to plead that the plaintiff wrongfully withdrew its franchise. The cross claimant claimed something like $170,000.

The cross claimant went into voluntary administration on 28 November 1995. It subsequently entered into a deed of company arrangement which provided for a moratorium to operate against all creditors other than the plaintiff. The deed stated that the cross claimant was insolvent and made it clear that the purpose of the deed was to enable the company to defend proceedings brought by the plaintiff and to prosecute the cross claim.

The only remaining relief sought in the plaintiff's summons is a damages claim. An affidavit filed by the cross claimant shows that the plaintiff's damages claim is in the vicinity of $700,000 and that the cross claim is estimated to be worth $1,473,000. To this the plaintiff's solicitor says that there has never been any denial by the cross claimant of the right of the plaintiff to damages, the only issue is assessment and that the cross claim has blown out from the initial relatively small amount to the amount set out in the cross claimant's solicitor's affidavit.

There is also evidence that the administrator and creditors of the cross claimant have been given the strong impression that the cross claim is a valuable one and that it is going to be funded by Mr Maydwell so that the creditors can obtain the fruits with no risk. The plaintiff, on the other hand, has very little money for costs and it would appear its creditors are not particularly interested in funding the litigation, at least at present.

The cross claimant says that its insolvency was mainly caused by the plaintiff's default. This may be so, but there is not sufficient evidence at this stage to conclude that it was so.

The cross claimant resists giving security for costs on a number of grounds.
First it says that although the cross claimant has propounded a counterclaim it raises the same issues as the claim. Secondly, it says that the plaintiff has been guilty of delay in bringing the application. Thirdly it says that the cross claimant's impecuniosity has been brought about by the plaintiff.

I will deal with these three matters in turn.
It is trite law that if the cross action is in reality a defence arising out of the same contract as that on which the plaintiff sues security will not be ordered on the counterclaim. The authorities, however, show that one does not for this purpose merely look at the position of the parties on the record (Mapleson versus Masini [(1879) 5 QBD 144], 146-7). One looks to see whether the cross claimant really is a person "seeking to go out for the recovery from the opposition by attack": Heller Factors Pty Ltd v
John Arnold's Surf Shop Pty Ltd (1979) 4 ACLR 492, 500. In a case where a cross claim is made on the same contract as the claim, the court will often consider that the matter is merely one of defence. It will be different, however, where the cross claim is so much greater in amount than the original claim. An illustration is T Sloyan & Sons (Builders) Ltd versus Brothers of
Christian Instruction [[1974] 3 All ER 715.] One can, however, make an apportionment between the costs which are really due in meeting the plaintiff's claim even though they may also go to the cross claim and costs which are solely attributable to prosecution of the cross claim as an instrument of attack.

In the instant case, the material which the administrator has sent to creditors makes it abundantly clear that the cross claim is an attack which is intended to net sufficient moneys to pay creditors and that the creditors have been induced to accept a moratorium because of the worth of the cross claim.
Although the cross claim could be said to be based on the same contract, namely the franchise agreement, it goes far outside the bounds of the claim and far outside the matters which the plaintiff will have to prove to establish its claim.

The plaintiff's solicitor gives evidence which I accept, that recoverable costs, should the plaintiff succeed on the cross claim, would be $47,000. I think I should discount this by $7,000 because of the possible overlap of the two claims. Accordingly, if security is to be given it should be for the amount of $40,000.
Delay is a factor which may induce a court to refuse security; see
Delany on Security for Costs (Law Book Company, Melbourne 1989), but delay is not necessarily fatal. One must look to see whether the delay has caused any problems to the opposing party and whether it was reasonable to wait before making an application. It seems to me that as the insolvency of the cross claimant only became clear when it went into administration at the end of last year and that the substantial expenses in the case are only really just about to begin, and no prejudice has been shown by the cross claimant, the delay should not induce me to refuse security if it is otherwise proper to order it.

I note, lest it be thought that I have forgotten them, the cases cited on this point by Mr Svehla for the cross claimant, namely Lucas versus Yorke  <case>; [(1993) 112 ALR 174.] Although these are both decisions of single Justices of the
High Court of Australia, in my view they do not assist the cross claimant in the instant case.
The cross claimant says that its impecuniosity was caused by the acts of the plaintiff. Really, to work out whether this is true or not, one would have to try the whole suit. As I have said earlier, there is not sufficient material to conclude that the cross claimant's insolvency was the result of the plaintiff's activities. Indeed, two factors tend against this, namely, (a) that the plaintiff itself had to commence proceedings in order to get back its equipment which the cross claimant was wrongly withholding; and (b) the matter which always attracts the suspicion of judges, and that is, that the amount of the cross claim seems to have soared tremendously from when it was first stated so that in recent affidavits what would appear to be a relatively humble cross claim now appears to be about one and a half million dollars. I could not conclude on the material before me that it was the plaintiff that caused the cross claimant's impecuniosity.

The plaintiff also says that this is a case where security for costs should be ordered because Mr Maydwell is funding the cross claimant's action and, unless security were offered, the cross claimant and its creditors would be in a position where they would be receiving external funding from Mr Maydwell with no liability to pay any costs because the cross claimant is insolvent and it has no money other than that supplied by Mr Maydwell.

Mr Alexis, for the plaintiff, pointed to cases such as Memutu Pty Ltd v
Lissenden  <case>; [(1984) 2 FCR 201], as showing that the court had a predisposition in ordering security for costs where there was a situation where a person was standing behind an insolvent company and was funding litigation for the benefit of that company or its creditors. Whilst the matter is one of the exercise of a discretion in each case, I believe that this approach is consistent with precedent; see also Riviera Development Co Pty Ltd versus Tantalite Pty Ltd [(1981) 27 SASR 161.] An allied principle is that if the cross claimant is to show that it is impecunious it bears the onus of proof, not only of showing it is impecunious itself, but that also those who stand behind it are impecunious:
Watkins Ltd versus Calcaria Pty Ltd (1985) 78 FLR 417.

For these reasons the plaintiff is entitled to security for costs. This is why at the end of the oral argument I made an order for security for costs in the sum of $40,000. I indicated that I would give my reasons later, and I have now fulfilled this promise.
 * * * 
