

Coleman and Anor V John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd [2003] NSWSC 564 (25
June 2003) 
Last Updated: 5 July 2004 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: COLEMAN & ANOR V JOHN FAIRFAX PUBLICATIONS PTY LTD <case>  
CURRENT JURISDICTION:  
FILE NUMBER(S): 20456 OF 2002  
HEARING DATE{S): 19 March 2003  
JUDGMENT DATE: 25/06/2003  
PARTIES: 
CRAIG COLEMAN  (First plaintiff)  
CAROL COLEMAN  (Second plaintiff)  v  
JOHN FAIRFAX PUBLICATIONS PTY LTD  (ACN 003 357 720)  
JUDGMENT OF: Levine J  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
M Richardson  
T Blackburn  
SOLICITORS: 
Gilbert & Tobin  
Freehills  
CATCHWORDS: 
Imputations - capacity - matter complained of incapable of being understood otherwise than as humerous - no libel  
ACTS CITED:  
DECISION: 
I find the matter complained of incapable as a matter of law of defaming the plaintiffs in terms of the imputations pleaded in the statement of claim. 
There will be a verdict for the defendant in respect of each of the imputations pleaded in the statement of claim. 
The plaintiffs are to pay the defendant's costs.  
JUDGMENT:  <case> 
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
COMMON LAW DIVISION 
DEFAMATION LIST  
JUSTICE DAVID LEVINE  
WEDNESDAY 25 JUNE 2003  OF 2002  
CRAIG COLEMAN  (First plaintiff)  
CAROL COLEMAN  (Second plaintiff)  v  
John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd  (ACN 003 357 720)  
JUDGMENT (Imputations - capacity - matter complained of incapable of being understood otherwise than as humerous - no libel)  The plaintiffs sue the defendant in relation to an article published in "The Sun Herald" on 29 September 2002. The text of the matter complained of as pleaded is Appendix A to these reasons.  It is contended that the matter complained of carries the following imputations of the respective plaintiffs:  (a) that the First Plaintiff suffers ongoing psychological harm and mental problems;  that the First Plaintiff was an incompetent professional football coach in that he lacked communication skills;  that the First Plaintiff was incompetent as a professional football coach because of his inadequate upbringing;  that the First Plaintiff was the cause of the disastrous performance of the South Sydney Football Team in the 2002 NRL season because of his inadequate upbringing;  that the Second Plaintiff was so bad a mother that by neglect and abandonment of her son, she caused him to suffer ongoing psychological harm and mental problems;  that the Second Plaintiff was responsible for the disastrous performance of the South Sydney Football Team in the 2002 NRL season, as coached professionally by her son, because of her having a fractured relationship with her son;  that the Second Plaintiff was such a failure as a mother as to have caused her son to grow up without adequate communication skills;  that the Second Plaintiff was a neglectful mother in that she spent little time with her son during his childhood.  The material set out in Appendix A is that which was originally pleaded by the plaintiffs. Pursuant to agreement, however, further material can be taken to have been "struck in" (Ron Hodgson (Trading Pty Ltd) versus Belvedere
Motors (Hurstville) Pty Ltd [[1971] 1 NSWLR 472] at 477;
Gordon versus Amalgamated Television Services Pty Ltd [[1980] 2 NSWLR ]
at 413).  Appendix B to these reasons contains the whole of the matter complained of including the original part (Appendix A sued upon).  There are two components to the defendant's objection. I will take the second, which relates exclusively to the imputations, as if viewed as arising from the material in Appendix A exclusively.  For the defendant it is argued that imputation 5(a) (as corrected) connotes a level of mental illness which is simply incapable of being carried by the matter complained of. The first plaintiff's psychological handicap is that he is without "adequate communication and intimacy skills" in consequence of which he is said to lack the "necessary confidence to make himself understood". These matters are elevated to "psychological harm and mental problems" in the imputation which represents an extreme and strained construction of the matter complained of on a quite unreasonable basis.  To the contrary, it is argued for the first plaintiff, the psychologist having said those things about him permits the equating of those things to psychological harm and mental problems.  I would be persuaded by the argument advanced for the defendant.  It was a further component of the defendant's position that the imputation as framed does not constitute an act or condition which would cause right thinking members of society to think less of the plaintiff. Mental illness is said to be a misfortune which may cause weak or ignorant people to think less of the sufferer, but ordinary decent people would not take such a narrow minded view. This position is the more so when one takes into account the use in the imputations of the words "mental problems". A comparison was made with my judgment in Waterhouse versus Perkins & Ors (SCNSW, unreported, October 1996) where I described as "an extremely borderline case" (at page 4) an imputation involving a lack of professional capacity in a solicitor on account of schizophrenia and left that matter to the jury.  I was referred by Mr Richardson to what Higgins J said in Graham Charles
Evans versus John Fairfax Group Pty Ltd <case>, 12
February 1993, where his Honour refers to Youssupoff versus Metro Goldwyn Meyer
Pictures Ltd [(1934) 50 TLR 5A1] and
Livingstone-Thomas versus Associated Newspapers (1969) 90 WN Pt 1,223 in support of the obvious proposition that is still good law that a person can be defamed without an allegation of misconduct. This naturally points to the area of a statement of a person that is likely to have the effect of that person being "shunned and avoided". See also Galea versus Amalgamated
Television Services Pty Ltd (Levine J, unreported, 20 February 1998).  Insofar as the defendant suggests that there is no difference in substance between imputation (a) and imputation (c) I would not sustain that objection.
There is quite clearly a difference in the imputations, the one relating to a condition, and a separate allegation in (c) as to his competence by reason of another attribute.  Be all that as it may, the first component of this leg of the defendant's submissions would succeed.  In this context I do not understand any submissions to have been made by the defendant in relation to imputation (b).  In relation to imputation (c) the defendant contended that it was incapable of being defamatory. It was argued that while it may be defamatory to impute professional incompetence to a football coach, that incompetence is here referred to as deriving from the first plaintiff's "inadequate upbringing".
Again on the basis of the "right thinking member of the community", it is argued that the imputation would not have the requisite quality. No right thinking person would think the less of the first plaintiff for professional incompetence when that incompetence is expressly said to arise on account of factors beyond his control, namely the inadequacy of his upbringing. With that proposition I would be in agreement.  A similar submission is made in relation to imputation (d). This submission
I would also accept.  Mr Richardson sought, as it were, to warrant the imputations by reference to s4 Defamation Act 1889 (Qld) by reference to an imputation by which the reputation of the plaintiff "is likely to be injured or by which the person is likely to be injured in the person's profession or trade".  This proposition would not save the plaintiffs discretely (publication in
New South Wales only is relied upon) or as a matter of principle in relation to the structure of the s9 cause of action.  In relation to the imputation concerning the second plaintiff, that is, Mr
Coleman's mother, the defendant says in relation to imputation (e) that it is incapable of arising. The matter complained of does state that the first plaintiff had grown up "feeling abandoned and rejected". There is, however, nothing in the matter complained of that is capable of supporting the notion that the plaintiff's mother was a "bad mother" or that she neglected or abandoned her son. All the matter complained of says is that the first plaintiff was put into child care as a toddler and spent "four days every week in child care between the ages of two and five". It is then argued that there can be no adverse reflection on the plaintiff's mother merely by reason of the first plaintiff having "abandonment and attachment issues" and "a somewhat fractured relationship" with his mother as a consequence of being placed in child care. Child care, it is argued, is a fact of present day life, and if the first plaintiff suffered some psychological difficulty in consequence of being put in child care when young, "as so many children are" then such a problem derives from the way in which the first plaintiff himself reacted to what is described as that "unexceptionable treatment". The only charge made against the second plaintiff is that she put the first plaintiff in child care. The first plaintiff's reaction cannot reasonably be held against the second plaintiff, nor can the peculiar reaction of the first plaintiff convey any imputation of blameworthiness in the second plaintiff when all that she did was to put her son into child care. This is a difficult one. This is "minds might differ" imputation which I would otherwise be inclined to leave to the jury.  Imputation (f) is in my view extraordinarily far fetched and cannot be saved even by reference to the context (Greek Herald Pty Ltd versus Nikolopoulos & Ors [(2002) 54 NSWLR 165).]  Imputation (g) it is argued for the defendant shares the same vices as imputation (e). It is an arguable matter and I would otherwise leave it to the jury.  Notwithstanding the protestations of the defendant, I would have to take the same view about imputation (h) and leave it to the jury.  However, I have come to the view, which I will state now, that this matter complained of is incapable of defaming either plaintiff in the way pleaded (or indeed, in my view, at all). My reason for so stating is that this could not, in my view, be a clearer case where the ordinary reasonable reader would understand from reading whole of the material that none of its contents was to be taken seriously. If a reader took the whole of this material, or any part of it, as a joke but nonetheless felt there was something "beyond a joke", in my view that reader would be neither ordinary nor reasonable. In the course of submissions I was referred to standard authorities in the areas of "jesting" and "at one's peril", that line of authority commencing with
Donoghue versus Hayes (1831) Hayes (Ir Ex) R 265 at 266. Reference has also been made to Hepburn versus TCN Channel Nine Pty Ltd [(1983) 2 NSWLR ]
at 667; Anderson versus Mirror Newspapers Ltd [(1986) 6 NSWLR 99];
Darbyshir versus Daily Examiner Pty Ltd (Levine J, unreported, 29 August ); McGuinness versus J T Publishing Australia (Levine J, unreported, 21
May 1999); Wild versus John Fairfax & Sons Ltd (Levine J, unreported 8
August 1997). The last three mentioned cases have had various outcomes. What became of them, as a matter of history, is unknown to me. A further case of my own, Falkenberg versus John Fairfax & Sons Ltd (NSWSC, unreported, 16
December 1994) was one in which the case did not go to the jury on the basis of absurdity.  Of course, each case is determined on its merits in accordance with principle. I have come to the view that this article itself, and the more so by reference to the surrounding material, is self-evidently absurd. The ordinary reasonable reader would understand that what was being published was to be understood only as an absurd joke. That reader, if ordinary and reasonable, simply could not draw from the matter complained of imputations of the kind pleaded here. No ordinary reasonable reader would understand this article to convey anything disparaging of the plaintiffs and thereby hold them up to hatred, ridicule or contempt, or by its mere publication, or any reference at best to psychological deficiencies or incidents of upbringing, to bring about them being shunned and avoided. A fortiori, in my respectful view, do these considerations apply to the second plaintiff.  Indeed I note that in paragraph 7 of the statement of claim it is contended that the publication of the matter complained of each plaintiff had the result of each being "greatly injured and their reputation has been and will be brought into public disrepute, scandal, odium and contempt". There is no reference to ridicule or to being shunned and avoided.  This is fundamentally a matter of impression. I might respectfully adopt what was stated by Hedigan J in May Wan Khor versus Nationwide News Pty Ltd [[1999] VSC 38:](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/vic/VSC/1999/38.html "View
Case" ) "I do not intend to write extended reasons on this application. The debate is to be found in the transcript". So are the notices under SCR Pt 67 r 12A. I repeat that this is a matter of impression. The impression that it has made for the purposes of the determination of the issue of law argued by consent pursuant to SCR Pt 31 r 2 is such as to bring about the result to which I have clearly adverted.  I find the matter complained of incapable as a matter of law of defaming the plaintiffs in terms of the imputations pleaded in the statement of claim.  There will be a verdict for the defendant in respect of each of the imputations pleaded in the statement of claim.  The plaintiffs are to pay the defendant's costs.  
APPENDIX A  
Coleman's mother blamed for Souths' disastrous year  
Redfern: South Sydney's poor showing in the 2002 NRL season may be linked to coach Craig Coleman being put in child care as a toddler, according to a psychologist. 
Asked by Club officials to assess Coleman's performance this year, a psychologist concluded that the Souths' disappointing 5-19 record stems from "abandonment and attachment issues" Coleman harbours after spending 4 days every week in childcare between the ages of 2 and 5. 
In making his finding, the psychologist dismissed suggestions that Souths finished second last simply because they didn't have any decent players.  "It's my belief that Craig's somewhat fractured relationship with his mother as a child hasn't provided him with adequate communication and intimacy skills", the psychologist said." He has grown up feeling abandoned and rejected and lacks the necessary confidence to make himself understood, which isn't something you want in a football coach". The psychologist said placing
Coleman in childcare could explain big losses in rounds 19, 21, 22 and 23". 
APPENDIX B  
PAUL CONNOLLY 
DROP KICK 
PHOTO PAUL CONNOLLY 
YOU WOULDN'T READ ABOUT IT 
With the grand final  seven days away 
Drop Kick brings you  the big stories from the  penultimate week of  the 2002 NRL season. 
An NRL advertising  campaign in Auckland  which refers to the New 
Zealand Warriors as a  bunch of "sheep-shagging dullards  with funny accents and how  about that crap New Zealand  weather?" has failed to ruffle  feathers across the Tasman. 
Warriors coach Daniel Anderson  said yesterday he will not use the  advertisement, placed in Sydney  newspapers on Wednesday, to  motivate his team before their 
Showdown with the Sharks on 
Sunday.  "My guys are playing in the  preliminary final. If that's not  enough to motivate them then they  can just go back to their farms," 
Anderson said.  "Besides we're smart enough to  realise that the NRL is merely trying  to promote the game. We'd be  absolute grade A morons to take it  too seriously." 
Populist New Zealand newspaper  columnists and radio shock jocks  have taken the same view, with the 
NRL campaign barely rating a  mention across the Tasman. 
Only one complaint was taken by  the NRL from a Christchurch man  who said the weather in New 
Zealand "wasn't all that bad". 
Coleman's mother blamed for 
South's disastrous year 
Redfern: South Sydney's poor  showing in the 2002 NRL season  may be linked to coach Craig 
Coleman being put in child care as  a toddler, according to a  psychologist. 
Asked by club officials to assess 
Coleman's performance this year, a  psychologist concluded that South's  disappointing 5-19 record stemmed  from "abandonment and attachment 
Issues" Coleman harbours after  spending four days every week in  child care between the ages of two  and five. 
In making this finding, the  psychologist dismissed suggestions  that South's finished second last  simply because they didn't have any  decent players.  "It's my belief that Craig's  somewhat fractured relationship  with his mother as a child hasn't  provided him with adequate  communication and intimacy skills'"  the psychologist said. "He has grown  up feeling abandoned and rejected  and lacks the necessary confidence to  make himself understood, which  isn't something you want in a  football coach." The psychologist  said placing Coleman in child care  could explain big losses in rounds 19,  ,22 and 23. 
Roosters fans fire up 
Bondi: long-time Roosters fan 
Tarqin Rhys-Jones says that if he  does not have anything else on he  will attend his first-ever Roosters  match should the tricolours make the  grand final. 
Rhys-Jones who has been  "passionately" following the Roosters  ever since his family moved to Bondi 
Junction in 1965, says he's "pretty  sure" he'll make the big one if the 
Roosters can overcome the Broncos  in the preliminary final.  "I guess you never know what's  going to come up between now and  then but I'm almost definite I'll be  able to make it", Rhys-Jones said.  "I know I'm meant to be going  down the coast around about that  time and I have to go with my wife  to a christening or something  sometime in October but if things  work out I'll be cheering on my  beloved red, white and blues to  premiership glory. Go the Roosters!" 
Bailey strikes again 
Newcastle: Andrew and Mathew 
John's parents have been admitted to  a Newcastle hospital after a freak  accident involving St George 
Illawarra's Luke Bailey. 
According to witnesses, Gary and 
Gayle Johns were about to enter  popular Newcastle chicken chain  the Dirty Bird around 6.45 last night  when the restaurant's heavy entrance  door swung out at them, hitting  them in the face. The pair were sent  crashing to the footpath. 
Witnesses said Bailey, who had just  finished dining, had accidentally  exited the restaurant through the  wrong door at the precise time the 
Johnses were attempting to enter. 
Their injuries were exacerbated  when Bailey, in rushing to help,  slipped on a discarded giblet and  landed knees first into the stricken  pair. 
Both were taken to hospital  suffering broken noses and rib  cartilage injuries. Bailey, who in the  past two weeks has been involved in  heavy on-field collisions which have  ended the seasons of Andrew and 
Matthew Johns, was unharmed. 
Though he wondered "what the  hell Bailey was doing in Newcastle in  the first place?", Cronulla's Matthew 
Johns reluctantly put it down to  freakish coincidence.  "First Joey, then me, now me mum  and dad. You wouldn't read about it." 
Photo Jason Cloke 
OH, THE PAIN: Jason Cloke contemplates a fate far worse than  death-suspension from the AFL grand final. Picture: Michael Clayton-Jones 
Cloke gets a start 
In the crying game 
Sports stories rarely take you  through the gamut of emotions but an  interview with the mother of 
Collingwood's Jason Cloke in Thursday's 
Herald Sun newspaper took me through an  entire box of tissues and three packets of 
Tim Tams: it was like Beaches, The Champ  and On Golden Ponds rolled into one. 
On first perusal of the piece I thought  that Cloke had been killed in an accident  or, at the very least, seriously maimed by  a combine harvester. With tears  cascading down my face, I read, with  quivering lips, of the, "devastation" and  "heartache" suffered by his "tight-knit"  family who were receiving so many  supportive calls that a "condolence  book" had been left near the phone. 
As it turned out, it was worse than  death of disabling injury. Cloke, who is  just 20 (practically an innocent babe in  swaddling clothes, for God's sake), had  been suspended from the AFL grand  final! That poor bloke! His poor family! 
Starving people in Malawi can only 
Imagine their pain! But from the pit of 
Tearful despair I was thrown a bone. For  "valiant" and "brave" Jason managed to  summon the courage to take his eight-  year-old sister to see Stuart Little 2  during the week! When this sunk in I was  furious. As if a man sensitive enough to  take his little sister to see Stuart Little 2  would deliberately break the nose of an  opponent! Have the AFL judiciary no  hearts  
LAST UPDATED: 25/06/2003 * * * 
