

Regina versus Domenico Velardi [1996] NSWSC 155 (24 May 1996) 
REGINA versus Domenico VELARDI /95 May 1996 
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
Gleeson CJ, Allen J, James J 
CATCHWORDS: CRIMINAL LAW AND PROCEDURE - single charge covering complicity in several acts of supply of cannabis leaf - whether latent duplicity - Jones versus Dunkel direction - directions as to lies - arraigning before the jury panel accused at the same time as the principal offender when it was known the principal offender would plead guilty. EVIDENCE - admissibility of statements in execution of a joint enterprise - admissibility of statements constituting supply. SENTENCE It was for trial Judge to determine what the particular acts of supply, comprehended in the single charge of supply, had involved the accused's active participation.

RESERVED/ 
EX TEMPORE: Reserved.

ALLOWED/ 
DISMISSED: Dismissed.
 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: I have had the benefit of reading in draft form the judgment of Allen J. I agree with the orders proposed by his Honour and with his reasons for those orders.

ALLEN J: On 31 July 1995 the appellant and his son, Frank Velardi, were indicted before his Honour Judge Nield at the Liverpool District Court.

The indictment contained the following counts:
That Frank Velardi between 3 June 1992 and 16 June 1992 at Sydney did supply cannabis leaf in that he agreed to supply about 20 pounds of that prohibited drug.
That Frank Velardi on 15 June 1992 at Kemps Creek did supply cannabis leaf.
That Dominic Velardi, the appellant, between 3 June and 16 June 1992 at
Sydney did knowingly take part in the supply of cannabis leaf.

They were jointly indicted before the jury panel from which the jury subsequently was selected.

The appellant's son, Frank Velardi, pleaded guilty to both counts and was remanded in custody for sentencing. The appellant pleaded not guilty. The trial against him proceeded before his Honour and a jury. On 7 August 1995 a verdict of guilty was returned against the appellant and a conviction was entered accordingly.

On 27 September 1995 the appellant was sentenced to a minimum term of imprisonment for four years, five months and seven days and an additional term of one year and six months.

The appeal is against the conviction and leave to appeal is sought in respect of the severity of the sentence imposed.

In the trial of the appellant the Crown bore the burden of establishing beyond reasonable doubt that between 3 June and 16 June 1992 Frank Velardi supplied cannabis leaf to an undercover police officer, Constable Zdrilic. That is the supply of cannabis in which, on the Crown case, the appellant knowingly took part.

The evidence that Frank Velardi did supply cannabis in that period to
Constable Zdrilic was overwhelming. It was no part of the case for the appellant as put at his trial that there was any room for doubt that Frank
Velardi was guilty as charged. The case for the appellant was that he had no knowledge of his son supplying marijuana to the undercover constable and that he had not done any of the acts which the Crown claimed he had done and which, it asserted, were acts by him of participation in that criminal activity by his son - nor had he said any of the things to the police which, on their evidence, he had said to them. In short he knew nothing about his son's criminal activity in respect of the marijuana supply and the police case in respect of the appellant himself was a fabrication.

The overwhelming evidence of the criminality of Frank Velardi is sufficiently summarised as follows. On 4 June 1992 Constable Zdrilic, an undercover policeman, telephoned the appellant's fruit shop and spoke to Frank Velardi.
He inquired about buying marijuana, using the pseudonym "boxes of tomatoes".
He again telephoned on the following day and made an appointment to meet Frank
Velardi at the car park at McDonalds on Elizabeth Drive, Liverpool. Later that day the two of them met in the car park at McDonalds and had a conversation which was recorded by a listening device fitted to Constable Zdrilic. In that conversation Frank Velardi indicated said: "We bag in one pound lots" and the price was "three and a half" ($3,500 per pound). Constable Zdrilic said he wished to buy twenty pounds. Frank Velardi's reaction was: "Before I give you a definite answer I want to confirm it with everybody else ... I don't want to tell you for sure, I don't want to tell you for sure you know before I do everything. I want to check it out first." It was then arranged for Constable
Zdrilic to inspect a sample on 9 June. On 9 June 1992 Frank Velardi telephoned the constable and they arranged to meet later that day at McDonalds. That meeting between them was observed by a surveillance officer. He saw Frank
Velardi arrive in a Nissan four-wheel drive vehicle. That vehicle was registered in the name of the appellant's wife on behalf of the fruit shop business. Frank Velardi got out of the Nissan and went up to Constable Zdrilic and shortly thereafter the two of them got into the car which had been driven to the meeting by the constable. The car then left, driven by the constable, with Frank Velardi as his sole passenger. Surveillance police saw them leave together. At Frank Velardi's direction Constable Zdrilic drove them along
Elizabeth Drive to the roundabout with Wallgrove Road. During the course of that drive they were followed by two unmarked police vehicles. At the roundabout the car driven by Constable Zdrilic did a U-turn and came back along Elizabeth Drive about half a kilometre. What was said between Frank
Velardi and the constable was recorded by a listening device. Constable
Zdrilic, on Frank Velardi's instructions, got out of the car and went into bushland to inspect a red sports-type bag with handles which, so Frank Velardi said, contained a sample of the marijuana which he had for sale. The undercover constable inspected the contents of the bag and, indeed, it appeared to be marijuana. He returned to the car and drove Frank Velardi back to McDonalds. On 11 June 1992 Constable Zdrilic spoke on a number of occasions by telephone with Frank Velardi and in the last conversation they agreed to meet at McDonalds on 15 June 1992 for the exchange of 5 pounds of cannabis leaf for $17,500 and for the exchange of a further 15 pounds of cannabis leaf, on the day after that, for $52,500. Frank Velardi explained that the full twenty lbs would not be sold on that day because "they are just a little bit worried about doing a big one with you ... They said he wants five, give him five. If everything goes smooth even the next day after that he can have more." 
On 15 June 1992 Constable Zdrilic again spoke with Frank Velardi by telephone and the latter told him that he now had available for exchange that day six pounds of the twenty pounds of leaf. Constable Zdrilic agreed to buy the six pounds that day and the remaining fourteen pounds the following day at the already agreed total price.

That night, during the period of about an hour before the time appointed for the meeting which had been arranged between Frank Velardi and Constable
Zdrilic, and an "associate" of the constable who was to be with him, surveillance police saw the Nissan four-wheel drive vehicle driven four times in a block pattern around the streets surrounding McDonalds. Frank Velardi was seen in the front passenger seat. Apart from the driver the other occupant was a man who was in the backseat. At the time appointed for the meeting Constable
Zdrilic with his "associate" arrived by car near the entrance of McDonalds and stopped. Frank Velardi then was observed walking up to the car and getting into it. The three men drove off, with Constable Zdrilic's "associate" driving. On this occasion, at the direction of Frank Velardi, they drove to
Kemps Creek post office. As it was approaching the post office Frank Velardi's mobile telephone rang and he had a conversation with someone whom he referred to as "Pat". What was said in the vehicle was recorded by a listening device.
About ten minutes later, at about 9.15 pm, while the car driven was stopped at
Kemps Creek post office, near a Shell service station, a man using the name "Pat" approached the car. He got into the car. The car, then containing Frank
Velardi, "Pat", Constable Zdrilic and his "associate" was driven to a bush track and then along the track. The vehicle was then stopped and Constable
Zdrilic went with "Pat" along the track. There "Pat" gave him a bag in which were bags of cannabis leaf later found to total six lb. They returned to the car and the constable's "associate" gave Frank Velardi $21,000. Then Frank
Velardi and "Pat" walked off into the bush. This was at about 9.45 pm.

It was an overwhelming case that Frank Velardi did supply cannabis leaf to the undercover constable. His guilt was never questioned in the trial of the appellant.

The evidence against the appellant, if accepted as true, that he participated in the supplying by Frank Velardi of the cannabis leaf to Constable Zdrilic was no less compelling. What he did, on that evidence if accepted, so dovetailed the activities of Frank Velardi in a wholly supportive way that it would be absurd to surmise that there might be some innocent explanation.

On 9 June 1992, the afternoon during which Constable Zdrilic, at the direction of Frank Velardi, went into the bush and inspected the sample of marijuana leaf contained in the red sports bag with handles, the appellant also was observed by surveillance police. The police in the two surveillance vehicles, which were keeping the vehicle driven by the Constable Zdrilic under surveillance, noticed about the time they reached the roundabout that the appellant was seated in the driver's seat of a Commodore, registered in the name of the appellant's wife, which was parked close to the roundabout. As soon as it could be done without drawing attention to themselves surveillance police in each of the two vehicles then came back along Elizabeth Drive towards Liverpool. They observed that while they were working their way back, unobtrusively, in that direction the Commodore had moved from where it had been when they first saw it and now was parked approximately where the vehicle which had been driven by the undercover constable had parked. The appellant was then observed by two of the police officers in one of the surveillance vehicles emerging from the bush with a red bag under his left arm. The other surveillance vehicle then passed by and surveillance police in that vehicle noticed the appellant was carrying a red sportsman-type bag by the handles while he was getting back into the Commodore.

As to the events of 9 June 1992 the inference was irresistible, on that evidence is accepted, that the appellant was collaborating with his son, Frank
Velardi, in the inspection by the undercover constable of the sample of the marijuana which was for sale and in the safeguarding of the sample.

I turn to the events of 15 June 1992. The Crown evidence was that the driver of the Nissan four-wheel drive vehicle, registered in the name of the appellant's wife for the fruit shop, which during the hour preceding the meeting with the undercover constable and his "associate" toured four times in a block formation around McDonalds, was the appellant. After the vehicle of
Constable Zdrilic drove off containing the constable, his "associate", and
Frank Velardi the Nissan, still being driven by the appellant, was observed by police in surveillance vehicles driving towards Kemps Creek post office. It was seen to park near a telephone booth at the post office and the male passenger got out, went to the telephone booth, and made a call. This was about three to five minutes after 9 pm. The surveillance police then saw the
Nissan drive off. It next was seen driving along a bush track with only the appellant in it. Surveillance police again picked up the Nissan vehicle shortly after 10 pm. It was being driven from the rear of the Shell service station near Kemps Creek post office and onto Elizabeth Drive. The headlights were off. It was only when the car was on Elizabeth Drive that its headlights were put on. There was only one person in the vehicle. It was the appellant.
It was followed for some distance before the vehicle was pulled over and the appellant was arrested.

There was no reasonable inference available as to the appellant's conduct on June 1992 other than that with Frank Velardi and "Pat" he did box searches of the area around McDonalds before the time of the meeting between his son and the undercover constable and his "associate"; that by pre-arrangement he drove to Kemps Creek post office where "Pat" went to the telephone booth and spoke by telephone to Frank Velardi while he was being driven to Kemps Creek in Constable Zdrilic's car; and that he was in the area of where the drug sale was completed in the bush, ready to do what might be needed as a lookout or otherwise, until the sale was effected and his son and "Pat" had got away. The inference that the appellant participated in the supplying of that marijuana by Frank Velardi was irresistible - if the evidence were accepted.

The appellant did not make any admissions as to what his actions were either on 9 June 1992 or on 15 June 1992. Indeed as to the events of 15 June 1992 he specifically denied having gone out that night from his house with anyone else, going to McDonalds at Liverpool, going to bush land near Kemps Creek, or having been in the vicinity of the Shell garage at Kemps Creek at about 9.20 pm.

Central to the argument for the appellant advanced to this Court it is that as the trial judge left the case to the jury "the indictment was grossly duplicitous".

The relevant law has firmly been established by a long line of authority collected and lucidly expounded by Hunt CJ at CL (with whom Abadee and Simpson
JJ agreed) in Hamzy [(1994) 74 A Crim R 341.]
The single charge preferred against the appellant was that between 3 June and June 1992 he knowingly took part in the supply of cannabis leaf. That was an offence under the [Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/). As
Samuels JA pointed out in R versus Locchi [(1991) 22 NSWLR 309] at 312: "In the present case, the [Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/) in [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s3.html) defines 'supply' in very broad terms. The word and the concepts which the word by definition is capable of conveying, have a very long arm indeed. I need only indicate that 'supply' includes selling and distributing, sending, forwarding, delivering and authorising, and directing, causing, suffering or permitting any of the acts previously defined, including supply, selling and distribution." 
An activity of supplying may involve many acts some, or even all, of which individually would itself be a "supply" within the meaning of that far- reaching definition. The law is settled that where the various acts of "supply" can fairly and properly be identified as part of the same criminal enterprise of supply, the one activity, it is permissible for the indictment to charge the single offence of supply notwithstanding that, in proving it, the Crown intends to rely upon each such individual act of supply. A charge so preferred is not duplicitous, provided the case as put to the jury, is that the Crown does rely upon all the individual acts to establish the single enterprise of supply. As Hunt CJ at CL said in Hamzy (at 347): "Where the Crown seeks to establish a particular activity or enterprise, it relies upon every act which it intends to prove (although, obviously enough, it does not have to establish every such act in order to succeed)." 
There did appear to be in the argument addressed to this Court an overtone that the jury would have had to be instructed that every act of supply relied upon by the Crown had to be proven failing which the appellant would have been entitled to acquittal. That is contrary both to authority and common sense. A common instance of where many acts each of which constituted an offence are relied upon to constitute the single offence as charged is larceny. If a thief enters a store and steals many individual items from different places in the store, all as part of the one shop-lifting activity, it is proper and usual for him to be charged with the one offence of larceny embracing all the articles which, on the Crown case, he stole. The Crown case on that single charge does not fail if it cannot establish larceny in respect of one or some of the individual items. If larceny is proven in respect of any of the items the accused must be found guilty of the charge.

Where a single count is preferred, the Crown case being that the commission of the crime was the one activity, and the Crown relies to prove that crime upon the commission of many acts some or all of which are themselves criminal, the sentencing judge, where the accused is convicted, has the task of determining what the proven facts are consonant with the jury's verdict of guilty. He is not bound, for sentencing purposes, to find all the individual criminal acts proven nor can he avoid his responsibility by taking the approach that whatever his own findings of fact would be he must sentence on the basis that only the minimum criminality has been established (R versus Martin [(1981) 2
NSWLR 640).] These are settled principles of the law relating to sentencing. They are of general application.

Whilst it is permissible to charge a single offence of supply where the Crown case is that the supply was a single enterprise or activity of supply constituted by several acts over a period, some or all of which acts are themselves individual acts of supplying, the trial judge has the duty of ensuring that no procedural unfairness is thereby caused to the accused. The law was succinctly summarised by Hunt CJ at CL in this respect in Hamzy (at , 349) as follows: "The Crown is entitled to plead in the one count a charge of supply where it intends to prove a number of individual acts of supply by the accused .. at different times, provided that those acts can fairly and properly be identified as part of the same criminal enterprise or the one criminal activity, but the trial court has power to direct the Crown either to elect or to separate the offences where the indictment would otherwise produce an unfairness to the accused. Where objection is taken to the indictment, the trial judge should apply common sense and decide what is fair in the circumstances." 
His Honour continued: "I see no reason why the concept of the one criminal enterprise or one criminal activity should be interpreted narrowly. Obviously enough, the fewer the number of individual acts, the fewer people and the shorter the period of time involved, the less likely that there could be any unfairness to the accused, but the issue of unfairness is dealt with separately from the issue as to whether the individual acts could fairly and properly be so identified.
In the present case, it would have presented a totally unreal picture of the activities alleged against the appellant if anything less than the total picture had been presented to the jury." (at 349).

In the present case, as in Hamzy, it would have presented a totally unreal picture of the activities alleged against the appellant if the total picture had not been presented.

In determining, in Hamzy, that there was no procedural unfairness to the appellant Hunt CJ at CL referred to the fact that the defence in respect of all the individual acts of supply relied upon by the Crown was the same - it was a simple one of denial. There was no complication arising, possibly productive of unfairness, that a different defence was being asserted to different acts of supply. So it is in the present case.

In the written submissions put to the Court on behalf of the appellant it is directly asserted that "the case was not left to the jury as one of his involvement in all of Frank's activities." That is not so. It was so left.

I turn to the course of the trial.

As I have indicated the indictment, as presented, contained three counts. The first was the count against Frank Velardi of agreeing to supply about twenty pounds of cannabis leaf. The second was a further count against Frank Velardi of supplying cannabis leaf on 15 June 1992. That related to the supply of six pounds of the drug on that day. The third count was the count against the appellant of taking part in the supply of cannabis leaf. His Honour ascertained that Frank Velardi would plead guilty to the two counts against him. The following exchange then took place: "HIS HONOUR: Dominic is charged with knowingly taking part in Frank's supply of the twenty pounds referred to in the first count, is that right? 
CROWN PROSECUTOR: Agreement to supply your Honour. The first count is an agreement to supply twenty and then actually supply of six-- 
HIS HONOUR: So Dominic is charged with knowingly taking part with Frank in agreement to supply twenty? 
CROWN PROSECUTOR: And in the actual supply of the six your Honour.

HIS HONOUR: There is no second count.

CROWN PROSECUTOR: Indeed there is not your Honour.

HIS HONOUR: But you say it is part of it.

CROWN PROSECUTOR: It's knowingly being concerned in all of the activities of
Frank in that period.

HIS HONOUR: In Frank's activities? 
CROWN PROSECUTOR: Yes your Honour." 
There is no room for complaint on behalf of the appellant that he did not know from the outset that the Crown was relying upon one single enterprise of supplying the cannabis, those activities of supply embracing both the agreement to supply twenty pounds of the drug and the carrying of that agreement to fruition to the point that six pounds of it were actually handed over in exchange for money. That involved no procedural unfairness. Indeed there was no application made by counsel for the appellant at the trial that his Honour direct that two separate charges be preferred against the appellant - one relating to the events of 9 June 1992 and the other relating to the events of 15 June 1992.

Further it would be wholly artificial to treat what was there said to his
Honour by the Crown prosecutor, by way of particulars of the single charge preferred against the appellant, as an acceptance by the Crown that it had to prove every one of the individual acts of supply by Frank Velardi or that it had to prove prior knowledge by the appellant that every one of those acts would take place. It was enough to prove that the appellant deliberately took part in what he knew was an enterprise to supply the drug to Constable
Zdrilic.

The course of the evidence, as I have previously outlined it, must have made it apparent to the jury that what was being alleged was one single enterprise of supply, in which six pounds of the twenty pounds agreed to be supplied was actually handed over before the appellant was arrested, and that the appellant was intimately associated with and taking part in that criminal enterprise.

At the end of the Crown case counsel for the appellant at the trial applied for "the Crown to elect on what basis the prosecution is brought against
Dominic Velardi". The basis of the application is not stated in the transcript but what it was appears clearly from the considered judgment given by the trial judge. He referred extensively to what Hunt CJ at CL said in Hamzy and stated that in his opinion "all of the acts of the accused's son, Frank
Velardi, between 3 and 16 June 1992 and those of the man identified as 'Pat' on 15 June 1992 were part of the one criminal enterprise or activity, that enterprise or activity being the supply, ultimately, of 20 pounds of cannabis leaf to the undercover policeman, Constable Zdrilic." Later in his judgment he said: "I cannot see any unfairness caused to the accused by the Crown relying upon all of the acts of Frank Velardi, and the man identified as 'Pat' and the accused's in seeking to prove the commission of one offence, that of knowingly taking part in the supply of cannabis leaf, by the accused. I appreciate that the jury may accept one or some or all of the accused's acts relied upon by the Crown as showing his commission of the offence ..." 
He went on that should that accused be found guilty in such a case "it is for the trial judge to find beyond reasonable doubt the facts within the body of the evidentiary material upon which the sentence is to be based." 
He refused to require the Crown to "elect".

His Honour's judgment was impeccable. It fully accorded with authority and was entirely appropriate to the circumstances of the trial.

The summing up was in accordance with that judgment.

After what may be termed the conventional directions of general application in criminal trials his Honour came to the specific charge. He said: "The indictment charges the accused with that, between 3 and 16 June 1992 at
Sydney he knowingly took part in the supply of a prohibited drug cannabis leaf. The time frame 3 to 16 June 1992 is a particular of the offence. It would, I am sure, be obvious to you that the date is one day preceding and one day succeeding when it was that the Crown alleged that Mr Frank Velardi was engaged in the transaction - if I may use that word in a neutral sense - to supply twenty pound of cannabis leaf to Constable Zdrilic. The place at which the offence is alleged to have been committed is another particular - the place is alleged to be Sydney. You know, if you accept it, that the transactions primarily occurred, if I can again use them in neutral sense, between Mr Frank Velardi and Constable Zdrilic at places in the Liverpool and
Kemps Creek areas. What the Crown must prove is that, firstly, the accused did something knowingly and, secondly, that the something that he did was to take part in his son's supply of cannabis leaf to Constable Zdrilic ... If it should be at the end of your deliberations that you are satisfied that the accused knew that his son was to supply twenty pound of cannabis leaf to
Constable Zdrilic but he, the accused, did not take part in it, then the Crown has failed and you will find the accused to be not guilty." 
Time and again throughout the summing up his Honour referred to the issue being whether the appellant knowingly took part in "his son's supply" of cannabis leaf to Constable Zdrilic.

Towards the very end of the summing up there were observations by his Honour which, it has been argued to this Court, introduced uncertainty for the members of the jury as to what their task was. It was in the course of his
Honour's explanation to the jury of the concept of "taking part" in an offence. He said: "In this case, what is alleged by the Crown against the accused is that the accused by any one of the various acts that he is alleged to have done, by being in the Holden Commodore at the roundabout, as a spotter .. for somebody who might be following his son; to go and pick up the red bag; to take the red bag away from where the undercover policeman had inspected the cannabis in it; to drive his son to McDonalds; to drive his son around the McDonalds block about four times; to drive the unidentified man Pat from McDonalds along
Elizabeth Drive to the Kemps Creek; to drive Pat from the Post Office into the bush and leave him there, if that is what happened; then to wait behind the
Shell service station; and then to drive the four-wheel drive away; took part in the supply of cannabis leaf. The Crown says that any one of those acts is an act of participation in Mr Frank Velardi's supply of cannabis leaf to the undercover policeman, and, if you are satisfied beyond reasonable doubt about any one of those various acts, then the Crown's case is that you can properly find the accused to be guilty of the offence." 
There is nothing in that particular passage in the summing up at variance with what clearly had been put to the jury earlier that the Crown was relying upon a single enterprise of supplying the twenty pounds of cannabis leaf to
Constable Zdrilic carried out to the extent of an actual supply of six pounds.
Indeed the specific acts identified by his Honour as relied upon by the Crown embraced both what occurred on 9 June 1992 and what occurred on 15 June 1992.

The appellant relies also, however, upon the immediately following passage in the summing up. It was: "Now, I said that there is another definition and that is the definition of the word 'supply'. In the context of this case, 'supply' means the handing over by Pat to the undercover policeman of the, what turned out to be, six pound or thereabouts of cannabis leaf. But 'supply' means a lot of things and 'supply' is defined to mean this: it includes selling and distributing and agreeing to supply or offering to supply or keeping and having in possession for the supply or sending, forwarding, delivering or receiving for supply or authorising, directing, causing, suffering, permitting or attempting any of those acts or things. So, the legislation is designed to cast the net of supply as widely as possible. In the context of this case, you know two things beyond the shadow of doubt, and those are that Mr Frank Velardi agreed to supply twenty pounds of cannabis leaf to the undercover policeman and that Mr
Frank Velardi supplied six pound of cannabis leaf to the undercover policeman and you know those things beyond a shadow of a doubt because, when he was charged on Monday of last week - that is when the indictment was read to him - and the indictment referred to his agreement to supply twenty pounds of cannabis leaf and his actual supply of cannabis leaf - although the reference to six pound is not included in the indictment - he pleaded guilty to those two offences.

So, the Crown's case is that the accused knowingly - intentionally, deliberately, with full knowledge - took part in Mr Frank Velardi's supply of that cannabis leaf to the undercover policeman because he did one or more of the various acts upon which the Crown Prosecutor relies to prove his case." 
I see no inconsistency between this passage in the summing up and in what preceded it. It would have been perverse for the jury to have understood the totality of the summing up as to what the Crown's case was other than that the accused took part in the transaction by his son over the period charged of coming to a deal with Constable Zdrilic for the supply of cannabis leaf to him being effected, before the appellant's arrest, to the extent that some cannabis leaf was actually handed over on 15 June 1992.

It was appropriate for his Honour to refer to the width of the definition of the word "supply". Had he not done so the jury well might have been troubled as to how it was that an offer or agreement to supply twenty pounds of cannabis could be part of a transaction of supply. His Honour's explanation to them removed any difficulty for them in that regard. It fully accorded with the way in which he left the case to the jury that there was this "transaction" which involved the making of the agreement to supply twenty pounds of cannabis leaf and the giving effect to that agreement to the extent that to the time of the appellant's arrest six pounds of the drug actually had been supplied.

It has been argued that the element of "knowingly" in participating in a supply was insufficiently related by his Honour to a specific supply falling within the ambit of the single enterprise. There is no substance in that argument. His Honour quite specifically directed the jury that there must have been an act of participation knowing that it was participation in the enterprise of supplying the drug. No more was necessary.

The grounds of appeal numbered 4c, 5, 5a, and 6 are directed to the proposition that his Honour should not have admitted, over objection, evidence of the conversations between Constable Zdrilic and Frank Velardi or what otherwise occurred between him and "Pat" as summarised previously in this judgment. His Honour did not err in that respect. The participants were involved in a joint enterprise. They had a common purpose with the appellant (Tripodi versus The Queen <case>; [(1961) 104 CLR 1]; R versus Courtney-Smith (No.2) [(1990) 48 A Crim R 49]; R v Masters, Richards and Wunderlich [(1992) 26 NSWLR 450]; R versus Mai and Tran [(1992) 60 A Crim R 49]; R v Taouk (CCA, unreported, 17 December 1992); R versus Houlker (CCA, unreported, March 1993); R versus Addison [(1993) 70 A Crim R 213).]
His Honour did not instruct the jury as to joint enterprise or common purpose.
He was not asked to do so. It was the essence of the Crown case, as left to the jury by his Honour, that there was a joint enterprise, a common purpose, and that being so any deficiency in his Honour's charge to the jury as to the evidentiary question clearly was not productive of any miscarriage of justice.
No specific directions in that respect having been sought [rule ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s4.html) applies. I would not grant leave to the appellant to rely as a ground of appeal upon the absence of such a specific charge in relation to the evidentiary point. In any event the evidence was admissible on the simple basis that the acts and statements were, having regard to the width of the statutory definition of supply, all integral to the individual acts of supply upon which the Crown relied. They were the means whereby the supply charged was effected. As Campbell J said in Houlker (at 2): "The matters relied upon by the Crown did not depend upon implied assertions said to arise from the acts proved - there were no relevant declarations - but rather upon the inferences to be drawn from a group of relevant objective facts. The evidence of those facts was admissible and could be used to found such inferences quite independently of the co-conspirator or common design rules." 
Those grounds of appeal are rejected.

Grounds 7 and 7a relate to what his Honour said relating to the fact that neither the Crown nor the appellant called Frank Velardi. His Honour gave a
Jones versus Dunkel ((1959) <case>; [101
CLR 298)] direction in the usual terms. He left it to the jury to decide whether they would have expected the Crown, the accused, or neither of them to call Frank
Velardi. He drew to their attention that the Crown gave as an explanation for it not calling Frank Velardi that he had stated that he was not willing to give evidence for the Crown. No explanation was offered by the appellant for not calling him. I see no error in the cause his Honour took. He simply left it to the jury. It is complained also that his Honour should not have instructed the jury that Frank Velardi was a competent and compellable witness. It was argued that it does not appear from the material before the
Court that, before the summing up, convictions had been entered against Frank
Velardi pursuant to his guilty pleas and that, if convictions had not been entered, the trial was not concluded as against him and hence he was not compellable. However, if the point had been taken at the trial, upon it being attempted to call Frank Velardi and ask him about the appellant's involvement, it would no doubt have been dealt with by entering, in the absence of the jury, the convictions. No objection was taken at the trial to what his Honour said in giving the Jones versus Dunkel direction or in stating that Frank Velardi was a competent and compellable witness. Leave pursuant to [rule ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s4.html) is required to argue these grounds. They are devoid of merit. Leave should not be granted.

Grounds 2, 2a, 4a and 4b relate to his Honour's instructions to the jury as to the use which they could make of lies which, on the Crown case, were told by the appellant to the police. His Honour specifically instructed the jury that nothing that, on the Crown evidence, the accused said to police "directly implicated him in the commission of the offence". In other words, nothing he said amounted to an admission. His Honour, however, went on to say: "But the Crown prosecutor submitted that the accused lied and that his lies show that he cannot be believed and show a consciousness of his guilt." 
His Honour then indicated that a number of statements by the appellant to the police were lies. The first was that when he left the shop earlier on the night of 15 June 1992 at about 7 o'clock he left on his own. The second was that he was not in the vicinity of the Shell garage at Kemps Creek about 9.20 that night and further that he did not at the time have another male in the car with him. The third is that he had not been at McDonalds at Liverpool that night. The fourth is that he did not go into bush land near Kemps Creek earlier that night.

His Honour then instructed the jury as follows: "Now, members of the jury, as to what the Crown Prosecutor submitted to you were lies told by the accused, let me say this. You must be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt, firstly, that the accused said what the police say he said and, secondly, that what he said to police were lies and, thirdly, that there is no other reasonable explanation for him saying what the police say he said and, as to this, let me make this comment, members of the jury, people do not always act rationally and that sometimes something else may explain why somebody said something, for example, it may have been said as a result of panic or fear or a desire to protect someone else or a lack of understanding of the question or an inability to respond to the question or sleeplessness or drunkenness or some other reason that may occur to you. But, members of the jury, if you are satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused said what the police say he said, and that what he said were lies and that there is no other reasonable explanation for him saying what he said, you are entitled to take his lies into account in these ways: firstly, that a person who lies about one matter may not be trusted about another matter, in other words, a person who lies about one thing may lie about other things and this may lead you to think that, because the accused lied to police when interviewed, he may have lied to you in his statement; and, secondly, that the accused lied to police because he was conscious of his guilt of the offence in respect of which he was being interviewed, that is, the supply of cannabis leaf on 15
June 1992, in other words, that the accused lied to police because he believed that, if he were to tell police the truth, the truth would inculpate or incriminate him in the offence." 
I am unpersuaded that his Honour erred in those directions.

The principal argument advanced in support of these grounds of appeal relating to lies is that the lies were simply a denial by the appellant of his guilt and that, accordingly, it would be circular to take them into account in order to determine his guilt because the lies are relevant only if he is guilty.
There is no substance in that argument. The ambit of the lies did not cover the totality of the acts of participation relied upon by the Crown. It was in any event open to the jury to find that he had lied as to some of the particular matters referred to by his Honour but not as to others.

These grounds of appeal also complain that his Honour did not give various directions as to corroboration of testimony. He was not asked to. [Rule ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s4.html) applies. Leave should not be given. The present appeal appears to be yet another instance of counsel who did not appear at the trial combing through the transcript to extract every possible complaint that could be made with the wisdom of hindsight.

The remaining grounds of appeal were abandoned before this Court save as to three. The first is that the conviction was unsafe and unsatisfactory. There is no substance in that ground. There is no possibility whatever in the present case that an innocent man has been convicted. (M versus The Queen [(1994) CLR 487).] As the matter was argued it was not entirely clear whether this ground was based upon supposed insufficiency of evidence or upon the combined effect of other grounds of appeal relating to suggested irregularities in the conduct of the trial. Insofar as the latter was the basis of the ground, what appears elsewhere in this judgment constitutes my answer to it. Insofar as the former was the basis, it was perfectly reasonable for the jury to accept the evidence of the Crown witnesses as to their observations of the conduct of the appellant and, on the basis of that evidence, to infer his guilt.

The remaining two grounds of appeal relate to a clear error, an error made by counsel for the Crown, counsel for accused and adopted by the trial judge. I have previously set out the exchange between the Crown prosecutor and his
Honour as to the preferring of the single charge against the appellant. What then occurred is recorded in the transcript as follows: "HIS HONOUR: Mr Greg Stanton (counsel for the appellant at the trial), you agree that part of the Crown's material is Frank's plea to each of these two counts? 
G STANTON: Yes...(not transcribable)..

HIS HONOUR: Well his plea of guilty? 
G STANTON: Yes.

HIS HONOUR: The Crown wants to adduce Frank's pleas to these two counts as being material against Dominic. Right Mr Crown? 
CROWN PROSECUTOR: Yes in establishing the substantive acts that must be established before Dominic can be knowingly taking part in it.

HIS HONOUR: If that be the case and it be admissible and there is no issue as to that, why is not then as was said apparently by the New South Wales full court of the Supreme Court a necessary part of the overall material that the jury must have before them.

S STANTON: I have never taken issue with that.

HIS HONOUR: So if it is a necessary part of the overall material the jury must have before them, that is that Frank has pleaded guilty to the two counts in respect of which it is alleged that Dominic knowingly took part. Why should the jury panel from which the jury will be drawn hear Frank's pleas.

S STANTON: I can't take it any higher-- 
HIS HONOUR: For no other reason-- 
S STANTON: Than the prejudice and-- 
HIS HONOUR: Which prejudice? 
S STANTON: With respect I submit that it is a prejudice. The actual taking of the plea in itself is a forensic (?) advantage or a tactic the Crown seeks to take in this matter that would give it an advantage to it otherwise not be fair. If it be the case that Frank's convictions are a material matter to be placed before this jury then it runs likewise to the proposition his plea should be taken in front of the jury. The fact of his conviction be adduced in another way. It seems to me that if the material - if the fact of his conviction is the issue it has got to be placed before the jury then the simpler and the less dangerous, if I can use that expression, means of doing that and in the interests of Dominic Velardi is for it to be adduced other than the jury panel seeing the co accused plead guilty.

HIS HONOUR: I must say that I cannot see any prejudice to Dominic by the jury hearing Frank plead as distinct from the jury hearing someone say that Frank has pleaded or being presented with a certificate as to Frank's conviction for having pleaded. I cannot see the distinction. I cannot see that there would be any greater prejudice to the accused from one than there would be from the other and there I cannot see why I should accede to your request that Frank be indicted and pleaded in the absence of the jury panel.

S STANTON: Had the issue of Frank Velardi's plea been ventilated sometime before the actual time that it has been and arrangements are made for him to plead separately to his father - to his co accused rather, that would have been proper and appropriate. The Crown wouldn't have delayed the issue of the plea until the present time.

HIS HONOUR: No, you're probably right as a matter of practicality that had
Frank pleads guilty on that day before his Honour Judge O'Reilly, 28 February last year then the Crown wouldn't have delayed, Frank would have been indicted, he would have pleaded and been dealt with by Judge O'Reilly or some other judge in the last eighteen months but that didn't happen.

S STANTON: --and looking at it from a lawyer's point of view, a lawyer's perspective as we presently are I concede there is force in what your Honour says but in front of lay people many of whom, I don't know what experience or lack of experience they have as jurors, I'm concerned as to the impression and as to the consequences of that impression which will flow from lay people hearing and seeing that process.

HIS HONOUR: I cannot see any distinction and I cannot see any prejudice. What, you see Mr Stanton, it would be the same as if having pleaded not guilty today, Frank tomorrow pleads guilty. The jury would know he pleaded not guilty today and hear that he pleaded guilty tomorrow and that happens in trials.

S STANTON: I appreciate that your Honour.

HIS HONOUR: And it is not suggested that the trial should be aborted or the trial shouldn't proceed or the jury should not know. It proceeds with the jury knowing and it is not suggested there is any great prejudice to the remaining accused or accuseds, if there is more than one and a judge directs the jury as to how they may make use - indeed in most things they can't make use at all of a plea of guilty although in this case the Crown says they can and you can see that they can. So I cannot see any reason Mr Stanton not to take Frank's plea in the presence of the jury panel and that is what I propose to do." 
Underlying what there occurred was the error that evidence of a plea of guilty by the principal offender would be admissible evidence, over objection, of his guilt in the trial of an accused charged with knowingly participating in the commission of that crime. The plea of guilty, if evidence was adduced of it before the jury, would have been hearsay. The pleas of guilty were no more than a formal admission by Frank Velardi of the supply by him. Those admissions would not have been admissible, except by consent, in the trial of the appellant. It is not necessary to consider the admissibility, over objection, of a certificate of conviction upon Frank Velardi in due course convicted pursuant to his pleas. Despite a bold submission by senior counsel for the appellant to this Court that counsel at the trial did not indicate that he accepted that the pleas of guilty would be admissible, it is manifest from the passages in the transcript to which I have referred that he did express his acceptance that such was the position. It may be that I do him less than justice in that he was aware it was not the position but was content for the hearsay evidence of the pleas of guilty to be before the jury. In his own words, as recorded: "I have never taken issue with that." It matters not.
What is of importance is the consequences of it having been common ground that the pleas of guilty were admissible evidence. What happened was that the indictment against both Frank Velardi and the appellant was presented in the presence of the jury panel and the pleas of guilty by Frank Velardi and the plea of not guilty by Dominic Velardi taken with the panel present. It was then that the jury were empanelled and the appellant was placed in the charge of the jury. In his summing up his Honour referred, in the passage which I have already quoted, to the pleas of guilty by Frank Velardi in which, he indicated, would leave the jury with the certain knowledge that he had been guilty of the supply for which he had been indicted. There was no demur of any sort by counsel for the accused at the trial to what his Honour said in that respect. That is so notwithstanding that no evidence was adduced in the trial to the making of the pleas of guilty - although his Honour and counsel knew the jury had heard the pleas themselves prior to being empanelled.

What his Honour did undoubtedly was irregular. He erred in telling the jury that they could have regard to the pleas of guilty. Although the members of the jury heard the pleas being made, before the jury was selected from the panel, there was no evidence in the trial of the appellant of those pleas having been made. Although the point was not taken at the trial I consider that the appellant should be permitted to argue this ground.
 [Rule ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s4.html) does not apply to the allied argument (ground 4) that his Honour erred in requiring Frank Velardi to be arraigned and his pleas of guilty taken in front of the jury panel. Counsel for the appellant at the trial did object. It is manifest, however, that the basis of his objection was not that there would be any contest that Frank Velardi was guilty as charged but that seeing him and his father, the appellant, standing side by side in the dock and the son pleading guilty to his part in what occurred might create an adverse psychological impression for the jury which would not be created if all that happened was that in due course in the trial of the appellant proof of Frank
Velardi's guilt was given by the tendering of a certificate for conviction or otherwise.

Where a trial is not going to be a joint trial the plea of guilty by some person other than the accused to his part in the relevant criminal conduct should not be taken in the presence of the jury panel where doing so might prejudice the accused (R versus Tillot [(1991) 53 A Crim R 46).] In those circumstances the taking of the plea in front of the jury panel is a denial of procedural fairness to the accused. The only prejudice suggested in the present case, however, was somewhat fanciful. It is difficult to see why the jury would have been more influenced by hearing Frank Velardi pleading guilty than by hearing undisputed evidence of him having pleaded guilty, or having before them a certificate of conviction. Nevertheless, the preferable course would have been for his Honour not to have taken Frank Velardi's pleas in the presence of the jury panel. On balance I am of the opinion that he committed appealable error in the course which he took.

I have no doubt at all, however, that no miscarriage of justice resulted from what his Honour did - either as to the taking of the guilty pleas or as to what he said about those pleas in the summing up. It is quite clear that from the outset counsel for the appellant at the trial was not going to make any challenge to the Crown evidence establishing the guilt of Frank Velardi of the supply in respect of which the appellant was charged with being a participant.
It would have been tactical suicide for him to have done so. He had a
Herculean task ahead of him in endeavouring to persuade the jury that it was a reasonable possibility that the police had fabricated the evidence against the appellant. The last thing he would have done was to suggest that they had fabricated also the evidence against Frank Velardi. There was the damning evidence of the conversations recorded on the listening devices. He co- operated with the Crown prosecutor in having the evidence of Frank Velardi's conduct led through the Crown witnesses. He did not challenge the evidence. It would be absurd to suppose that what happened in respect of Frank Velardi's pleas of guilty either as to there being taken in the presence of the jury or as to the reference to them by his Honour in his summing up had the slightest effect on the outcome of the trial of the appellant.

The appeal against conviction should be dismissed.

The sentence imposed by his Honour was well within the range of a sound exercise of sentencing discretion and no fault can be found with his remarks on sentence. The real challenge to the sentence was that his Honour erred in sentencing on the basis that he was a participant in the events both of 9 June and 15 June 1992. For the reasons previously given it was his Honour's duty to determine, for sentencing purposes, whether he was satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of such participation. There was ample evidence for the conclusion to which he came. Leave to appeal against sentence should be refused. 
JAMES J: I also have had the benefit of reading in draft form the judgment of Allen J. I also agree with the orders proposed by his Honour and with his Honour's reasons for proposing those orders.
 * * * 
