

Lloyd and Anor versus The Cardiff Coal Company [1996] NSWSC 21 (5 February )

Lloyd & Anor versus The Cardiff Coal Company /95 
Monday, 5 February 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
McLELLAND CJ in Eq 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The Cardiff Coal Company, to which I will refer as "the company", was formed as an unincorporated joint stock company by a deed of settlement dated 1 October 1862, subsequently substantially amended. On 30 December 1863 the company was incorporated by a private Act of Parliament entitled "The Cardiff Coal Company's Incorporation Act of 1863", to which I will refer as "the 1863 Act".

By s.10 of the 1863 Act, the share register of the company is prima facie evidence to show who are the proprietors for the time being of the capital thereof and the number of shares held by each proprietor. It appears that there are 1,965 issued shares in the capital of the company. The share register shows 1,725 shares as being held by Belmont Colliery Pty Ltd , and 100 shares as being held by the estate of L E Threlkeld. In the present proceedings, which were commenced by statement of claim on 15 August , the plaintiffs claim a declaration that they are entitled to be registered in the company's share register as holders of the 100 shares shown as being held by the estate of L E Threlkeld in their capacity as trustees of the estate of the late Lancelot Edward Threlkeld and an order that the company register them as the holders of those shares. The question of the status of the plaintiffs to seek such relief does not arise on the present application, but will no doubt be ventilated in some other application.

The company is the only defendant in the proceedings. The company filed a defence on 27 September 1995 and an amended defence on 16 January 1996. By a notice of motion filed on 29 January 1996 Belmont seeks orders that it be joined as a defendant in the proceedings and that leave be granted to file a further amended defence. In seeking to be joined as a defendant, Belmont invokes the provisions of Part 8 rule 8(1) of the Supreme Court Rules, which provides: "8(1) Where a person who is not a party - ought to have been joined as a party; or is a person whose joinder as a party is necessary to ensure that all matters in dispute in the proceedings may be effectually and completely determined and adjudicated upon, the Court, on application by him or by any party or of its own motion, may order that he be added as a party and make orders for the further conduct of the proceedings".

The plaintiff opposes the addition of Belmont as a defendant. It has not been submitted that Belmont ought to have been joined as a party within the meaning of paragraph (a) of rule 8(1). Generally speaking, proceedings to rectify the share register of an incorporated company do not require the joinder of any shareholders other than those, if any, who are sought to be displaced by the relief sought in the proceedings.

The unusual (in present day terms) circumstances of the formation of the company (which I should add is not a company within the meaning of the
Corporations Law) do not require the application of any different rule. It seems to me that the effect of, particularly, clause 69 of the deed of settlement and the provisions of the 1863 Act is to assimilate the company for present purposes to one that is incorporated in the usual way. So far as paragraph (b) of rule 8(1) is concerned, the main thrust of the argument put for Belmont is that there may be a defence of laches by the plaintiffs, or the estate which they claim to represent, adversely affecting the position of
Belmont, which could not be properly raised by the company itself as a defendant.

Counsel for Belmont has referred me to a passage from the judgment of Deane J in Orr versus Ford <case>; [167
CLR 316] at 341 in these terms: "The ultimate test effectively remains that enunciated by Lord Selborne L.C.
(not, as is often said, Sir Barnes Peacock (see Errata)), speaking for the
Privy Council, in Lindsay Petroleum Co versus Hurd (1874) 5 PC at pp239-240, namely, whether the plaintiff has, by his inaction and standing by, placed the defendant or a third party in a situation in which it would be inequitable and unreasonable 'to place him if the remedy were afterwards to be asserted': see Erlanger versus New Sombrero Phosphate Co [(1878) 3 App Cas 1218] at 1279, and also per Rich J in Hourigan (1934) 51 CLR at 629-630." 
The reference to a third party is a significant element in this statement of principle. It recognises that the adverse consequences of inaction or standing by which may properly be raised by a defendant under a defence of laches need not be consequences affecting the defendant itself, but may be consequences affecting a third party, and in particular other members of a defendant company or, indeed, other persons dealing with a defendant company.
This is orthodox doctrine (see, for example, the discussion by Meagher, Gummow and Lehane: Equity Doctrines and Remedies 3rd edition, in para 3604).

Accordingly, the possible availability of a defence of laches along the lines suggested does not give rise to a conflict of interest between the company and Belmont as was suggested in argument. It has not been shown that there is any appreciable risk that the company as defendant will not raise any legitimate defence available in the proceedings which Belmont might wish to have raised. Indeed, it would appear that the present directors of the company are effectively Belmont's appointees.

For these reasons, I am not persuaded that the joinder of Belmont as a defendant is necessary for the purposes identified in rule 8(1)(b) and accordingly, I order that the notice of motion filed 29 January 1996 be dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
