

Nye versus State of New South Wales and ors [2003] NSWSC 366 (30 April 2003) 
Last Updated: 2 May 2003 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: Simpson versus Ballina Council [[2003] NSWSC 188]  
CURRENT JURISDICTION: Equity Division  
FILE NUMBER(S): 1813 of 1994  
HEARING DATE{S): 2, 3, 4, 5, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 December 2002; 4, 5, 6, 7, 10, , 13, 14, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 24, 25, 27, 28 February 2003 and 3 March 2003  
JUDGMENT DATE: 21/03/2003  
PARTIES: 
Colin Ernest Simpson and Mavis Elsie Claire Simpson (Plaintiffs) 
Ballina Shire Council (Defendant/Cross Claimant) 
Roads and Traffic Authority (Cross Defendant)  
JUDGMENT OF: Windeyer J  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
Mr CJ Bevan with him Mr A C M Iuliano (Plaintiffs) 
Mr J Wilson (Defendant/Cross Claimant) 
Mr T Barrett (Cross Defendant)  
SOLICITORS: 
John Carmody & Co (Plaintiffs) 
W J Grace & Co (Defendant/Cross Claimant) 
Henry Davis York (Cross Defendant)  
CATCHWORDS: 
CONTRACT - sale of land to Council - breach of term - Council required to upgrade carriageway - whether term in contract could be varied orally - whether defence alleging oral variation to contract can be maintained - s23C and s54A [Conveyancing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) 
NEGLIGENCE - duty of care - obligations of construction authority and design authority 
NUISANCE - damage caused to neighbouring property by rock boulders falling from batter wall - no evidence of falls for 8 years - whether permanent injunction should be granted - 
NUISANCE -interference with right of way - actionable without damage - interference continuing - injunction granted 
DAMAGES - economic loss - whether plaintiff was denied opportunity to derive income from farming land - whether lack of access contributed to cessation of farming  
ACTS CITED:  [Conveyancing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) [s23C](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s23c.html), s[54A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s54a.html)  [Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1946404/) [s5](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1946404/s5.html)  [Limitation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/) [s14(1)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s14.html) 
Pollock Law of Torts 11th Ed. 379  
DECISION: 
Plaintiffs' claim succeeds in part, fails in part, cross claim dismissed. See orders page 39.  
JUDGMENT:  - 40 - 
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
EQUITY DIVISION  
WINDEYER J  
FRIDAY 21 MARCH 2003  /94 COLIN ERNEST SIMPSON & ANOR V THE COUNCIL - ROADS AND TRAFFIC AUTHORITY - CROSS DEFENDANT  
JUDGMENT  
Outline  The plaintiffs are banana farmers on a property at Uralba between
Alstonville and Ballina. They sold a small portion of their land to the
Ballina Shire Council (the Council) in November 1991. This was acquired by the
Council for the purpose of roadworks being constructed on the northern edge of the plaintiffs' property. Those roadworks adjacent to the plaintiffs' property included the construction of part of the new Bruxner Highway and the construction of a new service road to the south of that highway to provide road access to property owners in the area, with the intention of limiting the number of access points to the new highway. This access road is now called
Duck Creek Mountain Road, but was generally referred to as the service road throughout the hearing and I will call it that. Insofar as it is adjacent to the plaintiffs' property it is mostly built on the land purchased from the plaintiffs by the Council, but at a considerably higher level than the natural surface of that land. The batter embankment from the northern boundary of the plaintiffs' remaining land to the road surface is quite steep and is faced with rock boulders. At the western end of the plaintiffs' land access was gained to the old highway and is now gained to Duck Creek Mountain Road along a right of carriageway across land which had originally been owned by the plaintiffs. Drainage works were carried out in connection with the road building in the vicinity of the right of way. The roadworks were all carried out by the Council, generally in accordance with design plans prepared by the cross-defendant the Roads and Traffic Authority (RTA). The contract under which the plaintiffs sold to the Council included the condition that after completion the Council would construct a new stock proof boundary fence; that it would relocate the internal farm tracks so far as these were affected by the sale; and that the Council would re-instate the existing access from the property to the service road. Apart from the fence it is accepted that this has not been done. The plaintiffs claim that they have been unable to continue to farm bananas on the land immediately to the south of the land sold to the
Council, first because they have been unable to gain access to it along the right of way as a result of the drainage works to which I have referred, causing an increased volume of water to fall on that right of way and to make it impassable; and second because the rock-faced batter slope is unstable and negligently constructed so as to allow boulders to fall from it creating a danger to any person working on the plaintiffs' adjacent land. Thus the plaintiffs claim against the Council damages for breach of contract or specific performance of the contract, damages for loss of income as a result of the negligence or nuisance of the Council in the construction of the works and an injunction to restrain the continuance of the nuisance. The Council by way of cross-claim claims against the RTA contribution as a joint tortfeasor, on the basis that that Authority as cross defendant has contributed to the plaintiffs' loss by reason of defects in its road design acted upon by the
Council.  
History of proceedings  These proceedings were commenced by statement of claim filed on 24 March
According to notes on the file they are the oldest active (meaning requiring disposition) action in the Equity Division general list. Apart from an appearance having been filed little further seems to have been done until
February 2000 when the defendant filed a defence and the plaintiff filed a reply to that defence on 15 March 2000. There is on the file an amended statement of claim filed on 8 April 1994, which appears to be in the precise terms of the original statement of claim. A further amended statement of claim was filed on some date in July 1999 which appears to be in precisely the same terms as another document filed on 15 November 1999, which is the plaintiffs' current pleading. The current defence to that is an amended defence filed in court during the hearing on 7 February 2003. There is a reply to that defence filed on 10 February 2003. The cross-claim is made by document filed on 23
February 2000, the defence to the cross-claim being filed on 9 August 2000.
The seemingly desultory way in which the proceedings have been conducted on the part of the plaintiffs is or was stated to be a result of the plaintiffs' financial difficulties, which I accept to be the fact. That in no way explains the six year delay by the defendant in the filing of a defence. The sad fact is that the hearing took twenty eight days for a claim which in the long run was quite a modest one. Had the action been able to be brought on in a reasonable time it is likely and I think almost certain that the cost involved would have been substantially less.  
Facts  The plaintiffs are husband and wife. They have been growing bananas in the
Uralba area for many years. During those years they have had considerable plantations on the south side of Duck Creek, where their home is located as are their packing sheds. Mr Rixon is a son-in-law of the plaintiffs. The plaintiffs own all the land in question together and they share the income from it, but insofar as arrangements were made between Mr Rixon and the plaintiffs they were made with Mr Simpson and not with Mrs Simpson. In 1986 Mr
Simpson and Mr Rixon agreed that they would establish a banana plantation on an area of approximately 2.5 hectares on the northern side of Duck Creek, on a south facing area of land which sloped from Duck Creek up to the old Bruxner
Highway. The arrangements between Mr Rixon and his father-in-law were somewhat vague, but I am satisfied that the general arrangement was that Mr Rixon would provide what could be described as the labour content required for the farming and that Mr Simpson would provide what was described as the physical inputs, such as the cost of fertilizers and the like and that he would deal with the packing, cooling and sale of the bananas, with the subsequent arrangement being that the crop would be equally shared. This meant that Mr Simpson would, for the most part, sell his share of the bananas locally to outlets, such as supermarkets, which he had established and that Mr Rixon's share of the crop, at least up till 1990 and probably thereafter, was sold through the wholesale markets in Sydney. The Rixon share was sold through those markets in his name and a cheque for the proceeds was sent direct to him. There were clearly some variations on this in that the crop was not always divided precisely equally and some physical costs were paid from time to time by Mr Rixon, or were probably paid by him as his evidence of outgoings can in no way be relied upon. The plaintiffs and Mr Rixon did not regard this as a share farming agreement, although to all intents and purposes that is what it was. It was certainly not a partnership arrangement in that each participant returned his share of income in a separate return and there was no joint return lodged.
There are returns from Mr Rixon from 1986 up till 30 June 1991, showing his income from the shared plantation. During the whole of this time Rixon was in full time employment so that the attention which he gave to the banana plantation was after hours and during the weekends.  The title particulars relevant to this action are somewhat difficult to understand, the references in the further amended statement of claim not all being correct and there having been re-subdivisions since the registration of
Deposited Plan 261363 which is incorrectly referred to in the pleading as
In any event by the subdivision effected by that plan in 1981, Lot 5 was created. On that land is erected part of the service road. To the south of part of Lot 5 is Lot 4, previously in that Deposited Plan, but now it seems in
Deposited Plan 771593. The Rixon-Simpson plantation was conducted on part of
Lot 4 and most of Lot 5. To the west of that land is the land referred to as
Lot 3ortant by way of submission only. I am in no position to make a finding as to the severity of the brain injury based upon counter-submissions.  At this point I interpolate that in relation to Mrs Olive's testimony as to the plaintiff having suffered a "semi-detached retina", there is no evidence at all in support of such an assertion and nothing in the ophthalmologist's report sustains it: see Dr Dethlef's report (4 May 2002, part of exhibit 5).  Turning to exhibit G, the report of the cerebral CT scan is in the following terms:  "Scans were carried out without the use of contrast medium using both normal settings and bony settings.  
It was noted that there are fractures through the right frontal bone and there are also comminuted fractures through the roof of the anterior cranial fossa on the right side. It is noted that the right ethmoid group of sinuses appears to be quite opaque and is probably full of contained blood. A marked degree of soft tissue swelling is also seen in the region of the right orbit.
It would seem that there could be considerable damage to the globe of the right eye.  
It is also noted that an extensive brain contusion has occurred to the right frontal area. Some haemorrhage is noted here along with some oedema. There is also some haemorrhage on the left side as visualised on scan 6. There is not much displacement of the ventricles. No other lesion is seen".  The only reports of the procedures carried out on the plaintiff in relation to this "injury" are constituted by four communications from Dr Laing to the plaintiff's general practitioner, Dr Sundar, for the period 25 October 1991 to May 1992 (part of exhibit 5). There is no need to rehearse their content: what the doctor says is unremarkable. As at 4 May 1992 he released the plaintiff by reason of it being Eugene's main concern to play football in that year's winter season. The doctor did so with some reluctance and made the proviso that appropriate headgear be worn. At that stage the plaintiff's treatment was complete in the area with which Dr Laing with Dr Bosanquet (oral and maxillo-facial surgeon: report dated 11 October 1994, part of exhibit 5) came to an end. I add that there is no question that the plaintiff must be found to have always had a "dream", consistent with his athletic prowess and keenness of becoming a first grade professional rugby league player.  The hospital notes (part of exhibit 5) indicate that the plaintiff was attended to by relevant specialists, a speech pathologist and a social worker.
For example, the speech pathologist's notation of 5 October 1991 refers to a review and the plaintiff's alertness and cooperation; "minimal memory difficulties. However some difficulties planning and sequencing for verbal description/explanation".  For the defendant it is submitted that an overview of certainly the hospitalisation of the plaintiff following his fall does not speak ("scream out") of significant brain damage.  The plaintiff was discharged from the Wollongong Hospital on 16 October Until May of 1992 it is tolerably clear that the plaintiff was not receiving further treatment from a speech pathologist or a neuropsychologist or an occupational therapist. In either May or June of 1992, however, the plaintiff's mother completed a form (exhibit B) for the purpose of the plaintiff coming under the care provided by an institution known as "Kid's
Cottage". Much was sought to be made by the defendant of Mrs Olive's completing only the category "other" as reasons for referral of her son without specific reference to available categories expressly set out in the document, for example, "behaviour at home", "behaviour at school". There is reference in exhibit B to the fall, the fact of surgery and in paragraphs 35 and 36 to a need for assessment as to the behavioural problems referred to in the document arising from the accident, the plaintiff in his mother's eyes having become "not the same child". The defendant was critical of the plaintiff's mother by reason of the way it appears she went about filling out the form. There are two bases of criticism, namely, the generalised part was completed by Mrs Olive rather than the specific questionnaire, and the proposition that people simply do not fill out forms like that. I am not persuaded by that submission. Certainly Mrs Olive gave evidence as to problems with the plaintiff after his discharge from hospital (bearing in mind that he did not return to school until the following year, and then again that was a different school). One of the problems was "balance", which on my view of the evidence was satisfactorily resolved.  The material in exhibit 5 constituted by the records of "Kid's Cottage" discloses that the plaintiff was reviewed by various specialists and in particular by the speech pathologist Mr Colin Slattery whose report is dated September 1992 (part of exhibit 5). In relation to this, the point the defendant seeks to make is that Mr Slattery concludes in a way that indicates there are "subtle emanations" consistent with some form of brain damage which will affect the finding of the degree of brain damage as a result of the fall. An equivalent submission is made in relation to occupational therapy, as
I understand it, based upon the report of Ms Sloan dated 2 November 1992. As at that date the plaintiff was shown, so it was submitted, and I agree, based upon that report, to be a fit young person. Nothing of significance was revealed. He was within normal limits for his gross, fine and visual motor skills. Further, it seems to me that from material in exhibit 5 (being school reports post-return to school) that there still seemed to be behavioural problems especially in the playground.  Otherwise, it was urged upon me by the defendant, that at the end of 1992 as far as the health professionals were concerned, there was not a great deal wrong with the plaintiff at all.  As I mentioned above, Ms Moorhead, a qualified schoolteacher was called in the plaintiff's case. Her statement is exhibit H. Ms Moorhead was an impressive witness as indeed the defendant acknowledges. Her evidence is clearly available for a comparative analysis of the plaintiff before and after the accident but only vis-a-vis the plaintiff alone. I agree with the submission for the defendant that I cannot use her testimony overall to compare the plaintiff to an external source of measure such as the mainstream classes. Ms Moorhead acknowledged in her evidence that her emotional reaction to what she perceived to be the fairly stark change in the plaintiff was limited to the year 1992 when the plaintiff had recommenced school and recommenced attending the homework centre. In 1993 and 1994 I accept on the probabilities that in the homework centre environment the plaintiff had returned to the group situation rather than to any one-to-one relationship with Ms Moorhead.  Thereafter it is the defendant's position that nothing remarkable attends the plaintiff's progress until he is in high school. He was seen whilst in year 7 at Lake Illawarra High School by clinical-neuropsychologist Dino
Cipriani at the request of the plaintiff's solicitors of 21 October 1994. In his report (part of exhibit E) Mr Cipriani refers to the requirement for further information and notes complaints by Mrs Olive as to what are reported as personality and behaviour changes, mood changes, low self esteem, anti- social behaviour and the view that they "appeared" to be consistent with the nature of what was then understood to be the plaintiff's head injury. By report dated 31 October 1995 Mr Cipriani again, with further information from
Shellharbour and Wollongong hospitals, reported to the plaintiff's then solicitors. As I understand it there was no interview with the plaintiff at that time or with the plaintiff's mother. On 20 September 2000 the Illawarra
Brain Injury Service ("IBIS") provided a report to the plaintiff's solicitors prepared from clinical notes and reports on file relating to the plaintiff's rehabilitation management at IBIS. The plaintiff had been the subject of attention from IBIS in 1997 on the complaint of his mother in relation to behavioural problems, mood swings and memory problems. At this time there is reference to the plaintiff's commencement of the use of drugs which is not disputed in the evidence. It seems that the principal unlawful substances were marijuana and speed. Also, reference is made in this report to sexual dysfunction about which the plaintiff gave oral evidence and in respect of which Dr Jeff Murray provided a report of 15 February 2000, noting in particular the effects of smoking marijuana. The plaintiff was referred to
George Haralambous, Clinical Psychologist, by the plaintiff's solicitors. He reported on 23 October 2000 after a neuropsychological assessment had been carried out. Reference is here made to the plaintiff's father having informed the psychologist of Eugene remaining defiant, oppositional, moody and short- tempered at home but not experiencing any major difficulties at school until approximately 16 years of age when he became aggressive and violent. It was about that time that the plaintiff did not achieve ambitions in relation to
Rugby League football that was, no doubt, of pre-eminence in his mind. In this report reference is made to the consumption of cannabis and speed. The report is particularly thorough in the recitation of the tests and results carried out by the practitioner. An emphasis is placed on the significance of "acute abnormalities" including the onset of headaches, speech and language difficulties and difficulties with balance. At the time, however, the plaintiff seems to this practitioner to have improved considerably but there was a residue of complaint as to memory, moodiness, temper outbursts and impulse control consistent with the responses on psychological testing where he demonstrated difficulties with the organisation of materials and other specific signs of frontal lobe impairment. The view was formed by this practitioner that the difficulties appear consistent with the nature of the injury sustained by the plaintiff in September 1991 and with "a disturbance of frontal lobe functioning". The plaintiff's clinical picture appeared to be complicated by his self-acknowledged excessive consumption of alcohol, cannabis and other substances. These were likely to exacerbate any cognitive difficulties and difficulties with impulse control. The deficits were considered by Mr Haralambous to be permanent.  Mr Haralambous' report dated 23 October 2000 makes reference to a neuropsychology report by Ms Martin (undated), tendered by the defendant as part of exhibit 5, where the conclusion was reached at the time of the expiry of 6 years post-injury, that there was residual difficulty associated with it including mild to moderate cognitive problems in the visual domain and for abstract problem solving and planning. Ms Martin was of the view that this is consistent with damage to the frontal and right parietal areas of the brain and that it was not uncommon for behavioural difficulties to emerge in late adolescence even many years after a head injury. The plaintiff was at that time at an age where he would be expected to become more independent and mature in managing behaviour but he was then not achieving it at the rate of his peers. Ms Martin refers to the plaintiff's difficulties arising from "lack of structure in the environment and behaviour monitoring being consistent with the effects of damage to the frontal lobe of the brain".  The plaintiff was referred to Dr McClure, psychiatrist, in October 2000.
The plaintiff and his mother were interviewed and Dr McClure refers to the material provided to him including Ms Martin's report, letters from Dr Jeff
Murray and the social worker of IBIS, Ms Gilchrist. The defendant points to what it says are flaws in the history provided to Dr McClure, in particular to what appears to be his acceptance of the notion that the plaintiff's "retina definitely reattached around July 1992". There is no independent evidence in support of such proposition. The defendant also relies upon the admission made by Mrs Olive to this doctor that the plaintiff was "spoilt" after the accident and before the accident was average with no disruptive behaviour. Dr
McClure refers to the report of Dr Murray of 27 July 2000 in which reference is made to the plaintiff developing noticeable problems that year with a depressed mood which Mrs Olive dated to about March. Inter alia, Dr McClure concluded that the plaintiff's brain injury, combined with the psychological and biological stressors of puberty and ongoing development appear to have predisposed him to anger outbursts, oppositional behaviour and anti-social behaviour including substance abuse and one assault charge.  Reference is made by Dr McClure to matters touched upon by the plaintiff in his evidence as to paranoid episodes associated with referential and persecutory thinking, visual hallucinations and subsequent sustained, pervasive depression of mood requiring prescription of antidepressants. Dr
McClure was not optimistic as to the plaintiff's future.  The defendant qualified Dr F Roldan, a clinical psychologist, coincidentally a partner of Mr Cipriani. Dr Roldan provided a thorough report dated 20 March 2002.  I interpolate in this context a submission for the defendant based upon statements made by Haydon JA in Makita (Australia) Pty Ltd versus Sprowles <case>; [(2001) 52 NSWLR 705] at 711 commencing at paragraph [59] in particular (p729) as to the desiderata for experts' reports. The report provided by Dr Roldan is in my view with respect to that submission as thorough as those provided by Mr Haralambous.  I desire however to quote two paragraphs from Dr Roldan's report:  "9.9 As far as personality/behavioural functioning is concerned, it is my opinion that it is likely that Mr Olive had some fluctuating behavioural difficulties prior to the accident in question and that these difficulties may have become more pronounced with age and him entering the less structured environment of high school post-accident. However, it is also possible that the head injury in question may have contributed to the exacerbation of pre- existing behavioural difficulties. Once again, such hypothesised accident- related deterioration in behaviour may have become apparent some years post- accident due to the less restrictive environment in high school. Thus, it seems possible that a combination of pre-existing and accident-related (brain trauma mediated) factors may explain Mr Olive's alleged current difficulties with depression, anger, oppositional behaviour and anti-social behaviour.  .10 As far as intellectual/cognitive functioning is concerned, I reiterate that I can find no evidence for a generalised post-accident deterioration in intellectual ability or cognitive functioning. As noted above and in my previous report, it is my opinion that post-accident IQ estimates have been generally consistent with estimates of pre-accident ability. Also, while there have been some allegedly impaired scores in some areas of cognitive functioning, almost invariably such scores have been preceded by unimpaired scores in the same or similar tests. Thus, there is evidence that the allegedly impaired scores do not provide evidence of "true" cognitive deficits and that Mr Olive is capable of unimpaired (non practice inflated) performance in those tests. In my opinion, it is likely that inconsistencies in tests scores across assessments may manifest inconsistent effort, something which seems to have pre-dated the accident in question. It is my opinion that when
Mr Olive's best (non practice inflated) psychometric test performances are taken into account, there is no objective evidence that such performance is significantly discrepant from estimates of pre-accident ability".  In the end the defendant's submission is that a sequence of events commencing at high school was to the effect: drugs, discipline problems, football dreams unrealised, erectile problems and paranoia. The defendant propounds the proposition that given flaws of the kind that attend particularly Dr McClure's first report above, the plaintiff's position appears to indicate that his practitioners have overlooked obvious issues such as the capacity of drug use and the extent of drug use to be the sole foundation of the plaintiff's subsequent problems.  I can indicate now that I think the better view and the one by which I am persuaded on the balance of probabilities is that set out in Dr Roldan's report above.  The plaintiff shortly before the hearing of his action had become the father of a baby daughter, the mother being a person with whom he had been in a relationship, as I understand it, for some time and that relationship itself being a matter of contention between the girl's father (at least) and the plaintiff's family.  The plaintiff had also been involved in prosecutions by the police to which
I will return.  The plaintiff's work history, however, is to say the least, poor. The family of the plaintiff is large, he being one of eight siblings and at the relevant time the second youngest. The plaintiff's siblings who were in employment were in employment of a fundamental rather than a complex kind.
That, the defendant, and in my view rightly, asserts to be the context or backdrop against which the expectations of the plaintiff can objectively be judged in determination of his capacity for employment.  For example, having commenced year 11 at high school he took employment for work experience with a furniture manufacturer and simply left after two or three weeks because he did not like it. From time to time he worked as a tradesman's assistant in the plastering field. In 1999 the plaintiff went to
Shellharbour TAFE to do a course in "nursing" but again failed to complete it because of lack of interest. He got a job with the Department of Sports and
Recreation as a trainee sports development officer and lasted for a short time of a few months whilst studying at TAFE for a sports administration qualification. He became for a short time a supervisor on a gas construction pipeline in the context of the protection of indigenous people's interests, and became a security operative with the State Rail Authority, leaving after two to three weeks because he did not like the shift work and the geographical inconvenience involved.  I have found the resolution of this case difficult not the least because of the inevitability of the lapse of time between the original injury to a nine- year-old schoolboy and the hearing of his case 11 years later. The plaintiff presented well in the giving of his testimony before me, and as I believe his counsel himself remarked, that looking at him and hearing him, one would come to the view that there was absolutely nothing wrong. The reality, so it is submitted for the plaintiff, is that there has been and will continue to be residual disabilities in both behavioural and cognitive senses that will adversely affect him. For the defendant, on the other hand, it was sought to be argued either that the residual problems in terms of behaviour are fundamentally drug related, and otherwise consistent with a pre-accident personality trait or that such behavioural matters would minimally affect the plaintiff in areas of his life including employment.  In the end I am satisfied that more probably than not the plaintiff did suffer frontal lobe injury. The predominant consequence is in the behavioural context, but not to the exclusion of cognitive deficit to some extent as encompassed by what Dr Roldan said above, that is, overall it is minimal.  There was agreement between the parties in matters fundamental to the approach to the calculation of various heads of damages, though not, from the point of view of the defendant, as to entitlement. At the time of the hearing the plaintiff was 20 years of age; life expectancy is 57 years; three percent multiplier - 1437.9; remaining work life 45 years; three percent multiplier .5. The average weekly earnings in New South Wales for males between 1999 and 2001 were gross $930.00 and net $720.00. In respect of care, the rates provided by the Motor Accidents Act litigation would apply.  In regard to this heading the case mounted by the plaintiff in relation to care was substantially unchallenged, certainly in relation to the immediate post-accident period, bearing in mind the child's age, and I find it appropriate to make an allowance for past care as claimed and will return to the detail later.  In relation to general damages at common law, taking into account the nature of the physical injuries, such pain and suffering as the plaintiff appears to have undergone therefrom (which does not appear to be great), the frontal lobe brain damage and what I find to be the principal continuing disability in the behavioural aspect, I am of the view that $150,000.00 is appropriate, half of which is to be apportioned as to the past. This apportionment is based upon the physical injuries being resolved in the past and the brain damage component being of particular effect on the plaintiff as a child and adolescent. Accordingly the award for general damages is made up of $150,000.00 plus 2 per cent of $75,000.00 for 11 years, namely, $16,500.00, total ng103326 This claim is based purely upon a claim of deficiency in design. It is claimed that the construction of the Perry's Hill deviation, which includes the new Bruxner Highway to the north of the plaintiffs' land and the service road, was carried out in accordance with design drawings and specifications issued by the RTA and in accordance with instructions by its supervising engineer and that the design was deficient in respects which are said to be outlined in a report of Mr Tinni dated 11 February 1995 and to the extent to which there were departures from the design they were carried out upon the instructions of or with the acquiescence of Mr Eastwood and accordingly that insofar that the Council is found liable to the plaintiffs then the RTA would, if sued by the plaintiffs, have been liable to it as a joint tortfeasor and is thus liable to contribution under s5 of the [Law
Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1946404/). There is another claim for contribution in equity which was not pursued and which could not have been pursued. The cross-defendant denies any fault in design, denies that the amendments were its responsibility and says that it is released from any liability by special condition 30 of the contract between the Simpsons and the Council, which I have not set out and which was ultimately not relied upon and by Clause 61 of the general conditions of assistance to the Councils for works on roads which it claims form part of the basis upon which funds were advanced for the particular project. I will discuss this later but I should say now that I have concluded that the term relied upon has no bearing whatsoever upon this claim for faulty design, nor should it have.  
Issues  The discussion to date leaves for determination the following questions.
They may seem to be simply stated, but as I have said the trial was long and in some ways difficult.  The questions for determination are: 
Did the works, the subject of this action, cause the plaintiffs' right of way to be eroded, preventing access to the banana plantation by means of that right of way? 
If so, is this a continuing nuisance justifying the grant of a permanent injunction? 
On the basis that there is a breach of special condition 27(c) should specific performance or a mandatory injunction requiring performance of that term be granted or issued or should damages be awarded in lieu, and if so, damages in what sum? 
Were the continuing obligations under the contract discharged, waived or varied by new agreements made between Mr Trent and Mr Simpson and if such an agreement were otherwise made, is it ineffective or unenforceable, by reason of [s23C](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s23c.html) or s[54A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s54a.html) of the [Conveyancing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) or by reason of being barred by the [Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/)? 
If the right of way was not available for access to the plantation after
December 1992, was access available to the plantation by any other means or direction, namely from the north east corner or across Duck Creek? 
Was it inability to access the plantation from the right of way which caused the plantation to be closed down and put into caretaker mode? 
Was there faulty construction or faulty design in the rock faced batter or the drainage bearing upon such batter? If so, has this been the cause of rocks falling from the rock faced batter onto the plaintiffs' land? If so did this bear upon the plaintiffs ceasing to use the land for banana growing or their failure to bring it back into production when their development application failed? 
Does the batter wall as constructed represent a continuing nuisance for the plaintiffs' land and if so should a permanent injunction be granted? 
If either lack of access or the falling rocks or both brought about continuing nuisance preventing the operation of the banana plantation, what is the consequential loss to the plaintiffs as a result? 
Was there fault in design of the RTA leading to or contributing to the plaintiffs' loss?  
I will deal with these issues but not necessarily in turn, but first I should discuss the contract claims for an implied term and good faith. There is no basis to find the implied term pleaded. The contractual terms are clear; there is no need for the term put forward; nor is it obvious. This claim fails. It is not necessary to discuss the recent cases dealing with good faith. In circumstances such as exist here if the works were negligently carried out, or if they result in nuisance, that is actionable. Good faith here means no more than carrying out the contract. It does not extend some obligation in respect of work not the subject of contract.  
Was the agreement varied and if so was the variation binding through lack of writing?  In spite of the earnest arguments of Mr Wilson, he was unable to explain to me why the variation of the contract upon which he relied did not have to be in writing to be effective. There was no plea or argument that reliance on the requirement of writing or the statute was itself fraudulent or unlawful.
Accepting for the moment that the pipes would have been adequate consideration for the giving up of the other entitlements the fact is that the agreement, if it existed, could not have amounted to a release or recision of the original contract and the bringing into existence of a new contract as for the most part the original contract had been performed by transfer of land. I can see no basis upon which it could be said that it was anything other than a variation. If it were a variation then as the original contract was required to be in writing, variation of it except of some unimportant term, would be required to be in writing: Tallerman & Co Pty Ltd versus Nathans
Merchandise (Victoria) Pty Ltd <case>; [(1957) 98 CLR 93] at 113. It is apparent therefore that the variation agreement cannot be relied upon in answer to the contractual claim, or set up as a defence to it: Perpetual Executors and Trustees Association of Australia
Limited versus Russell <case>; [(1931) 45 CLR 146] at 153; [Conveyancing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) [s54A.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s54a.html)
As the land the subject of the contract was transferred pursuant to it I do not consider [s23C](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s23c.html) of the [Conveyancing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) is relevant. It is not necessary to deal with the [Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/) reply.  The second matter for decision is whether or not the oral agreement which
Mr Trent claims he arrived at with Mr Simpson was entered into. Mr Simpson said the meeting did not take place and he had never telephoned Mr Trent at home. The matters which support Trent's claim are that at that particular time
Mr and Mrs Simpson had a subdivision application before the Council and had, they thought, I think with reason, a reasonable chance of getting it through.
In fact the evidence appears to be that the Council staff recommended its approval, but the Council rejected it and the Land and Environment Court at a later date dismissed consolidated appeals. Had the application been successful then there is no doubt that access to the subdivided lots would have been more likely to have been obtained from the north east rather than along the right of way. I do not think that is in dispute. If the agreement was made as Mr
Trent suggested it was, then the pipes were delivered at an appropriate time and were clearly not intended for use for relocation of banana tracks as otherwise they would have been used for that purpose by the Council not by Mr
Simpson as it suited him in other places. Mr Trent always thought that the clause in contract as to re-instatement of the access way meant reinstatement at the turning point onto the old Bruxner Highway. That is at least a reasonable explanation and may have been a reasonable construction of the contract if the construction to which I have referred had not been agreed upon.  As against this, and in favour of the plaintiffs, there is the evidence of
Mr Johnston, who was the solicitor for the Simpsons, of a meeting at the site in February 1993 at which Mr Trent was present. Mr Johnston said that was to discuss both the subdivision and the Clause 27 matters. I accept that. Mr
Trent did not suggest the obligations to re-instate the right of way had been waived. Mr Trent's agreement about this may, of course, have related to the point of access onto the service road at the western end of the right of way, but on the other hand, if the contract had been varied so that this was no longer required, there was no reason for him to carry out the work whatever it was, although it was ultimately done by Mr Brown. In any event, the meaning of
Clause 27(c) was at least a matter of doubt, perhaps as much for Mr Johnston as anyone else.  The evidence of Mr Trent at the early stage was to the effect that the contract was for the provision of three pipes, these being apparent from his photographs, whereas the other six pipes had been used and were not noticeable. It is likely that it was only after the view that he realized or remembered that nine pipes had been delivered and used on the site. This casts some doubt on his reliability. In addition to that some doubt was cast upon his testimony, in that some photos which he said showed the condition of the plantation after the service road was completed across the top of Lot 5, were obviously taken at a much later date. This became apparent after some photographs were produced by Mr Ahern, who was an inspector for the Department of Agriculture, after which Mr Simpson was recalled for further cross- examination. It would have been possible to ask for Mr Trent to be recalled to put this to him, but no such application was made. In spite of that, whether by accident or design, the evidence about the photographs was incorrect.  As I understood the evidence, the destruction of the banana stools on Lot 5 did not take place until work on the service road on the Lot 5 area commenced.
In those circumstances it seems unlikely that there would have been any work on the reconnection of the banana tracks prior to January 1993 at the earliest. In those circumstances there would be no reason to deliver the pipes in May 1992 to do that work.  I have come to the conclusion that the evidence of Mr Trent should be accepted. This is a matter which has caused me some doubt, but it is supported by the view I take of the evidence of Mr Rixon as to the intentions for future farming. It is also supported by the failure of Mr Simpson on affidavit to disclose his use of 9 pipes and his misleading statements about the pipes.  
Was access along the right of way prevented from May 1992?  If access was prevented from this date, which I doubt, it is really against the plaintiffs' claim for an injunction for nuisance as the drainage work adjacent to the right of way had not been commenced at that stage. It is not clear to me when that drainage work by way of diversion from the 600 millimetre diameter pipe to the 375 millimetre pipe was carried out, but the extension of the smaller pipe towards the south was not carried out until
What is, however, apparent and appeared apparent on the view, is that whatever the question of catchment area, there will, because of the hard surface, be a greater run-off of water as a result of the construction of the new highway and there will be a greater velocity of flow of such water by reason of the construction of the new highway and the diversion of the water under the highway at chainage 8880 into the culvert and then underneath the service road causing a considerably stronger flow out onto the right of way.
The plaintiff would have been entitled to an injunction to prevent this in any event. However, I think the evidence is sufficient to establish and I find it established that the road works caused damage to the right of way actionable in nuisance. Whether or not this would have prevented access after May 1992, or even after December 1992 is not so clear. Certainly it would have prevented access at times of major flow but, like Duck Creek, I do not think it has been established that the right of way became impassable at all times after those dates. There has never been any complaint about lack of access. The fact that
Mr Johnston may have thought that work would be attended to after the April meeting is not sufficient to explain lack of complaint thereafter at least until this action started.  
Did farming stop because of lack of access?  In support of an application for the development approval, Mr Rixon had made a statutory declaration in January 1993 stating that farming the plantation on the northern side of Duck Creek ceased in December 1992. This was in relation to the use of chemicals on the site. He did not say that this cessation was because of lack of access. A body of written material produced to support the application for sub-division of the Simpson land north of Duck
Creek indicated the land was not suitable for banana production. Nevertheless the evidence is that some money was being made from the production on that site, albeit that as it was south facing it was not as good for farming bananas as a north-facing slope. The experts in the long run all agreed upon that and I accept it to be true. The question then is whether or not lack of access had anything to do with the cessation of farming. Mr Rixon agreed in cross-examination that: (a) the statutory declaration was true; (b) that farming the plantation ceased in December 1992; and (c) that this was consistent with the state of the plantation and weed growth observed by Mr
Ahern from the Department of Agriculture in December 1992 and July 1993. Then the following passage appears on page 191 of the transcript in cross- examination of Mr Rixon:  
Q. The circumstances were that in December 1992 the decision had been taken that the growing of bananas on lot 4 was not going to continue, wasn't it? 
A. Correct.  
Q. And you made that decision in consultation with Mr Simpson, didn't you? 
A. Yes.  
Q. And I suggest to you that at that time he was very keen to develop lot 4 by way of the rural residential subdivision that he had before the Council; that's correct, isn't it? 
A. Yes.  
Q. And that your decision to give up share farming on lot 4 didn't change after December 1992, did it? 
A. No.  
Q. In your affidavit sworn on 8 December 2002 - do you have a copy of that with you? 
A. Yes.  
Q. Can I ask you to turn to paragraph 21. You start off by saying to all of those considerations, you intentionally neglected your obligations under the [Plant Diseases Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pda1924152/), and so on? 
A. Yes.  
Q. The considerations to which you refer were those set out in paragraph 19, lack of access; is that correct? 
A. Correct.  
Q. And the difficulties in transporting the bananas by trailer as referred to in paragraph 20? 
A. Correct.  
Q. Were there any other matters that you had in mind when in paragraph 21 you said "having regard to all those considerations"? 
A. Only the workload put on me while I was in full-time employment.  
Q. But what you haven't said there is that you had decided by December 1992 not to continue with the share farming? 
A. Correct.  
Q. And I suggest to you that was the principal factor why weeds were allowed to grow through the plantation at the time of Mr Ahearn's inspection in
December 1992? 
A. Yes.  
Q. And, indeed, what you say about those other considerations in paragraph 21 is a smokescreen, isn't it? 
A. I don't understand the question.  
Q. What I am suggesting to you is that there was one reason and one reason alone why weeds grew on the plantation in December 1992, and that was because you had decided to give up the share farming arrangement? 
A. That's incorrect.  
Q. You have said in your affidavits at various times that you gave up the work on lot 4 in April 1993? 
A. Correct.  
Q. If you wish to go back, have a look at paragraph 16 of your first affidavit. What you are suggesting is that you continued working on the property up until April 1993? 
A. Only in a caretaking capacity.  
Q. I suggest to you that you had given up work on this property, on lot 4, in
December 1992? 
A. Yes.  
Q. As at December 1992 and up until April 1993 you were working full-time for an employer, weren't you? 
A. Correct.  
Q. The time that you spent on lot 4 in that period of approximately four months as a caretaker, what did it involve? 
A. It involved spraying the weeds, picking up bunch covers, chopping down bunches that had gone ripe to avoid flying foxes coming in.  
Q. And what was your intention as at December 1992 in respect of lot 4? 
A. Because I had lost all access, I thought, well, I will cease with it. But I still had an obligation to at least keep vermin out.  
Q. You say that you had lost all access as at December 1992? 
A. That's correct.  
Q. Is that an accurate statement? 
A. As far as I can remember, yes.  
Q. As at December 1992, what were the methods that you employed to get access to lot 4? 
A. It was either walking down off the old Bruxner Highway--  
Q. Of what part of lot 4? The north-eastern part or the north-western part? 
A. The north-eastern.  
Q. So there was pedestrian access of some type in the north-eastern corner? 
A. Yes.  
Q. How else did you get access to the property? 
A. It was over Duck Creek until that became impassable.  
Q. When you say over Duck Creek until it became impassable, it didn't remain impassable from December 1992 forever more, did it? 
A. That's correct.  
Q. But that's the impression that you seem to want to convey in your affidavit evidence and in your oral evidence. Is that what you want to do? 
A. At the time it was impassable.  
Q. What, impassable for a week or ten days? 
A. No, it would be--  
Q. Or a fortnight? 
A. Yes.  
Q. But that doesn't mean to say that when the flow of water in Duck Creek subsided that you couldn't gain access, does it? 
A. No.  Mr Rixon said that after December 1992 he got access only from the north east corner and had to carry his sprays and other materials down by hand. He said, or his evidence appeared to say, that Duck Creek became impassable after
December 1992. This was obviously not correct and he accepted that his affidavit evidence was exaggerated to that extent. It was probably impassable for a period of two or three weeks during a particularly rainy stretch and at times thereafter, as it had been at times before. While access from the north east corner would have been down a slope which itself may have been inaccessible in periods of heavy rain, the access track was there and available, albeit that to use it would have required some of the banana stools to be destroyed. I find as a fact that access was available on most occasions from the north east corner of Lot 4. Further it is clear that any pile of dirt which is said to have prevented access was not in position at that time and, in any event, on the evidence I find it would not have prevented access. It follows from this that I find that Mr Simpson and Mr Rixon had decided, prior to the commencement of the building of the rock wall, to discontinue banana farming on the northern side of Duck Creek and that they did not come to this conclusion because they were denied access as a result of work on the new highway and associated drainage prior to that date. Some of the evidence as to access is inconsistent with access not being available along the right of way since May 1992. I accept that there was a greater flow of water causing damage to the access track; I do not accept that this permanently prevented access by that route from May 1992. I consider the evidence of Mr Rixon as to the time at which it was decided to abandon the plantation to be far more reliable than that of Mr Simpson who said falling rocks and a lack of access were the two reasons which brought about its abandonment in April 1993. Mr Simpson did accept access was physically available, at least from April 1993, from the north east corner, but thought some legal problem prevented this. On any basis that was incorrect, but he went on to say if he had permission he could have used that access, yet he did not ask for permission. While it is just possible that he may have been thinking about the controlled access road, I do not accept his explanation of this, which I found to be quite unconvincing.  
Nuisance to the right of way  I consider the evidence to be overwhelming that the piping of water from the new highway to the northern side of the service road and then onto the service road to flow onto the right of way, causes a serious interference with its use. It is obvious that the extension of the pipeline to take it closer to the right of way increases that interference. It was put that the work, which is claimed in this action to have brought about the nuisance, did not bring about any greater flow than that which had existed for many years. That is contrary is the evidence of Mr Rixon and of Mr Simpson and to what was clear from the site inspection which was held. So far as the catchment area is concerned that may be correct, but water falling on agricultural land is to a large extent absorbed into the soil. Water falling on a paved surface runs or falls to a low point or to a culvert at a far greater velocity than it may run from agricultural land. The evidence is clear that there would be an increased volume of water as a result of the 600 millimetre pipe under the new highway at chainage 8880 and that this would be carried at an increased velocity partly flowing into the existing pipe under the old highway and partly flowing south east across the service road. That increase in volume and velocity was exacerbated by the omission of the energy dissipater which was shown on the
RTA plans and by the inclusion of a concrete drainage way from the new pipe which was not shown on those plans.  Interference with a right of way is an actionable nuisance even without damage: Nichols versus Ely Beet Sugar Factory Limited [[1936] Ch :]
Pollock Law of Torts 11th Ed 379. Leaving aside the interesting question of variation of contract, the plaintiff is entitled to a permanent injunction restraining that nuisance irrespective of the contract. This can be framed in the usual way as a restraining order but will obviously require the Council to take positive remedial action to deal with the flow of water through the pipes. The fact that Mr Simpson told Mr Trent that he was not concerned with the access way in 1992 or might not need it for his subdivision does not mean that he had abandoned it.  In light of my conclusion as to the effectiveness of the agreement varying the contract, and the admitted failure to comply with special condition 27(c) the question is whether specific performance of a particular unfulfilled term of the contract should be ordered or damages should be awarded in lieu. In ordinary circumstances, as it is over ten years since the sale of the land was concluded it would be likely that damages would be a more appropriate remedy.
In the present case, however, where work will be required to comply with the injunctive order it seems to me that an order for specific performance should be made so that all necessary work can be done by the Council at the same time. Apart from anything else this should result in less cost to the Council.
As the requirements of Clause 27(c) are independent, and the rest of the contract has been executed, the usual prescription against ordering specific performance of part of a contract need not apply.  
Claim in respect of erosion by water  While the evidence is probably sufficient to establish some run off of soil from the embankment or from the new highway during construction, there is no evidence of continuing flow of water greater than previously existed, nor of any continuing flow. In fact the table drains on the north of the same road and the fall to the east should result in less run-off onto Lot 4 than previously. There is no evidence of continuing siltration of Duck Creek nor I find of siltration caused by the roadworks. In any event there is no evidence of damage flowing from any such water or erosion. In the long run the claim was not strongly pressed if put at all and does not sound in damages nor give rise to a claim for an injunction.  
Falling rocks  Mr Rixon stated that he worked in the plantation on Lot 4 in a caretaker mode after December 1992 and I accept that to be true. It appears that he was engaged in weed control and that he was also engaged in taking off some clumps of remaining bananas. Whatever it was it is my view the retreat to caretaker capacity was not brought about by lack of access. He states that it was during this period while he was working in the banana plantation that three boulders rolled past him. I accept that to be true. I find that was probably sufficient at least to make him wary and perhaps somewhat frightened of continuing to work in that plantation, although it is by no means clear that he stopped doing so as a result of this. In fact I think it is clear that he continued to do some work there after the boulders rolled past. It was during this construction period that it is accepted that some boulders did fall from the wall, which were for the most part later taken from Lot 4 and replaced in the embankment. It is accepted that some of them still remain on Lot 4. The solicitor's letter of complaint, annexed to the statement of claim, referred to a small number of boulders rolling. The fact that they did so did not in itself prevent farming taking place. The falling boulders caused damage to the fence during construction, but this was repaired. I do not accept that the cattle, which Mr Simpson said got through the fence up onto the highway, shortly after construction concluded in May 1993, did so after construction had been completed. The state of the fence in July 1993 is quite contrary to such a finding. I have also come to the conclusion that the evidence from Mr
Tinni's photographic record and other photographs makes it more likely than not that some boulders have fallen from the rock embankment between April 1993 and January 1995. This supports the evidence of Mr Simpson when he was recalled for further cross-examination. By that time of course, the plantation had been abandoned and the Department of Agriculture had required it to be eradicated completely. That had been done. There were just some suckers coming back from time to time. There is no evidence of any boulders having moved from the wall onto the Simpson property since January 1995.  In some ways this is the most difficult part of the action. As I have found that the falling rocks were not the cause of the plaintiff abandoning the plantation little damage has been caused by the rocks which have fallen. There is now no claim in respect of the fence. There is no evidence that the plantation would have been replanted at any time after 1993 were it not for the falling rocks. Mr Rixon is farming elsewhere on the plaintiffs' land.
While there is evidence of the cost of replanting there is no evidence that this is intended. If it were then one must assume that some application for an interlocutory injunction would have been made many years ago. Until recently
Mr Rixon had not been on Lot 4 since 1996. Mr Simpson has been there on few occasions. On the expert evidence relating to rock falls and distances, the likelihood of a boulder rolling more than twenty metres from the northern boundary is so remote that it would not, I think, be sufficient to prevent a careful person farming Lot 4 south of twenty metres from its northern boundary. That however is not significant. What is significant is that there is no suggestion of intention to resume banana farming on Lot 4. A further subdivision application was lodged in 1995 which was refused in 1996. The case was not put forward as one for damages for lost opportunity to recommence after all subdivision attempts failed.  I move then to the question of present stability. This must be considered in light of my finding that some boulders, probably not more than twenty, have fallen from the wall between July 1993 and January 1995. I should say that no complaint was made to the Council about this and it is related only to the question of continuing nuisance. The question of whether there is any existing nuisance imposing a threat to the use of Lot 4 and its enjoyment must be considered in the light of the fact that there is no evidence of any boulder falling from the wall in the past eight years, apart from one dislodged for test purposes, which dislodgement required some effort.  The plaintiff relied on the evidence of two experts, namely Mr Tinni and Mr
Delaney on the question of stability. The plaintiff also relied on the fact that the defendant and cross-defendant did not ask their experts to address the stability question.  The evidence of Mr Tinni was that the rock facing was badly constructed. He said this was obvious because the rocks had not been carefully placed, there are obvious gaps between them, there was no drain at the foot, the wall is far too steep in places and that it had already collapsed once and that a new collapse was imminent. He said that the boulders had been dumped, not placed.
He said the omission of the SG dyke on the southern side of the service road shown on the RTA drawings, would allow water to flow down the batter wall causing erosion of soil underneath it. He said there was ponding in the northern table drain of the service road which would cause seepage into the batter and weaken the earth embankment. Anyone listening to his evidence would think that there was a certain risk of fall. But he has not been on site since It is fair to say the evidence of Mr Tinni was to some extent coloured, because he was not aware to amendments to the original design plans and when he wrote his original report he did not have a full set of those plans but only some of the pages. He did not know or understand that the plans provided for the water on the service road to fall to the south which would bring about a requirement for an SG dyke, but that ultimately the centre line became the high point. He had failed to realize that there was provision for a constant lowering of level from west to east bringing about a flow of water from west to east and his evidence of rocks being dumped was just wrong as was his evidence of a first collapse.  It is not suggested, except by Mr Tinni, that the wall as originally designed was not a suitable batter wall. His main criticism of it was the fact that its foot at the steepest point on Lot 4 was almost immediately upon the boundary between Lots 4 and 5. While that might have made construction or maintenance more difficult, it was not something which made it unsafe or unstable. Neither, I think can it be said that a slope of one horizontal to one vertical would not have been quite safe if properly constructed. When Mr
Brown concluded that the embankment as designed placed its foot into Lot 4 in part it was decided to steepen the embankment at its foot until it met the original design line of 1.5 horizontal to 1 vertical and then proceed on that line. However, it is not really clear at what angle it was proposed to construct the lower slope and as finally constructed its slope in at least one place is on the order 1 horizontal to 2.3 vertical for a short distance. At this particular point as the foot was commenced at a greater distance from the boundary, than at other points, additional rocks were added at the foot to give it greater stability. It is those rocks which caused Mr Tinni to report that there had already been a collapse. The evidence is that the compaction tests were taken as required of the soil component. There was nothing to suggest any instability in the soil. In my view there is no basis to suggest that the defendant should have produced evidence of stability and failure to do so requires some inference it was not in its interest to do so. The onus was on the plaintiffs. Mr Tinni said that water penetration would cause instability and this would come about by the lack of an SG dyke and seepage from ponding in the table drain on the northern side of the service road. His opinion that this had already caused instability as shown by a collapse, was shown to be wrong. There is no evidence the earth embankment is at present unstable. The effect of ponding was exaggerated in view of the slope to the east. This and the centre line high point were accepted by other experts as reason to eliminate the SG dyke. I accept those views.  Mr Delaney, an engineering geologist called by the plaintiff, considered the rock facing was not constructed in accordance with modern engineering practice. This related mainly to its steepness in part. He assessed the risk of rock fall to be high. He based this on the presence of rocks on Lot 4, the steepness of the batter and his discussions with Mr Simpson. He gave evidence of the calculations of rolling rocks from the top the batter which in essence showed the likelihood was that of any rocks falling between 63 and 100 percent would fall within five metres of the boundary, between 0 to 37 percent would fall within ten metres of the boundary and 0.1 to 0.4 percent would fall within fifteen metres of the boundary. He considered this to be an unacceptable risk for a rural residential development or to persons undertaking agricultural activities on that site. He stuck to his opinion of the high risk of instability as a result of the steepness of the batter, the erosion of the soil on the batter and the lack of proper locking between rocks.  Mr Verco, an expert engineer called by the RTA was of the opinion that the rock facing appeared stable. He agreed that if rocks had fallen then it was some evidence of bad construction. On the other hand he thought the rocks were properly linked, although it would have been better practice and better construction to put in smaller rocks to fill gaps and that this could have been done by breaking up the larger boulders available on the site.  I have concluded that the evidence does not support a finding that the rock facing is now unstable. It certainly does not support a claim that the earth embankment is becoming unstable as a result of erosion by water so as to represent a nuisance. It is reasonable to say that the evidence and inspection on the view would lead to a conclusion that a better batter could have been built. That is not evidence of nuisance to occupiers to adjoining land by threat of fall without evidence of any fall for the past eight years. The claim for an injunction to restrain a nuisance for the rock faced batter wall is not made out.  
Other findings  In the light of my finding that the plaintiffs have not sustained economic loss as a result of lack of access or falling rocks it is unnecessary to deal with the claim of such loss. However, a lot of time was spent at the trial on this aspect and a lot of evidence of agronomists went towards it. In case, therefore, my conclusion is found not to be correct I set out briefly the findings I would have made.  The plaintiffs, the defendant and the cross-defendant each called expert evidence from agronomists, namely Mr Wilkie, Mr Campbell and Mr Ivey respectively. I consider that of these Mr Ivey is by far the most reliable.
The evidence of Mr Wilkie was to some extent made less acceptable by his continual refusal to accept much disadvantage in the south facing slope, by his evidence as to the percentages of krazmosin and podsolic soil on the property and by his reliance on the achievements of Mr Simpson on other parts of the plantation when the one in question was not farmed by him. The estimated yield of 2,800 cartons per hectare could not be accepted. It was in the upper range of yield from banana plantations and was, I think, far in excess of the yield Mr Simpson was achieving where he was farming himself. Mr
Campbell's evidence as to the soil types was, I consider, somewhat inaccurate.
I consider that he placed too much reliance on the aerial photographs and I have also come to the conclusion that he placed too much emphasis on the disadvantages of a south-facing slope. Mr Ivey may have incorrectly considered agreement had been reached on soil types, but his views as to the percentages of one type from the other was, I consider, more likely to be correct.
Generally on all matters I considered him an impressive witness. It is more likely than not that about 50% of the plantation comprised podsolic soils.  The problems about yield arose because the plaintiffs kept no records of the yield from Lot 4 and neither did Mr Rixon. If the plaintiffs' share of the yield was ever brought to account, which is very doubtful, it was never separate from the yield from other parts of their plantation. I expressed the view during the hearing, and remain of that view, that the best evidence of yield likely to be achieved was from evidence of past yields if that could be obtained. I said that I considered this could be obtained from Mr Rixon's disclosed income from the plantation over the years in question, which would have been from about one half of the total yield. It was never suggested that his income figures were not correct. If the income from each year of known figures was divided by the average Flemington wholesale price for that year per carton and doubled, an annual yield could be estimated from the plantation, which was likely to be far more accurate than an agronomist's estimate formed on some other basis. Mr Ivey agreed with this approach. It is fair to say however that the yields so determined varied so much that there must be some doubt about the approach, although an averaging would probably bring a reasonably fair finding. It would show beyond doubt that Mr Wilkie's estimated yield could not be supported.  This figure is subject to one further adjustment. The evidence was that Mr
Simpson had contracts with supermarket and other retail outlets so that he sold at what were called "retail prices" rather than wholesale prices through the markets. This of course is different from the final retail price paid by the customer. On this basis as Mr Ivey explained, as Mr Simpson was buying in bananas from others to fulfil his contracts his loss was the amount that he had to pay for the wholesale bananas. Once again on the sparse evidence that price is about 75% of retail price so that in calculating loss one could take either the Flemington wholesale price each year from 1992 and relate that to the yield estimated as I have mentioned, or take 75% of the retail price obtained by the Simpsons shown by what most experts agreed to be an insufficient sample. If it were necessary to do so I would have chosen the
Simpson figures because while a small sample it was probably real rather than being some average from the Flemington prices. In fact on the evidence shown in the Ivey report there would not be a great deal of difference. The plaintiffs in the long run accepted that the buy-in price was the proper figure to work on. I have marked the plaintiffs' final schedule of damages claimed as Exhibit X so that this can be understood if future reference is necessary. This does not take into account the acceptance of the relevance of the buy-in cost.  
Damages from the fallen rocks  No attention was given to this. I am satisfied there is some damage and I would be prepared to award damages of $1,000 including interest, but counsel may address further on this if they wish.  
Cross-claim  In the light of my conclusions it is only necessary to consider any liability of the cross-defendant in respect of the nuisance to the right of way as the cross claimant did not really press a claim in respect of design of the wall and of course the amount is very small. If it had been necessary to consider any liability in respect of the rock faced batter I would have found for the cross-defendant. The reasons for that are that it was not built to the design of the RTA, and in any event Mr Trent, as the authorised representative of the Council was entitled to make changes to it and did so. The fact that the original design was an RTA design had no bearing on the current state of the wall. In other words, there is no suggestion that the original design was not satisfactory nor that the design, which was certainly accepted by Mr
Eastwood for the lowering of the level of the service road was not in itself satisfactory. The fact that the wall as designed did not fit within Lot 4 did not cause damage to the plaintiff. If anything did it was the construction not the design. In coming to this conclusion I do so on the basis that the wall as designed encroached on Lot 4. The drawing in Exhibit 43 makes it clear it did.  So far as the continuing nuisance to the right of way is concerned, I have come to the conclusion that it has not been established that the work of the
RTA in the design phase has caused or contributed to the nuisance. That is for two reasons. First because the drainage at the point in question has not been constructed in accordance with the RTA design, and second because there is no evidence that the extension to the existing pipe under the service road, which extension has, I consider, increased the nuisance, was ever discussed with the
RTA. Certainly it was not envisaged in its design. In those circumstances the cross-claim must fail.  There was a further defence to cross claim based upon what are called
General Conditions of Assistance to Councils (the Grey Book). Clause 61 of the conditions was as follows:  
Any damages, costs, charges or expenses of any nature whatsoever paid, suffered or incurred by the Council in respect of any action, claim suit or proceedings taken by or against the Council in respect of any work is to be paid or borne by the Council and is not to be charged to the cost of the work and the Council is to indemnify and save harmless and keep indemnified the
Commissioner from and against all such damages, costs, charges and expenses.  The clause relates to construction works by the Council, not to defects in design by the RTA. A reading of the whole document makes that clear. In my view it would be no defence to the cross-claim for faults in design if they had been made out, which they were not.  
Costs  The main claim of the plaintiffs has failed. In those circumstances I will have to hear argument on costs. The cross-claim should be dismissed with costs. The plaintiffs should be protected against the additional costs to them involved in the cross-claim being heard with this claim. It should be borne in mind they sought a separate hearing. 
Proposed orders 
Declaration that the defendant is in breach of special condition 27(c) of a contract for the purchase by the defendant from the plaintiff of the land in
Folio Identifier 5/261323, which clause on its true construction as agreed between the parties, required the access way of the plaintiffs to Lot 4 in DP by means of a right of carriageway over Lot 3 in DP 261363 to be reinstated by the defendant by shaled upgrade. 
Order this term of the contract be specifically performed by 1 June 2003. 
Order that the defendant be permanently restrained after 1 June 2003 from interfering with the Plaintiffs' right of way over Lot 3 by causing or allowing water to run or discharge on the right of way from pipes located under Duck Creek Mountain Road. 
Judgment for the plaintiff against the defendant for damages and interest in the sum of $1,000. 
Plaintiffs' other claims dismissed. 
Order that the cross claim be dismissed with costs. 
Stand over question of balance of costs to a date to be fixed.  
LAST UPDATED: 02/05/2003 * * * 
