

Ehrenfeld & Anor versus Nan Sun & Ors [2017] NSWSC 547 (28 April 2017) 
Last Updated: 8 May 2017 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Decision: 
Injunction granted to 5.00pm on 4 May 2017. Plaintiffs warned that rental balance required would need to be paid or secured for the restraint ordered to be extended until a final hearing.  
Catchwords: 
LANDLORD AND TENANT - Termination of a tenancy - NSW Civil and Administrative
Tribunal decision terminating residential tenancy agreement - Tribunal found tenants frequently failed to pay rent owing on the residential premises - rental arrears remain outstanding - interlocutory injunction sought to restrain landlord from taking possession of or interfering with the tenants' quiet enjoyment of the premises - alleged denial of procedural fairness before the Tribunal - balance of convenience - whether prejudice to defendants in grant of injunction pending a final hearing - what financial terms imposed upon the plaintiffs for grant of any injunction.  
Legislation Cited: 
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013  [Residential Tenancies Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rta2010207/)  
Cases Cited: 
Australian Broadcasting Corporation versus Lenah Game Meats Pty Ltd <case>; [(2003) 73 ALD 321]  
Category: 
Procedural and other rulings  
Parties: 
First Plaintiff: Michelle Anne Ehrenfeld 
Second Plaintiff: Gabriel Ehrenfeld 
First Defendant: Nan Sun 
Second Defendant: Megaward Pty Ltd 
Third Defendant: NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal  
Representation: 
Solicitor:  
Plaintiffs: Mr G. Ehrenfeld in person 
First Defendant: Min Wen in person 
Second & Third Defendant: n/a  
File Number(s): /127242  
Publication Restriction: 
No  
EX TEMPORE JUDGMENT
Mrs Michelle Ann Ehrenfeld leases premises in George Street, Dover Heights ("the premises") from Nan Sun under a residential tenancy agreement ("the lease agreement") which commenced on 19 July 2016 and concludes on 18 July 2017. As at today, 28 April 2017, there are approximately 10 weeks to run on the lease. Mrs Ehrenfeld lives in the premises with her husband Mr Gabriel Ehrenfeld and two of their adult children.
On 26 April 2017 the NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal ("NCAT") decided ("the NCAT decision") to terminate the lease agreement under [Residential Tenancies Act 2010](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rta2010207/) ("the Act"), <case>. It did so on the ground that the tenant had breached the lease agreement by failing to pay rent. NCAT was satisfied under the Act, <case> that the tenant had frequently failed to the pay the rent owing. So NCAT terminated the lease agreement immediately. NCAT ordered that possession was to be given to the landlord on the date of termination.
NCAT found that $8,045.71 in rent was due on 26 April (being the rent from 14 March 2017 to 26 April 2017), under the lease agreement. That amount remains outstanding today. The only parties to the NCAT proceedings at the time they were decided, were Nan Sun and Mrs Ehrenfeld.
Mrs Ehrenfeld and her husband both approached the Court late yesterday, 27 April, in the Duty List. They sought to file a Summons which names Nan Sun, the registered proprietor of the premises, and Nan Sun's leasing agent, Megaward Pty Ltd trading as "the Megaward Property Group" ("Megaward"), as the first and second defendants and NCAT as the third defendant. The Summons claiming relief as plaintiffs: (1) to restrain Nan Sun and Megaward from acting on the NCAT decision; and (2) to restrain them from taking possession of the premises, or interfering with Mr and Mrs Ehrenfeld's quiet enjoyment of the premises. Although Mrs Ehrenfeld is the only named tenant in the lease agreement, Mr Ehrenfeld also claims the relief sought in the Summons. Yesterday, the Court authorised service on the defendants and made temporary restraining orders which, unless extended, will expire at 5 pm this afternoon.
Mr and Mrs Ehrenfeld were both present yesterday. Today, when the matter was returnable before the Court at 3 pm, Mr Ehrenfeld continued to represent the couple. Mrs Ehrenfeld had expressly authorised Mr Ehrenfeld to represent her interests. The Court gave leave for him to do so both yesterday and today. Mrs Ehrenfeld said she had other employment duties and claimed not to be able to be present at all times in Court.
The standard form of lease agreement under the Act provides a space on the first page for the lessor's name to be inserted. The entity named in the lessor section of the lease agreement is Megaward Pty Ltd. But the standard form makes clear that the person named as lessor, can be either the owner or the owner's agent. Megaward is the managing agent for Nan Sun.
This matter came on late today, 28 April, in a busy Equity Duty List. The plaintiffs sought to extend the existing restraint, pending final hearing. They relied upon the same evidence as had been read yesterday, namely, Mr and Mrs Ehrenfeld's respective affidavits of 27 April.
Ms Angelina Wen an employee of Megaward sought leave to appear for Nan Sun and Megaward. Ms Wen is not legally qualified. But as the amount ultimately in issue in relation to these proceedings is very modest, the Court gave her leave to appear. Through Ms Wen the first and second defendants tendered the original lease agreement, a notice of termination and correspondence recording Megaward chasing arrears of rent on the premises.
The Court asked the plaintiffs to define the legal basis of the relief they sought. Mr Ehrenfeld was not readily able to articulate a precise legal basis for the relief. But he in substance submitted that there had been a denial of procedural fairness in the NCAT hearing on 26 April and that the restraint now being sought was in substance ancillary to an application for prerogative relief to quash the decision of the Tribunal.
The NCAT decision included the following orders: "1. The Residential Tenancy Agreement is terminated in accordance with:  •[s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rta2010207/s87.html) of the [Residential Tenancies Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rta2010207/) as tenant has breached the agreement,  •failure to pay rent in accordance with agreement.  . The Tribunal is satisfied in accordance with [s (5)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rta2010207/s89.html) the tenant has frequently failed to pay rent owing for the residential premises.  . The Residential Tenancy Agreement is terminated immediately and possession is to be given to the landlord on the date of termination.  . The tenant shall pay the landlord a daily occupation fee at the rate of $182.86 per day from the day after the date of termination, namely 27-Apr-2017 until the date vacant possession is given to the landlord.  . Within 60 days of the date for possession of the premises specified in these orders the landlord may request the relisting of the application to determine the amount of the occupation fee owing.  . The landlord's agent is to advise the tenant in writing by the delivery of a letter to the premises by 6:00 pm on 26-Apr-2017 of the orders made today.  . The tenant, MICHELLE ANN EHRENFELD, D/70 GEORGE Street DOVER HEIGHTS
NSW 2030 Australia, is to pay the landlord, NAN SUN, 01- MEGAWARD PROPERTY
GROUP UNIT 701 66 GOULBURN Street SYDNEY NSW 2000 Australia, the sum of $8,045.71 immediately.  . GABRIEL EHRENFELD is removed as an respondent."
NCAT's reasons make clear that the overdue rent of $8,045.71 referred to in Order 7 was for the period from 14 March 2017 to 26 April 2017.
NCAT gave reasons for its orders and explained the procedural steps leading to its decision, including Mr Ehrenfeld's removal as one of the named parties to the NCAT proceedings.
 "The tenant has not appeared before the Tribunal on the hearing today. A copy of the Notice of Hearing addressed to the tenant at the residential premises the subject of the tenancy appears on the tribunal's file. Having regard to the Registrar's statutory declaration concerning notice and listing procedures in the Tribunal's registries, The Tribunal finds that a copy of the
Notice of Hearing was sent to the tenant. It has not been returned to the
Tribunal. There is nothing to suggest that it was not received by the tenant.
The Tribunal is satisfied that the tenant has been served with notice of the hearing today. 
Mr G Ehrehfeld appeared today at the Tribunal. Mr Ehrenfeld is not a party to these proceedings as he is not a named tenant. Mr Ehrenfeld advised the
Tribunal that he has no authority to represent Mrs M Ehrenfeld today. 
Mr Ehrenfeld sought to make submissions that the matter that the application should be dismissed as misconceived. This submission was made on the basis that on 10 March 2017 the identical application was dismissed by the
Tribunal for non-appearance by the applicant. Mr Ehrenfeld believes that as the matter has already been dismissed by the Tribunal the only avenue open to the applicant is to appeal the decision of the Tribunal made on 10 March 2017.
The submission of Mr Ehrenfeld is not accepted by the Tribunal. There were no factual findings made by the Tribunal on 10 March 2017 that would prevent the applicant from filing a new application with the Tribunal on identical terms to a previous application. 
Mr Ehrenfeld then sought to have the proceedings adjourned as he was not prepared to present evidence today as he presumed that the application filed by the applicant was misconceived and would be dismissed. The Tribunal asked
Mr Ehrenfeld if he owed any rent. Mr Ehrenfeld advised the Tribunal he did not owe rent as he was not a party to the residential tenancy agreement. 
As Mr Ehrenfeld was not a party to the agreement and he had no authority to represent Mrs Ehrenfeld, Mr Ehrenfeld was removed as a respondent, and no further evidence was heard from him. The Tribunal asked the Tribunal whether he wished to swear under oath that he had authority to represent Mrs 
Ehrenfeld and he advised the Tribunal again that he had no authority. 
Having regard to the amount of arrears claimed and the likelihood that the landlord will be prejudiced if the hearing does not proceed today, the
Tribunal is satisfied that the matter should proceed to hearing today. 
The Tribunal has heard sworn evidence from the landlord. The landlord has provided the Tribunal with a Hearing Notes (which appear on the file), the
Managing Agency Agreement, the Residential Tenancy Agreement, the Notice of
Termination and the Tenant Rent Ledger."
NCAT then made findings based on the contested evidence before it. These findings were the following: "1. There is a residential tenancy agreement between the parties regulated by the [Residential Tenancies Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rta2010207/).  . The non-payment termination notice complied with the formal requirements of [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rta2010207/s82.html) and section 88 of the Act and provided sufficient time in accordance with the Act for the tenant to comply.  . The termination notice was served in accordance with the provisions of s223 of the Act. The tenant has not vacated the premises.  . The grounds set out in the notice of termination have been established.
The rent had remained unpaid for not less that 14 days on the day the notice was served or deemed served.  . The application was brought within 30 days of the termination date specified in the termination notice.  . The Tribunal has considered the circumstances of the landlord and the tenant, in so far as they are known to the Tribunal, in making this decision.  . The tenant has not paid all the rent owing and is currently 44 days in arrears.  . The tenant rent ledger shows that the tenant has frequently failed to pay the rent on time  . The landlord relies on the rent to meet the obligations to pay the mortgage, rates and other expenses for the property. The failure to pay the rent on time causes the landlord hardship.  . There is no evidence which provides a reasonable explanation for the tenant's failure to pay rent.  . The Tribunal is satisfied that the breach of the Agreement is, in all of the circumstances of the case, sufficient to justify an order for termination of the Agreement and for vacant possession of the premises."
Two questions arise in this, as in every hearing for an interlocutory injunction: Australian Broadcasting Corporation versus Lenah Game Meats Pty Ltd [(2001) 208 CLR 199.] First, the Court must consider whether there is a serious question to be tried at a final hearing. The second question is the balance of convenience, to assess whether injustice will be occasioned to any party before a final hearing by the making of the orders requested and whether any injustice is able to be mitigated by terms imposed in this Court.

Serious Question to be Tried
As earlier indicated, the plaintiffs appear to be proceeding under the Court's general power to grant an injunction or prerogative relief to restrain the first and second defendants from acting on the NCAT decision, which is allegedly void because of a denial of procedural fairness. As neither party was legally represented in this Duty List hearing, analysis of the legal basis for the plaintiffs' Summons was not developed beyond this bare statement.
Leaving aside for a moment the plaintiffs' substantive claim of denial of procedural fairness, strong discretionary and procedural obstacles stand in the way of the plaintiffs' success at final hearing. Principal among these is that adequate alternative remedies to prerogative relief may be available to the plaintiffs in NCAT, which the plaintiffs have not sought to deploy before coming to this Court: see for example, Dranichnikov versus Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs <case>; <case>.
For example, the plaintiff almost certainly had additional options for relief available to him including an internal appeal to an Appeal Panel in accordance with the Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013, Schedule 4.
A party to an NCAT hearing, with the leave of this Court, may appeal on a question of law an "appealable decision" of NCAT, as defined in Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013 ("CAT Act"), <case> (1). Such a decision includes, inter alia, a decision of an Appeal Panel in an internal appeal: CAT Act, <case>(a). The requirements for an appeal to this Court from the Tribunal are fully set out in Division 3 of Part 6 of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013.
There may also be jurisdictional arguments against the plaintiffs' present application, given the jurisdictional limitations set out in the Consumer and Commercial Division Schedule of the CAT Act, Schedule 4.
It is not necessary for present purpose to go beyond these very general observations about procedural and jurisdictional issues that might arise at final hearing, before turning to the plaintiffs' case.
The plaintiffs advance three arguments in support of their claim that NCAT denied them procedural fairness. The first of these relates to Mr Ehrenfeld's removal as a party to the NCAT proceedings and NCAT's refusal to hear submissions from him or to allow an adjournment for his wife to attend.
The plaintiffs' argument arises in the following circumstances. The NCAT proceedings as originally constituted were brought by the first and second defendants against Mr and Mrs Ehrenfeld. But when the matter was heard on 26 April, NCAT at its own motion, removed him from the proceedings because he was not the tenant under the lease agreement. This left Mrs Ehrenfeld as the only respondent. As she was not present at the Tribunal, Mr Ehrenfeld applied to NCAT to represent her interests. NCAT did not given him leave, for the reasons it explained in the passages of its decision set out above. Nor did it allow him an opportunity for an adjournment to arrange for her to attend to argue her case for herself.
Looking at these facts, one can understand why Mr Ehrenfeld might wish to argue there was a denial of procedural fairness. A denial of procedural fairness arguably occurred, at least to the extent that he was denied an adjournment, so he says, to allow his wife to attend. It is arguable on the plaintiffs' behalf at a final hearing that it was reasonable for both of them to assume that one of them could appear to represent both and that when that assumption was denied he should have been given the chance to arrange for her to appear.
It is no answer to a denial of procedural fairness case to inquire what the decision-maker would have done had procedural fairness been afforded. The denial itself is usually sufficient to ground relief avoiding the decision in question. But the Court will at final hearing need, to some extent, to assess the probable course of the NCAT proceedings, in the process of assessing the strength or weakness of the plaintiffs' case for final discretionary relief.
Further circumstances suggest there may be discretionary reasons to decline relief to the plaintiffs at a final hearing. The rent under the lease agreement was $1,280 per week. But by late January this year it had fallen into arrears. So in early March Mrs Ehrenfeld agreed to pay an additional $1,280 a week, commencing on about 9 March 2017 for as many weeks as it took to bring the arrears up to date ("the catch-up agreement"). She paid the arrears under the catch-up agreement (together with the rent as it accrued) more or less on time for about four weeks. The defendants said she was late in the third week. She says she was ahead of time in the third week. Which of those two versions is right cannot be determined at this hearing. But it will depend on when the parties agreed that the periodic payment date of the catch-up agreement would commence. In the defendants' opinion Mrs Ehrenfeld was late. So they commenced the NCAT proceedings for termination of the lease.
But this was not the landlord's first application to NCAT in respect of the lease agreement. In February the landlord had applied to NCAT for the termination of the lease (the first application). The arrangement under the catch-up agreement was for the defendants to stay their hand and not pursue an NCAT application for termination of the lease agreement provided that the plaintiffs remained up to date not only with the rent but with the reduction of the arrears. So this first application was dismissed on 10 March. The second NCAT application was made on or about 17 March, after the alleged default under the catch-up agreement.
But once the defendants lodged the second application, the plaintiffs took the view the first and second defendants had repudiated their mutual arrangements under the catch-up agreement. The plaintiffs then decided they would pay no rent at all. It is difficult to fathom on what possible basis the plaintiffs could have reached this conclusion, whilst still claiming a right to occupy the premises. One would have thought they should have continued paying the rent if they wanted to maintain their right of possession. But they did not.
NCAT has the power to amend its process. If Mrs Ehrenfeld had been present on 26 April 2017, to pursue the second application for the termination of the lease, as matters then stood she would still have had to explain the non-payment of rent up to 26 April 2017 and her prior history of non-payment. She would have faced considerable difficulty in doing so. Mr Ehrenfeld says that the plaintiffs were up to date when the landlord launched the second application. The effective answer to this really is that by the time the hearing took place, they were well in arrears. When this proposition was put to Mr Ehrenfeld, he frankly confessed that there was no good reason why the rent, even if not the arrears, had continued to be paid in this period.
If Mrs Ehrenfeld had appeared arguably NCAT may have been obliged to hear argument on a claim that the plaintiffs had repudiated the catch-up agreement and that the lease agreement could be terminated in any event. The defendants may argue with some force at a final hearing that whilst the rent remains in arrears that any grant of relief would be futile.
The plaintiffs deploy two other procedural fairness arguments. Neither has much obvious merit. First, the plaintiffs contend: that the lease agreement describes Megaward as the Landlord; and that Megaward can bring the NCAT proceedings but instead they were wrongly brought in the name of Nan Sun.
This argument contains a misconception. The proceedings were brought in the name of Nan Sun. But that that does not inhibit NCAT making valid orders in respect of the premises. The lease agreement provides an option for the person whose name is entered into the lease agreement to be either the landlord or the landlord's agent. In these circumstances, I see no difficulty with proceedings being brought by the agent's principal, the landlord, Nan Sun, even though the landlord's agent's name was on the lease.
Finally the plaintiffs contend that the second application to NCAT was a mere duplicate of the first application; and that the dismissal of the first application means that the second cannot now be brought.
There may be many answers to this contention, which need not be addressed in this interlocutory judgment. But the contention has already been dealt with by NCAT itself. The NCAT decision of 26 April 2017 says on this subject that the first application was not dismissed on the merits: "Mr Ehrenfeld sought to make submissions that the matter that the application should be dismissed as misconceived. This submission was made on the basis that on 10 March 2017 the identical application was dismissed by the
Tribunal for non-appearance by the applicant. Mr Ehrenfeld believes that as the matter has already been dismissed by the Tribunal the only avenue open to the applicant is to appeal the decision of the Tribunal made on 10 March 2017.
The submission of Mr Ehrenfeld is not accepted by the Tribunal. There were no factual findings made by the Tribunal on 10 March 2017 that would prevent the applicant from filing a new application with the Tribunal on identical terms to a previous application."
The next hurdle for this argument at a final hearing is that the available evidence appears to show that the two applications contain different rental claims for different rental periods. But there was no apparent duplication as can be seen from the schedules of the different rent claimed in each application. In the first application the amount claimed is arrears of $6,400 up to 17 February 2017. The second application claims arrears of $6,400 up to 20 March 2017. The same amount of arrears is claimed but it is for different periods.

The Balance of Convenience
As to the balance of convenience, in order to prevent unfairness to the defendants, if the Court were prepared to grant interlocutory relief, particularly in light of weaknesses in the plaintiffs' case, it would only do so on terms that gave clear financial protection to the first and second defendants, because of the several periods during which rent has already failed to be paid.
This Court cannot realistically fix a final hearing for these proceedings, even on an urgent basis, until about a month to six weeks from now. The matter may take half a day to one day to argue.
This lease only has 10 weeks to run. There is already $8,045 owing in arrears. Between now and 19 July another $1,280 per week will fall due. The total due from now until the end of the lease agreement is $23,222.85.
The plaintiffs submitted that as a term of allowing the present restraint to continue beyond this afternoon that they should be put on terms to bring the arrears up to date and then be allowed to periodically meet the rental payments as they fall due.
In light of the history of this matter, the Court is not prepared to do that. Such an order would grossly prejudice the defendant. Nan Sun may have to expend legal costs to re-list the matter to argue further for the recovery of arrears under these interim arrangements.
NCAT has been given jurisdiction over residential tenancy matters under the Act for good reason: to determine terminations of leases such as this after holding informal hearings such as the one that took place in NCAT before the plaintiffs came to this Court. Bringing a Summons to this Court may possibly be an available course but is not a substitute for NCAT's own internal appeal processes. Depending on the result of arguments about jurisdiction and alternative remedies, the defendants may well recover their costs in any event at a final hearing.
If the Court does not impose strict financial terms upon the plaintiffs for any continuation of the present restraint, the defendants will be prejudiced. If the plaintiffs want a final hearing, the plaintiff will have to bring existing arrears up to date. And the plaintiffs should pay or secure the balance of the amounts falling due, right through to the end of the lease.
That is a fair balance in my view. It does mean that the money is being paid or secured, in advance of falling due under the lease. It may not have to be paid in advance, provided it can be secured in a satisfactory way. The Court will allow a very brief adjournment to permit the plaintiffs to make these arrangements, otherwise the injunction will be allowed to expire.
Accordingly the Court makes the following orders and directions: * (1) Extend the injunction granted yesterday, 27 April 2017 until 5pm on Thursday 4 May 2017.
* (2) The Court notes the Court will not extend beyond 5pm on 4 May 2017 unless by that time the plaintiffs have: a) brought up to date the current arrears of $8,045.71 and either paid or provided security satisfactory to the defendants for the payment of the balance of the residential tenancy agreement rent until 19 July 2017.
* (3) The matter is adjourned and listed before me at 2pm on 4 May 2017.
* (4) Costs of this application is reserved.
* (5) These orders may be entered forthwith.
 
Amendments May 2017 - [19] citation * * * 
