

Regina versus P.B.H. [1998] NSWSC 1019 (25 April 1998) 
REGINA versus P.B.H.
 /95 
THURSDAY 2 MAY 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, ALLEN J, JAMES J 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: In this matter I will ask James J to give the first judgment.

JAMES J: This is an appeal by the Director of Public Prosecutions pursuant to <case> of the Criminal Appeal Act against the sentence imposed on the respondent, who I will refer to simply as H or the respondent, by his Honour Judge Nield in the District Court on 4 December 1995.

The respondent had pleaded guilty to one charge under <case> of the Crimes
Act that in January 1991 he had had sexual intercourse with his daughter, who will I refer to simply as the complainant, who was then between the ages of ten and sixteen years, specifically fourteen years nine months, and who was under his authority. An offence under <case> carries a maximum penalty of penal servitude for ten years.

On 4 December 1995 the respondent was sentenced to a sentence of three years penal servitude, consisting of a minimum term of eighteen months commencing from 26 October 1995 and an additional term of eighteen months, his Honour finding that there were special circumstances within [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/). The sentencing judge did not in his remarks on sentence set out what he found to be the facts of the offence. However, there was admitted into evidence in the proceedings on sentence a facts sheet prepared by a police officer, and in my view it can safely be concluded that his Honour accepted at least the facts relating to the offence which are stated in this facts sheet.

According to the facts sheet the offence took place in the complainant's bedroom in the family home at about half past seven on an evening in January
The respondent entered the complainant's bedroom. He had been drinking.
According to the facts sheet the respondent "allegedly" pushed the complainant by the shoulders so that she was lying on her back on her bed. The respondent got on top of the complainant, lifted up her nightdress and had penile/vaginal sexual intercourse with the complainant. The respondent then got up and left the room. As a result of this act of sexual intercourse the complainant became pregnant and on 25 October 1991 the complainant gave birth to a daughter, whom the complainant has kept and reared.

There was unchallenged evidence before his Honour that in January 1993 the complainant became friendly with a young man in whom she ultimately confided that the respondent was her child's father. The complainant secretly tape- recorded a conversation with the respondent in which the complainant put to the respondent that the child was "part of you," to which the respondent replied, "Who's going to know that? No one is going to know that, are they."
At the suggestion of her boyfriend the complainant saw a doctor and a counsellor.

In August 1993 police officers went to the respondent's home and asked him to accompany them to a police station. At the police station the respondent admitted to having had sexual intercourse with the complainant in January
The respondent was interviewed by the police in an electronically recorded interview. No tape recording or full transcription of the interview was available in the proceedings on sentence, but a synopsis of the interview prepared by a police officer was admitted into evidence. According to the synopsis, the respondent admitted having had sexual intercourse with the complainant in January 1991. However, he disputed that the intercourse had been without the consent of the complainant. He claimed that she had led him on and that he had done what the complainant had wanted and he denied having pushed the complainant on to her bed.

After a plea of guilty in the Local Court the respondent was committed for sentence to the District Court. On two occasions he failed to appear in the
District Court and was subsequently arrested pursuant to bench warrants. He appeared before another District Court judge on 26 October 1995 and was then remanded for sentence in custody. Judge Nield made the sentences he imposed commence from 26 October 1995.

The respondent was not legally represented at the hearing of the proceedings on sentence before Judge Nield on 4 December 1995. The sentencing judge pointed out to the respondent that there could be advantages for him in obtaining legal representation but the respondent said that he wanted to be sentenced without any further delay. The sentencing judge said to the respondent that he would like to understand why the offence had been committed. The only answer the respondent gave was that he and his daughter had been too close, and that his daughter had been depressed.

Among the documents admitted into evidence in the proceedings on sentence was a victim impact statement or report prepared by Dr Strum, a psychiatrist. The sentencing judge clearly accepted Dr Strum's opinions about the serious effect the commission of the offence and its consequences had had on the complainant.
His Honour observed in his remarks on sentence that he would have expected, as
Dr Strum had found, that the complainant's life had been greatly disturbed, that, among other things, her education, employment prospects and sexuality had been disturbed. A conclusion Dr Strum reached, which it is clear his
Honour accepted, was that the complainant was left with a failed education, a loss of adolescence, a loss of family, social isolation and a child for whom she has very ambivalent, sometimes psychotic, feelings. Elsewhere in Dr
Strum's report he recorded that the complainant had complained to him of other acts of sexual abuse by the respondent.

In the proceedings on sentence the respondent told the sentencing judge that he could "rip Dr Strum's report to pieces very easily" if he wished, and that Dr Strum's report should be taken with a grain of salt. This might or might not be the case. However, it is clear that the sentencing judge did not accept, for the purposes of sentencing the respondent, that he had committed any other act of sexual abuse against the complainant. There is no mention of any other act of sexual abuse in either the facts sheet or in the statement by the complainant which was admitted into evidence in the proceedings on sentence. His Honour said, "I am not concerned with any instance of sexual impropriety other than the act of intercourse which occurred during January 1991." On this appeal there has been no challenge to this part of his Honour's remarks on sentence.

The complainant's statement contained assertions to the effect that she had not consented to the act of sexual intercourse in January 1991 and that the respondent had made threats against the complainant about what might happen, if she disclosed that the respondent was the father of her child. However, in his remarks on sentence his Honour made no findings on these matters and I would infer that his Honour was not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt as to these matters.

In his remarks on sentence the sentencing judge said that the respondent's act in having intercourse with his daughter was a gross breach of trust, "a monstrous act". His Honour made no finding as to why the act had occurred and in particular refrained from making any finding as to whether the act had occurred in the alleged circumstances recorded by Dr Strum in his report. As I have already indicated, his Honour found that the facts that the complainant had become pregnant and had given birth to a child as a result of the act of intercourse with her father had grossly disturbed her life.

In his remarks on sentence the sentencing judge noted some of the subjective circumstances of the respondent. He had been born in 1949 and was accordingly forty-one years old at the time of the offence and forty-six years old at the time he was sentenced. He was married with three children. He had engaged in community activities. He did not have any previous criminal history. He still had the support of his wife and oldest child. In his Honour's view he was not likely to offend again. He had made admissions to the police and had pleaded guilty in the Local Court and had adhered to the plea of guilty in the
District Court.

The Crown's Notice of Appeal was filed promptly on 21 December 1995.

In the Crown's written submissions in support of the appeal it has been argued that the sentencing judge failed to give proper weight to the objective seriousness of the offence and gave too much weight to the respondent's favourable subjective circumstances and that, particularly having regard to the width of the statutory definition of "sexual intercourse", offences falling within <case> extend over a wide range and the present offence, involving full penile/vaginal sexual intercourse, should be regarded as one of the most serious instances of an offence within <case>. The Crown referred to what was said by the then Chief Judge at Common Law with the approval of other members of the Court in R versus Dent (unreported, Court of Criminal Appeal, 14
March 1991 at page 6):- "When a child is living in the family situation he or she is particularly vulnerable to sexual molestation from the male parent, or step-parent. The community regards the family unit as one in which each parent is in a position of trust in respect of the child, under a duty to rear it and give it proper guidance and to refrain from using the child for sexual pleasure. The child is usually helpless to protect itself against sexual attack from the parent- as in this case - and that can be seen in so many other cases of a like kind that come before us. One sees in such cases that the child is too embarrassed, too afraid or develops too great a sense of guilt to complain. When the male parent takes advantage of the helplessness of the child, he not only commits a breach of trust, but it is a cowardly breach of trust: the protector of the child's body, the guide and mentor of the child, in those circumstances has abandoned his proper role in order to gratify his lust on the child".

The Crown further submitted that it was a circumstance of aggravation that the respondent had had unprotected sexual relations with a daughter who was old enough to conceive a child and that it was a circumstance of aggravation that when the respondent became aware that the complainant was pregnant he had said words to her which were to be interpreted as an order that the complainant should not terminate the pregnancy.

It was submitted on behalf of the respondent that the sentence was within the range of a sound exercise of the sentencing judge's discretion and it was pointed out that the sentencing judge had sentenced the respondent on the basis that he had committed a single, isolated offence, that the respondent had not been charged with an offence including as one of its elements that the complainant had not consented to the intercourse and that the judge had properly refrained from making any finding that the complainant had not consented. It was further submitted that it was clear from the remarks on sentence that the sentencing judge had been mindful of the objective seriousness of the offence and the effect of the commission of the offence and its consequences on the complainant and that it should not be inferred that the sentencing judge was unaware of the need for his sentence to satisfy the requirements of general deterrence and retribution. It was also submitted that the sentencing judge was entitled to give some weight to the respondent's favourable subjective circumstances.

The principles governing Crown appeals against sentence were summarised by this Court in such cases as R versus Alpass, (CCA 5 May 1993) and by the High
Court in Everett versus The Queen <case>; , [(1994) 68 ALJR 875], where it was said that a Crown appeal should be exceptional and brought only to establish some matter of principle, though a matter of principle can include the avoidance of manifest inadequacy or inconsistency in sentencing.

The present case involving full sexual intercourse by a father with his fourteen year old daughter in the family home, the daughter being under his authority, is objectively serious and the passage in the judgment of the Chief
Judge at Common Law in R versus Dent which I have quoted is apposite. That the victim became pregnant and gave birth to a child and has suffered serious psychological consequences add to the gravity of the offence. However, while it is material that the victim became pregnant as a result of the act of sexual intercourse, I would not regard the omission to use a contraceptive as of itself necessarily affecting the criminality of the respondent. As regards the alleged order by the respondent that the complainant should not terminate the pregnancy, the sentencing judge made no finding that any such order had been given and this Court cannot proceed on the basis that such an order was given.

I have concluded that the sentence imposed by his Honour was manifestly inadequate so as to disclose an error of principle. Because of the width of the statutory definition of sexual intercourse, many different kinds of behaviour fall within <case>. The conduct of the present respondent, consisting of full penile/vaginal sexual intercourse carrying with it the risk of the victim conceiving, is a most serious form of an offence under <case>.
Furthermore, the kind of authority which the respondent held over the complainant and which the respondent abused, namely the authority of a father over a daughter in the family home, was a kind of authority the breach of which is to be regarded as especially serious. In the present case the commission of the offence had particularly grave consequences.

In my opinion the Crown appeal should be upheld on the basis that the sentence imposed by the sentencing judge was manifestly inadequate. There is no discretionary reason why this Court should decline to uphold the Crown appeal.
In re-sentencing the applicant this Court should observe the principle that when a Crown appeal has succeeded, the sentence imposed by this court should, because of considerations of double jeopardy, usually be somewhat less than the sentence the court would have been minded to impose, had it been the original sentencing tribunal.

I would propose that the Crown appeal be allowed, that the sentence imposed by
Judge Nield on 4 December 1995 be quashed, and that in lieu thereof the respondent be sentenced to a sentence of three years four months penal servitude consisting of a minimum term of two years six months commencing on October 1995 and expiring on 25 April 1998 and an additional term of ten months. I myself would not find that there were any special circumstances within [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/).
Time served should count.

GLEESON CJ: I agree.

ALLEN J: I agree. I would add this. In my view penile/vaginal intercourse with a post puberty female without any contraceptive precaution being taken, carrying with it as it does the possibility of an unwanted pregnancy, is objectively more serious than such intercourse with appropriate contraceptive precautions having been taken. This is a relevant circumstance to be taken into account in the sentencing process.

GLEESON CJ: The orders of the court will be as proposed by James J.
 * * * 
