

Commonwealth Bank of Australia versus Stavrianos and Ors Matter No 12224/94 [1997] NSWSC 491 (17 October 1997) 
Last Updated: 27 February 1998 
Commonwealth Bank of Australia versus Stavrianos & Ors /94 October 1997 
Graham A-J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /94 - Commonwealth Bank of Australia versus Stavrianos & Ors 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The focus of attention for the evidence in these proceedings has been upon the execution by two families of certain security and related documents affecting their respective homes and upon the appointment of a receiver to Rosta Electrical Industries Pty. Limited (hereinafter referred to as "Rosta") by Commonwealth Bank of Australia (hereinafter referred to as "the Bank"), the plaintiff in these proceedings, on Tuesday 16 November 1993. 
Rosta was the corporate vehicle used by the two husbands Theo Stavrianos, the first defendant, and Richard Saywell Crawford-Ross (also known as Richard or
Dick Ross), the third defendant, for their "partnership" business.

The principal witnesses have been Mr. Stavrianos, his wife Evangelia (also known as Lily), the second defendant, Mr. Crawford-Ross and his wife Marion , the fourth defendant, and James Robertshaw, John Harris, Terrance Austin, Ross
Jeffrey and Mark Potter, officers or former officers of the Bank, the last three of whom were in fact called as witnesses by the defendants. Formal evidence was also given for the Bank by Robert Wawrzyniak and Ross Dearing.

The four defendants appeared in person after an application for adjournment of the proceedings made at the commencement of the trial by the wives, through
Counsel who had been briefed on the previous day, was dismissed. The Bank was represented by Mr. J.W.J. Stevenson of Counsel. Whilst the defendants appeared in person, the form and content of their written submissions tends to suggest that they have enjoyed the benefit of some legal assistance behind the scene.

Mr. Robertshaw was the Manager of the Five Dock branch of the Bank in and around May and June 1985, when certain mortgages were executed by Mr. and Mrs.
Crawford-Ross and Mr. and Mrs. Stavrianos. He retired as an officer of the
Bank on 9 October 1986.

Mr. Harris was a loans officer at the Five Dock branch of the Bank in and around November 1986. He had previously worked at the Summer Hill branch of the Bank as a Supervisor/Examiner in the period 1978-81 when Mrs. Stavrianos worked there as a part-time enquiry clerk on Mondays, Thursdays and Fridays for a total of about 15 hours per week.

Mr. Austin was the head of the Asset Management unit of the Bank's Lending
Services section in and about November 1993. That unit was located in a building known as 19 O'Connell Street, Sydney sometimes referred to as being in Spring Street. As the head of the unit Mr. Austin had approximately 80 managers and assistant managers reporting to him including at various times
Mr. Jeffrey, Mr. Potter and a Mr. Trevor Brown. Mr. Austin reported to Mr.
Vince Kelly, the head of the whole of the Bank's Lending Services section. Mr.
Kelly worked out of the same premises as Messrs. Austin, Jeffrey, Potter and
Brown. Mr. Kelly, who was not called as a witness, reported, in turn, to Mr.
Richard Perkins the General Manager of the Bank's NSW administration. Mr.
Perkins' office was located in the Royal Exchange building at the corner of
Pitt, Bridge and Gresham Streets. Mr. Austin, as an Attorney of the Bank, executed the Deed of Appointment of Martin Russell Brown of Messrs. Coopers & Lybrand as Receiver of the property of Rosta which was made on 16
November 1993.

Mr. Jeffrey was a manager within the Asset Management unit of the Bank's
Lending Services section. Managers and assistant managers within the unit had control of as many as a dozen files at any one time. One such file for which
Mr. Jeffrey was responsible in November 1993 was the Rosta file. That file came under consideration by the Asset Management unit following the appointment of Mr. Kevin Shirlaw of Messrs. Horwath & Horwath as voluntary administrator of Rosta on 2 November 1993. Mr. Jeffrey worked on the Rosta file until the afternoon of Friday 12 November 1993 when he left the Asset
Management unit, transferring to the Bank's Corporate Banking Division at
Chatswood on the following Monday, 15 November 1993. When Mr. Jeffrey left the
Asset Management unit he handed the file on to Mr. Potter who had been assisting him in relation to the Rosta file and with whom he shared an office.

Mr. Potter was a manager or assistant manager in the Bank's Asset Management unit. As at Friday, 11 November 1993 he was expecting a transfer to the Bank's
Group Credit Policy and Control section which was located in the Capita building in Castlereagh Street, Sydney. As it transpires Mr. Potter himself left the Asset Management unit on Monday, 15 November 1993 transferring the file to Mr. Austin early on that day.

It would appear that late in the day on Friday, 12 November 1993 Horwath &
Horwath caused a report from Mr. Shirlaw, as Administrator of Rosta, to be forwarded to the Bank's Asset Management unit. This report does not appear to have come to the attention of any of the Bank's relevant officers until the following Monday, 15 November 1993. At that stage Mr. Austin called upon Mr.
Trevor Brown, another manager or assistant manager in the Asset Management unit, to consider same. At about 10.00am on 15 November 1993 Mr. Potter informed Mr. Paul Weston of Messrs. Horwath & Horwath, who was assisting
Mr. Shirlaw in relation to the Rosta administration, that the Bank had received the Administrator's report (which was approximately 1.5cm thick), and that the Bank was reviewing same.

Before proceeding further I wish to record some brief observations about the principal witnesses and their demeanour in the witness box.

Mr. Stavrianos and Mr. Crawford-Ross were directors of and shareholders in
Rosta. The very name Rosta is derived in part from Mr. Crawford-Ross' surname and in part from that of Mr. Stavrianos. The two together established the company in 1977 to service the fire pump industry. Each of Mr. Crawford-Ross and Mr. Stavrianos was an electrician by trade with limited commercial experience.

Mr. Crawford-Ross impressed me as a hardworking individual. In relation to
Rosta he was at all times concerned for the well-being of the company's clients, its creditors and its staff. He was keen to ensure that the company met its financial commitments to the Bank and, indeed, until the time of the appointment of the Receiver, it did so. Mr. Crawford-Ross knew that in the contracting business in which Rosta was involved there were always problems with recovering moneys and effecting payments. He presented as a decent sort of individual whom I considered to be basically truthful.

Together with Mr. Stavrianos, Mr. Crawford-Ross had built the business of
Rosta up from nothing until it became a leader in the business of servicing fire pumps. Later the company branched out into air-conditioning.

Some time ago Rosta suffered a significant loss of approximately $200,000.00 when Dainford defaulted in making payments to it under a contract. Later, in , it suffered problems with two contracts for air-conditioning, one in relation to an apartment building near the Lakeside Hotel in Canberra and another in relation to a building at Parramatta. Accordingly, it experienced trouble in meeting its own commitments even though it was "still invoicing good business". At about this time the company noted an advertisement which led it to make contact with Messrs. Horwath & Horwath.

At 5.00pm on 2 November 1993 a meeting of directors of Rosta was held attended by Messrs. Crawford-Ross and Stavrianos at which the following resolutions were passed:- "VOLUNTARY 
ADMINISTRATION: It was resolved that Kevin R. Shirlaw of Horwath & Horwath, Chartered Accountants, having consented in writing to act, be appointed Voluntary Administrator of the company in view of the company's insolvent financial position. 
It was resolved that the Company Seal be applied to a letter appointing Mr.
Shirlaw as the Voluntary Administrator to take effect from the second day of
November 1993." 
Notwithstanding the appointment of Mr. Martin Brown as Receiver to the company on 16 November 1993 the Administrator proceeded to seek the agreement of
Rosta's creditors to a proposed Deed of Arrangement but, in the event, no Deed was executed with the consequence that early in 1994 Rosta entered into liquidation.

Along the way Mr. Stavrianos and Mr. Crawford-Ross decided to branch out into the video duplication business and this they did through the establishment of
Omega Duplication Pty. Limited. In due course they tried to secure a back door listing for this company but nothing came to pass. Omega Duplication Pty.
Limited entered into liquidation on 16 February 1993.

Mr. Stavrianos was very much the mirror image of Mr. Crawford-Ross. He had no difficulty in speaking, reading or understanding English. Indeed all the witnesses were what one could describe as average Australians in that regard.
He had more involvement in Rosta's dealings with the Bank than did his partner
Mr. Crawford-Ross, probably because of his association with the Bank through his brother-in-law, Mr. Tsaccounis, who was, at least at one time, the Manager of the branch of the plaintiff at which Rosta banked. However, it may be noted that both families had been, to all intents and purposes, lifelong customers of the Bank.

Mrs. Stavrianos was a housewife and mother. She had close connections with the
Bank having had two of her brothers work in the Bank, one of whom, George
Tsaccounis, had risen to the position of Bank Manager and worked in the Bank from 1 July 1968 to 19 October 1988. Mrs. Stavrianos had herself worked as a junior clerk for the Bank upon leaving school after completing the
Intermediate Certificate in 1961. She stayed for three years in a full time capacity and later returned for eight years in a part-time capacity working at a number of branches including the Summer Hill branch where she worked with
Mr. Harris. She performed duties verifying signatures, attending to customers' needs at the enquiry counter, typing details into Bank security documents when called upon to do so and acting as an interpreter, although she never interpreted conversations between customers and senior officers of the Bank concerning security documents. Whilst Mrs. Stavrianos was fluent in Greek and able to speak other languages, she had grown up in Australia migrating to this country as a young child. She was in no way handicapped in speaking, reading or understanding the English language. From time to time Mrs. Stavrianos undertook casual office work for Rosta, helping out when required.

Mrs. Stavrianos says, and I accept, that she took her part-time job at the
Bank in the period 1975 to 1983 for the social benefits which it gave her as much as anything else. It allowed her to escape from the tedium of some of her household chores with a young family and provided her with some financial rewards which enabled her to provide for special treats such as holiday cruises. She says, and I accept, that she performed the clerical tasks which were entrusted to her but did not really think about the things she was doing e.g. when she was typing up details on Bank mortgage forms.

Mrs. Stavrianos trusted her husband and was, generally speaking compliant when asked by her husband to sign documents for Rosta which concerned the Bank. I did sense that she adopted a somewhat defensive approach to questions asked of her about documents which she had signed over the years. Mrs. Stavrianos presented as a strong and self-confident lady. She was not naive.

Mrs. Crawford-Ross was a housewife and mother who had worked for the
Department of Main Roads as a clerk/typiste after leaving school at age 15.
Since late 1993 she, like Mrs. Stavrianos, has gone back into the work force.
In the intervening period she worked intermittently for Rosta doing some typing - sometimes at home and sometimes in the office. She impressed me as an honest and reliable witness.

All of the witnesses, and especially the Bank officers, found themselves at a disadvantage in trying to recall details of the execution of documents and explanations given and discussions had in relation to same which took place many years ago. As I see it the documentary evidence, so far as it is relevant, tends to be more helpful and reliable than the witnesses' recollections, at least insofar as there is conflict between them, in a case such as this.

In relation to the Bank officers I found them to be straight forward and honest in their accounts of what transpired insofar as they had any relevant independent recollections. However, I must say that I had somewhat less confidence in the evidence of Mr. Robertshaw than I did in respect of that of the other officers, but I do not think that he was in any way intending to mislead the Court.

The progress of Rosta and Omega Duplication Pty. Limited is, to some extent, reflected in the cars which the Crawford-Rosses drove. Mrs. Crawford-Ross gave evidence that her husband started off in business with a resprayed second-hand taxi and she acquired a second hand Isuzu Bellet for $200.00 for herself. By Mr. Crawford-Ross was driving a new Honda Legend and Mrs. Crawford-Ross a new Honda Prelude.

Until July 1980 the facilities made available by the Bank to Rosta totalled $5,000.00. Between July 1980 and November 1992 the facilities increased from $5,000.00 to $970,000.00 as follows:- 
July 1980 $ 10,000.00 
May 1985 $ 20,000.00 
March 1989 $100,000.00 
February 1990 $200,000.00 
March 1990 $750,000.00 
September 1991 $950,000.00 
November 1992 $970,000.00 
In the case of Omega Duplication Pty. Limited the Bank provided a facility of $150,000.00 as at October 1991 which increased to $216,640.00 as of July 1992.

The evidence of Mr. Dearing, which I accept, is that as of 19 August 1997 the indebtedness of Rosta to the Bank was $1,550,264.34 with interest accruing at the rate of $445.05 per day. In the case of Omega Duplication Pty. Limited his evidence, which I accept, is that as of 19 August 1997 Omega Duplication Pty.
Limited was indebted to the Bank in the sum of $285,742.03 with interest accruing at the rate of $66.58 per day.

Along the way, the Bank, needless to say, required security to be provided for the current and increasing indebtedness of the two companies to the Bank. For present purposes the relevant documents comprised:- 
Memorandum of Mortgage registered No.Y949958 given by Mr. and 
Mrs. Crawford-Ross to the Bank over their family home situated at 7 
Holmlea Place, North Engadine as security for all moneys mentioned in the Bank's standard Memorandum registered No.T340042, the provisions of which were incorporated into the mortgage itself. This mortgage was expressly given in consideration of certain advances and accommodation granted or to be granted at the request of the mortgagors to Rosta.

Memorandum of Mortgage registered No. Y 937848 given by Mr. and Mrs.
Stavrianos to the Bank over their family home situated at 32 Endeavour Street,
Sans Souci as security for all moneys mentioned in the Bank's standard
Memorandum registered No.T340042, the provisions of which were incorporated into the mortgage itself.

Deed of Guarantee made 19 November 1986 between Mr. and Mrs. Stavrianos as guarantors, the Bank and Rosta as debtor.

Deed of Equitable Mortgage made 1 October 1991 by Rosta in favour of the
Bank.

Deed of Guarantee made 20 December 1991 between Mr. and Mrs. Stavrianos as guarantors, the Bank and Omega Duplication Pty. Limited as debtor.

Deed of Guarantee made 20 December 1991 between Mr. and Mrs.

Crawford-Ross as guarantors, the Bank and Omega Duplication Pty.

Limited as debtor.

The Memorandum of Mortgage registered No.Y949958 bears date 20 May 1985. It bears the signatures of each of Mrs. and Mrs. Crawford-Ross as mortgagors, their signatures having purportedly been witnessed by Mr. Robertshaw. The handwriting on the original mortgage suggests that three different pens were used by the respective signatories and witness. In purporting to witness the execution of the mortgage by Mrs. Crawford-Ross, Mr. Robertshaw has appended his signature beneath the words "Signed in my presence by the Mortgagor who is personally known to me".

Mrs. Crawford-Ross's evidence is that the mortgage was not signed by her in the presence of Mr. Robertshaw. She says, and I accept, that she signed the mortgage at her home in the absence of any representative of the Bank.

Mrs. Crawford-Ross's evidence in relation to her execution of the mortgage is confirmed by that of her husband. She has also given evidence that Mr.
Crawford-Ross signed the mortgage in the absence of Mr. Robertshaw.

Mr. Robertshaw gave evidence that his normal practice was to sign mortgages as a witness to the signatures of mortgagors only when the mortgagors were in front of him at the time. He qualified this by saying that he followed this practice in most or 99% of cases. He conceded that he had very occasionally posted documents out or handed documents to customers for signature outside the Bank if he knew them very well. He said that he might have done so once or twice in the case of relatives, signing as the purported witness later.

Mr. Robertshaw couldn't recall that this mortgage was not signed in his presence.

Mr. Crawford-Ross did not recall signing the mortgage at the Bank.

By reference to a letter dated 23 May 1985 from Mr. Robertshaw to Rosta Mr.
Crawford-Ross urged that the mortgage must have been executed after that date.
The letter contained the following:- "As arranged we have increased the Company's overdraft limit from $10,000.00 to $20,000.00 on the Bank's usual terms and conditions. This new limit will be subject to annual review as discussed. Following receipt of the executed mortgages, we will release the $20,000 Term Deposit to the Company's account on 29th May. In the meantime this new limit may be exceeded if required." 
Mr. Robertshaw described the third sentence of the letter as a "bad choice of words". Mr. Crawford-Ross asserted that it demonstrated that the mortgages referred to must have been executed after 23 May 1995 even though the
Crawford-Ross mortgage bears the date 20 May 1995. I do not accept this argument. Whilst the expression "Following receipt of the executed mortgages" is ambiguous it could easily be construed as confirming the fact that the mortgages referred to had already been received.

The Bank's receipt stamp for 20 May 1985 appears on a series of related documents and, in that context, it seems to me that the mortgage was signed by
Mr. Robertshaw as the purported witness to Mr. and Mrs. Crawford-Ross's signatures on 20 May 1985.

I accept the evidence of Mrs. Crawford-Ross that she did not sign the mortgage in the presence of Mr. Robertshaw and I am not satisfied that Mr. Robertshaw did witness the signature of Mr. Crawford-Ross on the mortgage either.

In my view Mr. Robertshaw acted fraudulently in representing to the Registrar-
General that the mortgage was signed in his presence. However, I am not prepared to find that the relevant signatories were not personally known to
Mr. Robertshaw at the time.

In the circumstances, the Bank should not be in any better position by virtue of obtaining registration of the mortgage than that which would have obtained if Mr. Robertshaw had not engaged in the relevant fraudulent conduct. The registration of the mortgage should be set aside and the case determined on the basis that the Bank has an unregistered equitable mortgage alone. (See
National Commercial Banking Corporation of Australia Limited v. Hedley BPR 9477 at pages 9480 and 9481-2).

Mrs. Crawford-Ross said that she did not see a copy of the Bank's Standard
Memorandum registered No.T340042 at the time when she signed the mortgage and
I accept her evidence in this regard.

The Stavrianos mortgage registered No.Y937848 bears date 21 June 1985. The signatures of Mr. and Mrs. Stavrianos appear to be in the same ink but, to my eye, their signatures have been applied with a different pen from that used by
Mr. Robertshaw who has purported to sign as witness to their signatures.

Mrs. Stavrianos' evidence supported to some extent by that of Mr. Stavrianos is that Mrs. Stavrianos signed the mortgage at home in the absence of any Bank officer although Mr. Stavrianos had no personal recollection of the circumstances of his execution of the document or its execution by his wife.

The evidence in relation to the execution of the Stavrianos mortgage is not as compelling in favour of the conclusion that it was not signed by the mortgagors in the presence of Mr. Robertshaw as was the case in respect of the execution of the Crawford-Ross mortgage. I am unable to conclude, on the evidence, that the Stavrianos mortgage was not signed in the presence of Mr.
Robertshaw. In the circumstances the registration of that mortgage ought not to be set aside.

The next document to consider is the Stavrianos/Rosta guarantee. This is an important document.

Mrs. Stavrianos' evidence is that she can't remember who witnessed her signature. She said:- "At no time when I signed that document did the Commonwealth Bank of Australia nor did anybody else ask me any questions to find out if I knew what I was signing or advised me to get any independent advice. I was asked to sign a document and I did, not understanding the nature and effect of what it was that I as (sic) signing and the security I was giving to the Commonwealth Bank of Australia over my home." 
The witness to Mrs. Stavrianos' signature was Mr. Harris. Mrs. Stavrianos has given evidence that the document was signed by her in her kitchen at her home and that Mr. Harris was not present at the time. Mr. Harris' evidence is that he had no independent recollection of being present when Mr. and Mrs.
Stavrianos signed the guarantee. However he believed that he was present when they did so. He said that in November 1986 it was his usual practice to only append his signature as witness to that of another if he had actually been present when that other person signed and that he had no recollection of departing from that practice on this occasion.

Mr. Harris says that it is highly unlikely that he ever signed as a witness to documents which weren't signed in his presence.

The guarantee bearing date 19 November 1986 has two parallel vertical lines in the margin against clause 4 against which the initials of Mr. and Mrs.
Stavrianos appear. Their initials do not signify their acceptance of any alterations to the terms of the clause: It has not been altered. It reads as follows:- "4. The Guarantor hereby records and acknowledges to the Bank that every security already executed or which may at any time and from time to time be executed by the Guarantor in favour of the Bank shall also be and remain continuing security to the Bank for the payment by the Guarantor to the Bank of all moneys for the payment whereof the Guarantor is or may be or may become liable to the Bank under or by virtue of this Guarantee." 
Mr. Harris says that he placed the vertical lines on the document. He also says:- "Consistently with my usual practice I would have drawn the attention of Mr.
and Mrs. Stavrianos to that clause. I cannot now recall whether I read it out to them, asked them to read it or summarised its effect to them. However, consistently with my usual practice, I would have done one or more of those things to satisfy myself that Mr. and Mrs. Stavrianos understood that their obligation under the guarantee was secured by the mortgage that they had executed in favour of the Bank on 21 June 1985." 
Mr. Harris says that consistent with his usual practice he believes that he said to Mr. and Mrs. Stavrianos words to the effect:- "This guarantee is supported by the existing mortgage over your home to secure the Company debts of Rosta Electrical Industries Pty. Limited." 
I have no doubt about accepting the evidence of Mr. Harris in relation to this document. His evidence is supported by a contemporaneous manuscript note made and signed by him on 19 November 1986 which reads:- "Security clause 4 of G/- was brought to the attention of guarantors & appeared to be fully understood." 
Mr. Harris has said that he brought clause 4 to the attention of the guarantors (plural) face to face and I accept his evidence in this regard. I am satisfied that Mr. Harris witnessed the execution of the Rosta guarantee by the Stavrianoses who signed the document in his presence.

The next documents to be considered are the Omega Duplication guarantees of 20
December 1991 which were executed by Mr. and Mrs. Stavrianos and Mr. and Mrs.
Crawford-Ross. There is no suggestion that these documents were signed by the respective guarantors in the presence of a Bank officer. Mrs. Stavrianos signed her guarantee in the presence of Donna Adamson a secretary in the Rosta office and Mrs. Crawford-Ross signed hers in the presence of her 18 year old daughter Deral.

Each of Mrs. Stavrianos and Mrs. Crawford-Ross has given evidence in the following terms:- "I have no commercial skill and could not at the time of signing and cannot to the present time understand what is meant by all the small print in the mortgage documents and the guarantee documents the Commonwealth Bank of
Australia had me sign.

I have never spoken with the Commonwealth Bank of Australia nor have the
Commonwealth Bank of Australia spoken to me about my expertise or knowledge of commercial matters as I have only been in the workforce in recent times due to economic hardship being suffered by me and my family.

If the Commonwealth Bank of Australia or anybody else had explained to me what
I was signing at the time the documents were signed, I would not have signed any of the documents and none of us would be in Court today. If was (sic) told what was the nature and effect of the documents that I signed, I would never have signed them in the first place." 
One issue which arises for consideration and to which I will return later is the question of the true knowledge and understanding of Mrs. Crawford-Ross and
Mrs. Stavrianos in respect of the documents referred to above.

Turning, for the moment to the question of the appointment of the Receiver to
Rosta on 16 November 1993 it followed, as I have said, the appointment of Mr.
Shirlaw as the Administrator of Rosta on 2 November 1993.

The suggestion which is advanced by the defendants is that the Bank did not give Rosta's proposal of 12 November 1993 a fair go and acted beyond power in appointing Mr. Martin Brown as Receiver on Tuesday 16 November 1993.

To be fair to the Bank it is important to note that under the Corporations Law a fixed time of ten business days was available after the appointment of the voluntary Administrator in which it could, relevantly, appoint a Receiver and that period of time expired on 16 November 1993 or, arguably, 17 November 1993 given that it did not have notice of the appointment of the Administrator until 3 November 1993. Be that as it may, it had a tight time frame within which to act especially given the late submission to it by the Administrator of Rosta's "proposal". In addition a question arises as to whether or not the
Administrator's submission of 12 November 1993 in fact constituted a proposal by Rosta to enter into an arrangement, reconstruction or composition. In his report to the Bank the Administrator said:- "In the period since my appointment I have taken control of the company's business, property and affairs and have continued the trading operations pending resolve (sic) of a Deed of Company Arrangement by creditors (currently being formulated in conjunction with Rosta Management) or action by the Bank pursuant to its security. With regard to a proposed Deed of Company
Arrangement, you will be aware that pursuant to the provisions of the
Corporations Law I am required to assess any proposal being formulated and to report to creditors as to whether: i) it would be in the interest of the company's creditors for the company to execute a Deed of Company Arrangement; ii) it would be in the creditors' interests for the administration to end; iii) it would be in the creditors' interests for the company to be wound up.

In order to ascertain whether a Deed of Company Arrangement is viable, I am furthering my investigations into the company's business, property, affairs and financial circumstances with a view to compiling a report to creditors at the earliest possible time. ... Based on my preliminary investigations ... I am of the opinion that a Deed of Company Arrangement may prove to be in the best interests of all creditors of the company, however, as you will appreciate at this early stage specific details on a proposal are not available but I consider same should be available for consideration by creditors prior to the meeting to be held later this month. At this time however, the broad proposal is that the company's debt to the Bank be reduced from recovery over time of loans due by related companies ... During this period it is intended that interest payments on the Bank's debt will continue to be met from Rosta charging a similar rate of interest on the debts due to it by those companies. It is also proposed to repay unsecured creditors ...
from recovery of the problem/disputed trade debts with the resulting deficiency to be met from profits generated over time from trading operations.
The ability of the company (and the related companies) to perform under such a proposal is currently under review by my staff and I." 
In a memorandum dated 9 November 1993 Mr. Jeffrey made the following note:- "Until we receive data from H&H there is little we can do in respect of issueing demand/appointing a receiver. Advice from Legal Dep't is Default does not exist at this stage under the R/E/M. We would need to establish some technical default mechanism to act." 
By his reference to a "technical default mechanism" Mr. Jeffrey intended to convey a non-monetary default mechanism.

By Friday 12 November 1993 Mr. Jeffrey had come to learn of a round robin transaction in which Rosta had been involved which took place on 7 October
He understood that Rosta's assets had been stripped and swapped/exchanged for "unsecured" debtors in circumstances where moneys previously owing by Sohena Pty. Limited to Rosta had been covered, at least in part, by a registered equitable mortgage over the assets of Sohena in favour of Rosta. Mr. Jeffrey's "gut feeling" was that "the directors are crooks".

Between about 2.00pm and 3.00pm on Friday 12 November 1993 Mr. Jeffrey had a meeting with Mr. Martin Brown of Coopers & Lybrand to ensure that the Bank was afforded all protection to which it was entitled under it securities.
After considering all of the facts Mr. Brown expressed the very firm belief that a Receiver must be appointed to investigate and if possible nullify the "round robin" transaction effect. Accordingly Mr. Jeffrey recommended the appointment of Mr. Brown as Receiver. Such a recommendation required Mr.
Kelly's approval. Prior to the file being transmitted to Mr. Kelly for his consideration Mr. Austin enquired as to what the likely cost and benefit to the Bank would be of pursuing this course.

Mr. Jeffrey recorded a note for Mr. Potter on the afternoon of 12 November advising that Mr. Brown's advice had been to appoint a Receiver forthwith rather than wait until the meeting of creditors which was due to be held before 26 November 1993 and risk further dissipation of assets.

Mr. Jeffrey reported to Mr. Potter that he had arranged for certain formal matters to be attended to including the preparation of documentation by Mr.
Richard Matthews of the Bank's legal department.

Mr. Trevor Brown prepared a memorandum on 18 November 1993 for Mr. Kelly to send to Mr. Perkins. In this memorandum Mr. Trevor Brown reported:- "A meeting has held ... on 3 November 1993 with the Administrator's Manager (Mr. Weston) and the company's Directors (Messrs. Stavrianos and Ross). The
Bank received no prior notice of the appointment nor was it consulted by any of the parties in respect to its financial predicament and the strategy regarding the appointment of the Administrator. Rosta's financial statements for year ending 30 June 1993 and a budget forecast for the period to 30 June were tabled.

Neither Mr. Weston nor the Directors were able to offer any accurate and up to date information on the current position of the company.

At the interview Mr. Weston was advised that the Bank had insufficient data to make an informed decision as to whether it should participate in the proposed scheme of arrangement or exercise its rights and act under its R/E/M in order to protect its position as a secured creditor.
 ...

The first creditors meeting was held on 8 November 1993 and attended by Bank staff. The meeting dictated that a report would be available to creditors by November 1993. Next meeting was required to be convened before 26 November .

Following the meeting Bank representatives spoke to Mr. Weston and the
Directors who were informed: 
Bank urgently required Rosta's up to date financial data to determine its course of action; the Bank reserved all its rights including the right to vote against any proposed scheme of arrangement in order to preserve its position as a secured creditor; and 
Directors should not automatically assume the Bank's support will be forthcoming to any scheme of arrangement.

The Corporate Law Reform Act required the Bank to decide whether it would support the Administrator's proposal or alternatively enforce its securities within 14 days of the appointment of the Administrator i.e. by 16 November
The additional financial information was supplied by the Administrator on Monday 15 November 1993.

The financial information provided lacked substance and did not support the financial viability of the proposed Administration. In addition, the Bank needed to protect any "claw back" rights in respect to the round robin transactions. Consequently the Bank appointed a Receiver ... on 16 November
Legal Dept advice was obtained which confirmed that the Bank was legally entitled to make an appointment." 
In an office memorandum of 18 November 1993 Mr. Trevor Brown also recorded:- "Information that is available is contained in Howarth & Howarth's (sic) report. As Martin stated the report virtually infers to rely on the contents of the report, do not do anything, everything will be alright. The contents of the report are not substantiated by budgets or cash flows.
 ...

The Bank had approximately 24 hours to arrive at a decision on incomplete information. To protect the Bank's interest the Receiver was appointed." 
On 16 November 1993 Mr. Kelly discussed the matter with Mr. Austin and agreed that it was in the best interests of the Bank to appoint a Receiver and
Manager to the group. Accordingly, on 16 November 1993 the Bank effected such an appointment as aforesaid.

It seems to me that the suggestion advanced by the defendants that the Bank did not give Rosta's proposal a fair go should be rejected. The Bank had genuine doubts about the efficacy of the round robin of 7 October 1993 and its effect upon Rosta's recoverable assets. It did give due consideration to the
Administrator's report of 12 November 1993 on Monday 15 November. The Bank then formed the view that the information provided was inadequate to enable it to make an informed judgment on a possible future arrangement. In the circumstances it proceeded to effect the appointment of Mr. Martin Brown as
Rosta's Receiver. Whilst there may have been initial doubt as to whether there was an available event of default, this appears to have been satisfactorily resolved with the Bank's legal department before the appointment was effected.

An important question for me to consider is whether or not there was in fact a relevant event of default under the registered equitable mortgage given by
Rosta to the Bank.

Mr. Stevenson submits that Rosta committed breaches of a number of clauses in the Deed of Equitable Mortgage made 1 October 1991 entitling the Bank to appoint a Receiver. In relation to an appointment of a Receiver clause 9.4 of the Equitable Mortgage provided as follows:- "9.4 Appointment of Receiver 
At any time after the secured moneys become payable ... the Mortgagee may appoint in writing any person ... to be receiver of the mortgaged property or any part thereof ... Provided always that every such receiver shall be the agent of the Mortgagor and the Mortgagor alone shall be responsible for the acts and defaults of such receiver ..." 
In relation to events of default by which the secured moneys may become payable without any demand or notice, clause 9.1 of the Equitable Mortgage provided as follows:- "9.1 Events giving Mortgagee Right to Immediate Payment 
The secured moneys shall at the option of the Mortgagee and notwithstanding any delay or previous waiver of the right to exercise such option immediately become payable without any demand or notice in each or any of the following events:- ...
 if an application is filed ... or a resolution is passed for the winding up of the Mortgagor or of the Debtor or if any meeting be convened for the purpose of considering any such resolution; if ... an Official Manager of the Mortgagor or the Debtor is appointed or if the Mortgagor or the Debtor enters into any arrangement reconstruction or composition with its creditors or any of them or proposes so to do; ...
 if the Mortgagor without out the consent in writing of the Mortgagee creates ... any ... lien ... over or affecting the mortgaged property or any part thereof in favour of any person other than the Mortgagee; ...
 if the Mortgagor fails to observe or perform any of the covenants on its part herein contained; ..." 
The covenants which the Bank contends Rosta failed to observe or perform were clauses 7.1(f), 7.1(h) and clause 7.2(a). These clauses provided as follows:- "7. MORTGAGOR'S GENERAL COVENANTS .1 General Positive Covenants 
The Mortgagor hereby covenants with the Mortgagee that the Mortgagor will: ...

Maintain and protect the mortgaged property and keep the same in a good and tenantable state of repair and in good working order and condition and will on being required by the Mortgagee so to do forthwith amend every defect in the repair and condition thereof ...
 ...

Carry on and conduct the business of the Mortgagor in a proper and efficient manner and with due diligence.
 ...
 .2 General Negative Covenants 
The Mortgagor hereby covenants with the Mortgagee that the Mortgagor will not without the consent in writing of the Mortgagee (which consent may be subject to such terms and conditions as the Mortgagee thinks fit):- sell assign discount or otherwise dispose of ... any debt owing or payable to the Mortgagor which is or may be subject to the floating charge created by this security or execute or create any ... lien ... over or affecting the mortgaged property or any part thereof in favour of any person other than the Mortgagee.
 ..." 
The Bank's act of appointing Mr. Martin Brown as Rosta's receiver undoubtedly constituted an exercise by it of its option to render the secured moneys due by Rosta immediately payable provided, of course, that a relevant event had occurred within the meaning of clause 9.1 of the Equitable Mortgage which gave rise to the existence of the option. The Bank's submission was that relevant events had occurred under clauses 9.1(b), 9.1(c), 9.1(g) (and also 9.1(n) when taken with 7.2(a)), 9.1(n) when taken with another part of 7.2(a), 9.1(n) when taken with 7.1(f) and 9.1(n) when taken with 7.1(h).

Firstly, the Bank submitted that on 2 November 1993 an application was filed for the winding-up of Rosta by virtue of section 440H(2) of the Corporations
Law which provided as follows:- "440H(2) During the administration of a company, an application to wind up the company is taken to be pending." 
The Bank argues that if an application to wind up Rosta is to be "taken to be pending" as from the time of the appointment of Mr. Shirlaw as administrator, then it must also be taken that an application for the winding up of Rosta was filed. I am unable to accept this argument. The event relevantly covered by clause 9.1(b) is the actual filing, just as the alternative events mentioned are the actual passing a specific resolution and the actual convening of a meeting for the purpose of considering a specific resolution. The doctrine of contra preferentum applies.

Secondly, the Bank submitted that an "Official Manager" of Rosta was appointed on 2 November 1993. I do not accept this. Part 5.3 of the Corporations Law which provides for Official Managers was repealed with effect from 23 June and Part 5.3A which provides for voluntary administration was inserted with effect from that date. Whilst the two regimes are similar to one another, they are not the same. As the defendants rightly submit, if the Bank wanted to cover an eventuality such as this, the relevant clause should have read "...
if an official manager or some other person carrying out similar functions of the Mortgagor ... is appointed ...".

Thirdly, the Bank submitted that as at 16 November 1993 Rosta proposed to enter into an arrangement with its creditors or some of them. In this regard it is relevant to note the object of Part 5.3A of the Corporations Law as set out in section 435A and the normal outcome of an administration as referred to in section 435C(2) (see also section 439C). One of the contemplated outcomes mentioned is that the creditors of a company under administration may resolve to execute a Deed of Company Arrangement.

Whilst a specific proposal may not have been formulated as at 16 November , I consider that Rosta did then "propose" to enter into an arrangement with its creditors or some of them. In the administrator's report, written as
Rosta's agent (see sections 437A and 437B of the Corporations Law), to the
Bank of 12 November 1993 (see page 15 above), the administrator referred to a
Deed of Arrangement "currently being formulated in conjunction with Rosta
Management". He then proceeded to say "the broad proposal is ... ", "it is intended" and "It is also proposed ...".

Whilst I agree with the defendants' submission that the mere appointment of an administrator does not establish that a company under administration proposes to enter into an arrangement with its creditors or some of them, the administrator's report of 12 November 1993 in this case, in the context of
Rosta's entry into voluntary administration on 2 November 1993, is a clear indication that Rosta proposed to do so. It follows that the Bank was entitled on 16 November 1993 to appoint a receiver to Rosta.

Fourthly, the Bank submits that Rosta, without the consent in writing of the bank, created a lien over or affecting the mortgaged property or some of it in favour of Mr. Shirlaw by appointing him as voluntary administrator on 2
November 1993 and Mr. Shirlaw's then, for example, convening the first meeting of Rosta's creditors on 8 November 1993 as he was required to do. The Bank's argument is that under section 443D(b) of the Corporations Law the administrator became entitled to be indemnified out of Rosta's property for his remuneration. Then, under section 443F, a statutory lien arose in the administrator's favour in respect of such remuneration. Section 443F provided as follows:- "443F (1) To secure a right of indemnity under section 443D, the administrator has a lien on the company's property.

A lien under subsection (1) has priority over a charge only in so far as the right of indemnity under section 443D has priority over debts secured by the charge." 
The argument proceeds that, inevitably, the administrator will, in performing his statutory duties, become entitled to remuneration and, accordingly, a lien in respect of that remuneration. By 8 November 1993 the administrator had already caused the first meeting of creditors to be convened and thus became entitled to remuneration to which the lien applied. By appointing the voluntary administrator under section 436A(1) of the Corporations Law Rosta effectively "created" a lien over or affecting the mortgaged property or some of it in favour of a person other than the Bank.

Notwithstanding the provisions of section 443F(2) I am disposed to accept the
Bank's argument. The defendants submit that the lien was not "created" by
Rosta but, given the statutory provisions to which I have referred, I reject this submission.

The defendants further submit that the Bank has by its conduct waived reliance upon the relevant provisions and, alternatively, is estopped from relying upon them. Mr. Stevenson rightly observes that waiver and estoppel were not pleaded and, had these matters been pleaded, the allegations could have been met by evidence. I agree with this submission but in any event note that the lien had already come into existence before the occurrence of the matters relied upon by the defendants and such matters did not constitute conduct by the Bank which was inconsistent with the Bank's subsequent reliance upon the clauses in question. The matters which the defendants relied upon were the calls by the
Bank to Rosta for the urgent submission of financial data to enable the Bank to determine the course of action it would follow. These calls were made in the context of an indication by Rosta at the first meeting of creditors on 8
November 1993 that a report would be available to creditors around 18 November
In seeking the urgent submission of financial data to enable the Bank to determine the course of action it would follow the Bank did not waive its right to rely on any of the relevant events of default. It did not engage in any specific act with knowledge of a breach which was inconsistent with its subsequent attempt to rely on that breach (see Canberra Advance Bank Limited v Benny) <case>; [(1993) 11 ACLC 148).] It follows that the Bank had a second legitimate basis for the appointment of the receiver.

Fifthly, the Bank submits that by entering into the round robin transaction
Rosta assigned or otherwise disposed of a debt owing to it by Sohena Pty.
Limited, one of the companies involved in the round robin which, as at 30 June had owed Rosta $552,126.00, $50,000.00 of which was secured. Sohena Pty.
Limited was the company in the group which held the physical assets used in the video duplication business. I agree with the defendants' submission that what occurred on 7 October 1993 was that the debt owed by Sohena to Rosta was discharged as to $512,350.00 thereof; it was not assigned or otherwise disposed of.

Sixthly, the Bank submits that by accepting repayment of the Sohena debt and replacing same with debts due from Asset Holdings Pty. Limited, TLS Nominees
Pty. Limited as trustee of the Theo Stavrianos Family Trust and CRMD Nominees
Pty. Limited as trustee of the Richard Ross Family Trust, Rosta failed to maintain and protect the mortgaged property and keep the same in a good and tenantable state of repair and good working order and condition. One only has to state the proposition to demonstrate the absurdity of it. As the defendant rightly says, clause 7.1(f) of the Equitable Mortgage is directed at the preservation of physical property and not at the preservation of choses in action.

Finally, the Bank contends that Rosta breached clause 7.1(h) by failing to carry on and conduct its business in a proper and efficient manner and with due diligence. In this regard it relies upon the round robin and the loss by
Rosta of the benefit of a significant part of the security held by it for the payment of Sohena's debt. Rosta failed to obtain any substitute security from any of its replacement debtors. I agree with the defendants' submission that a round robin per se does not call for remark (see Perpetual Trustee Company
Limited versus Barnett (1969) 90 WN ( Pt1) 637 at 650-1). However, the true position is that Rosta ceased to be owed moneys by the company in the group which owned the relevant physical assets and it lost the benefit of a significant part of its security. In the circumstances I find that Rosta failed to carry on and conduct its business in a proper and efficient manner and with due diligence and this afforded a further basis for the valid appointment of Mr. Martin Brown as Rosta's receiver.

Whether the Bank was aware of all of the relevant events entitling it to appoint a receiver on 16 November 1993 or not is of no importance. Similarly, it matters not that what the Bank had in mind at the time may not have constituted a relevant event (see Canberra Advance Bank Limited versus Benny at pages 152-3).

As noted above the Bank appears, contrary to the defendants' submission, to have had advice as at 16 November 1993 from its legal department confirming that it was legally entitled to make the appointment but, as I have said, this was not an essential prerequisite for a valid appointment.

In the foregoing circumstances it is unnecessary for me to consider the effect of what might otherwise have been an invalid appointment by the Bank of a receiver to Rosta and whether the action of the Bank, if assumed to be bona fide (and I have no reason to doubt that it was and no suggestion was put to
Mr. Austin to the contrary), would have the effect of discharging the sureties even if there was no relevant event entitling a valid appointment to be made.
Rosta, of course, is not a party to the proceedings.

It is also unnecessary to address the significance of clauses such as 9, 10 and 13 in the Stavrianos/Rosta guarantee and clauses such as 24, 25, 26 and 28 in the Bank's Standard Memorandum registered No.T340042 which form part of the
Crawford-Ross/Rosta mortgage (see generally O'Day versus The Commercial Bank of
Australia Limited <case>; [(1933) 50 CLR 200]; Buckeridge versus Mercantile Credits Limited <case>; [(1981) 147 CLR 654]; Drummond versus National Australia Bank Limited, unreported,
Giles J, 7 July 1995 at page 58 et seq; unreported, Court of Appeal, 14
February 1997; cf the judgment of Mitchell J in the Prince Edward Island
Supreme Court in Moase Product Limited versus Royal Bank of Canada 59 CBR (Canadian Bankruptcy Reports) (N.S.) 300; [59 Nfld & P.E.I.R. 168]; 178
A.P.R. 168 and [(1987) 64 C.B.R. 191] at 193-4).

The defendants, by their pleading, alleged that Mr. Martin Brown was never entitled to exercise any powers under the Equitable Mortgage because the Deed whereby he was appointed was never registered. They relied on [section
A(2)(c)(ii)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s115a.html) of the [Conveyancing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) as amended. There is no force in this submission. As Mr. Justice McHugh said in
Isherwood v. Butler Pollnow Pty. Limited [(1986) 6 NSWLR 363] at 388-9 "... it is no part of the purpose of [s.115A(2)(c)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s115a.html) ... to require registration of a document which appoints a receiver pursuant to a power contained in the mortgage deed." He also said "The object of [(section
A(2)(c))](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s115a.html) ... is to prevent the exercise of any powers unless default has occurred".

Under clause 9.4 of the Equitable Mortgage the receiver became the agent of
Rosta and Rosta alone was responsible for his acts and defaults.

It follows from what has been said above that the Bank did not engage in any misleading or deceptive conduct or acts of trespass as alleged by the defendants in their defence and cross-claim. Accordingly, neither the
Crawford-Ross mortgage nor the Stavrianos/Rosta guarantee was or could be discharged as a result of the prejudicial conduct alleged by the defendants in their defence. Furthermore, the defendants are not entitled to any equitable set-off against the Bank's claims upon them.

This brings me to the [Contracts Review Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) and negligence defences of Mr. and Mrs. Stavrianos, the [Contracts Review
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/), negligence and [Trade Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth) [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) cross- claims of Mrs. Stavrianos, the [Contracts Review
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) and negligence defence of Mrs. Crawford-Ross and the [Contracts Review
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) and negligence cross-claims of Mrs. Crawford-Ross.

I propose to deal with the negligence issue first. Mrs. Stavrianos has alleged that the Bank owed her a duty to exercise reasonable skill and care in seeking the execution of the Stavrianos/Rosta guarantee, the Stavrianos mortgage and the Stavrianos/Omega Duplication guarantee. Mrs. Crawford-Ross has alleged that the Bank owed her a duty to exercise reasonable skill and care in seeking the execution of the Crawford-Ross mortgage and the Crawford-Ross/Omega
Duplication guarantee. The particulars of the alleged breaches of these claimed duties are to be found in the case of Mrs. Stavrianos in paragraph 10 of the cross-claim and in the case of Mrs. Crawford-Ross in paragraph 26. The particulars provided were as follows:- 
Mrs. Stavrianos.
 "(a) the Bank failed to advise the second cross-claimant that there were real risks involved in the Rosta Guarantee and Stavrianos Mortgage and the 
Omega Guarantee; the Bank failed to advise the second cross-claimant of the magnitude of the risk involved in the execution of the Rosta Guarantee and Stavrianos 
Mortgage and the Omega Guarantee; the Bank failed to advise the second cross-claimant not to proceed with the Rosta Guarantee and Stavrianos Mortgage and the Omega Guarantee; the Bank failed to advise the second cross-claimant adequately (or at all) of her possible or probable liability pursuant to the Rosta Guarantee and 
Stavrianos Mortgage and the Omega Guarantee; and the Bank failed to make adequate (or any) inquiry as to the real knowledge of the second cross-claimant regarding the nature of the obligations under the Rosta Guarantee and Stavrianos Mortgage and the 
Omega Guarantee." 
Mrs. Crawford-Ross.
 "(a) the Bank failed to advise the fourth cross-claimant that there were real risks involved in the Omega Guarantee and Crawford-Ross Mortgage; the Bank failed to advise the fourth cross-claimant of the magnitude of the risk involved in the execution of the Omega Guarantee and 
Crawford-Ross Mortgage; the Bank failed to advise the fourth cross-claimant not to proceed with the Omega Guarantee and Crawford-Ross Mortgage; the Bank failed to advise the fourth cross-claimant adequately (or at all) of her possible or probable liability pursuant to the Omega Guarantee and Crawford-Ross Mortgage; the Bank failed to make adequate (or any) inquiry as to the real knowledge of the fourth cross-claimant regarding the nature of the obligations under the Omega Guarantee and Crawford-Ross Mortgage." 
The Bank did not assume the position of business adviser to the Stavrianoses or the Crawford-Rosses or any of them. The relevant officers merely acted in the interests of the Bank. Accordingly, no duty to advise with due skill and care arises.

The [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) claim advanced by Mrs. Stavrianos alleges that Mr. Stavrianos as agent of the Bank without any reasonable basis to do so represented by silence that there would be no real risks involved in the Stavrianos/Rosta guarantee, the Stavrianos mortgage or the Stavrianos/Omega Duplication guarantee and that signing the
Stavrianos/Rosta guarantee, the Stavrianos mortgage and the Stavrianos/Omega
Duplication guarantee would be in Mrs. Stavrianos' interests. The said representations were said to have involved the Bank in conduct which was misleading and deceptive or likely to mislead and deceive contrary to [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/).

No valid basis exists for the suggestion that any representations made by Mr.
Stavrianos to his wife in relation to the execution of the documents mentioned were made by him as agent of the Bank or otherwise such as to render his conduct that of the Bank (see [section (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s84.html) of the Act).

Furthermore there was no evidence from which it could be inferred that representations were made by Mr. Stavrianos by silence to the effect alleged (see Henjo Investments Pty. Limited v. Collins Marrickville Pty. Limited <case>; [(1988) 79 ALR 83] at 94-5).

Turning now to the questions arising under the [Contracts Review Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) it is important to note that the Act requires a two-stage inquiry to be undertaken: firstly, a determination whether a contract or a provision in a contract was unjust in the circumstances existing when it was made and secondly, whether it is just to grant relief in respect of the unjust contract or provision in the contract.

In West versus AGC (Advances) Limited [(1986) 5 NSWLR 610] at -621, McHugh J.A. (as he then was) said:- "Under [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s7.html) a contract may be unjust in the circumstances existing when it was made because of the way it operates in relation to the claimant or because of the way in which it was made or both. Thus a contractual provision may be unjust simply because it imposes an unreasonable burden on the claimant when it was not reasonably necessary for the protection of the legitimate interests of the party seeking to enforce the provision: cf [s (2)(d).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html)
In other cases the contract may not be unjust per se but may be unjust because in the circumstances the claimant did not have the capacity or opportunity to make an informed or real choice as to whether he should enter into the contract: cf [s (2)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html), [s (2)(e)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html), [s (2)(f)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html), [s (2)(g)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html), [s (2)(i)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html), [s (2)(j).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html)
More often, it will be a combination of the operation of the contract and the manner in which it was made that renders the contract or one of its provisions unjust in the circumstances. Thus a contract may be unjust under the Act because its terms, consequences or effects are unjust. This is substantive injustice. Or a contract may be unjust because of the unfairness of the methods used to make it. This is procedural injustice. Most unjust contracts will be the product of both procedural and substantive injustice.
 ...

It is important to bear in mind that it is the contract or its provisions which must be unjust. As Professor Lang has pointed out "it is not the transaction but the contract which must be initially examined": Macquarie
University Continuing Legal Education Program, "[Contracts Review Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) - in practice" (22 May 1980) at 32. The [Contracts Review
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) regulates contracts not investments. During the Second Reading debate the Minister, who introduced the Bill quoted a statement of Professor Peden who said that the legislation was: `... intended to confer on the Courts a new and wide discretion to determine the existence and extent of harshness in a contract, and thereby develop a doctrine of unconscionability suitable to present and future business and community needs and standards.' (my emphasis) New South Wales
Parliamentary Debates (1980) at 5858.

If a defendant has not been engaged in conduct depriving the claimant of a real or informed choice to enter into a contract and the terms of the contract are reasonable as between the parties, I do not see how that contract can be considered unjust simply because it was not in the interests of the claimant to make the contract or because she had no independent advice." 
This statement has been approved by Mahoney JA in Baltic Shipping Company v.
Dillon ("Mikhail Lermontov") [(1991) 22 NSWLR 1], Samuels JA and Meagher JA in Beneficial Finance Corporation Limited v. Karavas [(1991) NSWLR 256], Sheller JA in Nguyen v. Taylor [(1992) 27 NSWLR 48], Mahoney P and Meagher JA in Elders Rural Finance Ltd. v. Smith [(1997) NSW Conv R -806] at 56,325 and 56,330 and Mahoney P and Cole JA in John
Dorahy's Fitness Centre Pty. Ltd. v. Buchanan (Court of Appeal of NSW, unreported 18 December 1996).

In relation to the first stage of the inquiry it is necessary to have regard to [section (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html)-(4) of the Act and, in relation to the second stage, to [section (5).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html) 
In the Amended Cross-Claim each of Mrs. Stavrianos and Mrs. Crawford-Ross relies, in relation to the first stage inquiry, on [section (2)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html), , (c), (d), (f), (g), (h) and (i). In addition Mrs. Stavrianos says:- "3(b) The second cross-claimant was not provided with copies of the Rosta 
Guarantee or Stavrianos Mortgage or the Omega Guarantee prior to being asked to sign them; ...

Nothing was done by the Bank to bring home to the second cross- claimant the risks that she was running in entering into the Rosta 
Guarantee and Stavrianos Mortgage and the Omega Guarantee or to bring home to her that there was a real risk that action would be commenced against her if there was a change in the position of 
Rosta." 
To like effect, Mrs. Crawford-Ross says:- "19(b) The fourth cross-claimant was not provided with copies of the Omega 
Guarantee or Crawford-Ross Mortgage prior to being asked to sign them; ...

Nothing was done by the Bank to bring home to the fourth cross- claimant the risks that she was running in entering into the Omega 
Guarantee and Crawford-Ross Mortgage or to bring home to her that there was a real risk that action would be commenced against her if there was a change in the position of Omega." 
In putting her case under [section (2)(f)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html)
Mrs. Stavrianos says:- "3(f) The second cross-claimant did not have the education or experience to enable her to reasonably protect her interests in entering into the Rosta 
Guarantee or Stavrianos Mortgage or the Omega Guarantee or to make an informed judgment as to the risks which she was running in entering into them or to appreciate that there was a real risk that she would be in any way liable should circumstances arise that Rosta was not in a position to attend to whatever arrangements it had with the 
Bank." 
Similarly Mrs. Crawford-Ross says: "19(f) The fourth cross-claimant did not have the education or experience to enable her to reasonably protect her interests in entering into the 
Omega Guarantee or Crawford-Ross Mortgage or to make an informed judgment as to the risks which she was running in entering into them or to appreciate that there was a real risk that she would be in any way liable should circumstances arise that Rosta was not in a position to attend to whatever arrangements it had with the Bank." 
In the case of Mrs. Crawford-Ross it is important to note, as I have found above, that she was not shown a copy of the Bank's Standard Memorandum registered number T340042 at the time when she signed the Crawford-Ross
Mortgage.

Turning now to the evidence, each of Mrs. Stavrianos and Mrs. Crawford-Ross signed a number of documents prepared by the Bank referable to the indebtedness of Rosta to the Bank. For example on 11 July 1980 Rosta under its
Common Seal executed a document in the terms set out hereunder and each of Mr.
and Mrs. Stavrianos and Mr. and Mrs. Crawford-Ross also signed the document under the words "We consent to the above":- "The Manager 11/7/80 
Commonwealth Trading Bank of 
Australia 
FIVE DOCK NSW 2046 
Dear Sir 
ROSTA ELECTRICAL INDUSTRIES PTY LTD 
We hereby request an increase of $5,000- in the Companys overdraft from $5,000- to $10,000- to assist with working capital. We acknowledge that approval will be based on the Banks usual terms for this type of lending.

The Common Seal of Rosta Electrical 
Industries was affixed hereto under ............................
 the authority of a resolution of the Director 
Board of Directors whose signatures appear opposite hereto. ............................

Secretary 
We consent to the above.
 ...............................

Theo Stavrianos ..............................

Evangelia Stavrianos ..............................

Richard Saywell ..............................

Marion Crawford-Ross." 
On 30 March 1981 a similar document was executed referable to an increase in
Rosta's overdraft from $10,000 to $20,000.

On 30 May 1983 Mr. and Mrs. Stavrianos signed a document beneath the words "We consent to the above" in the following terms:- "The Manager 
Commonwealth Trading Bank of Australia 
FIVE DOCK NSW 30-5-1983 
Dear Sir 
Rosta Electrical Industries Pty Limited requests release of securities in the form of unregistered mortgage by Richard Saywell Crawford-Ross and 
Marion Crawford-Ross over home at 237 Cooriengah 
Heights Road, Engadine and substitution of unregistered mortgage by Richard Saywell Crawford-Ross & Marion 
Crawford-Ross over 7 Holmlea Place, North Engadine.

The Common Seal of Rosta Electrical 
Industries Pty Limited was ............................

Affixed by authority of a Director resolution of the board of directors in the presence of a director & the secretary whose signatures appear opposite. ............................

Secretary 
We consent to the above.
 ................................ ............................

Theo Stavrianos Evangelia Stavrianos" 
On or about 20 September 1984 Mr. and Mrs. Crawford-Ross signed a document under the expression "We consent to the above" in the following terms:- "The Manager 
Commonwealth Bank of Australia 
FIVE DOCK NSW 
Dear Sir 
ROSTA ELECTRICAL INDUSTRIES PTY LIMITED requests release of security in the form of unregistered mortgage by 
Theo Stavrianos and Evangelia Stavrianos over home at Wallenbeen Place, ARNCLIFFE NSW.

New security position will be:- 
Unregistered mortgage by Richard Crawford-Ross and 
Marion Crawford-Ross over home at 7 Holmlea Place, 
NORTH ENGADINE NSW.

The Common Seal of 
ROSTA ELECTRICAL INDUSTRIES ........................

PTY LIMITED was affixed by Director authority of a resolution of the 
Board of Directors in the presence of Theo Stavrianos, 
Director and the Secretary whose signatures appear ........................
 opposite. Secretary 
We consent to the above.
 ................................ ............................

Richard Crawford-Ross Marion Crawford-Ross" 
On or about 26 October 1984 Mr. and Mrs. Stavrianos and Mr. and Mrs. Crawford-
Ross signed a further document under the words "We consent to the above" as follows:- "The Manager 
Commonwealth Bank of Australia 
FIVE DOCK NSW 
Dear Sir 
ROSTA ELECTRICAL INDUSTRIES PTY LIMITED requests release of security in the form of unregistered mortgage by Richard 
Saywell CRAWFORD-ROSS and Marion CRAWFORD-ROSS over home at Holmlea Place North ENGADINE.

New security position will be: 
Commonwealth Bank of Australia Term Deposit in the name of 
ROSTA ELECTRICAL INDUSTRIES PTY LIMITED for $20000 S/C number 222971.

The Common Seal of 
ROSTA ELECTRICAL INDUSTRIES 
PTY LIMITED was affixed by ..........................
 authority of a resolution of the Director 
Board of Directors in the presence of Theo Stavrianos Director and the Secretary whose signatures ..........................
 appear opposite. Secretary 
We consent to the above.
 ................................. ...................................

THEO STAVRIANOS EVANGELIA STAVRIANOS ................................. .....................................

RICHARD SAYWELL CRAWFORD-ROSS MARION CRAWFORD-ROSS" 
On 13 May 1985 Mr. Stavrianos and Mr. Crawford-Ross called to see Mr.
Robertshaw at the Five Dock branch of the Bank. His diary note includes the following:- "Stavrianos has decided not to sell his Arncliffe home for the present. They require release of the $20,000 in Term Deposit which is our present security and substitute with a mortgage by Mr. and Mrs. Stavrianos over their Arncliffe home and a second mortgage by Mr. and Mrs. Ross over their Engadine home. ..." 
On or about 20 May 1985 Mr. and Mrs. Stavrianos signed the Bank's standard form of "Authority to Complete and Pay", which was also executed by Rosta, in respect of a loan to Rosta. The relevant text included:- "I/we hereby request you or any officer of the Commonwealth Trading/Savings
Bank of Australia to date and fill in any blanks in the mortgage and other documents I/we have executed, so that they will, when so completed, provide a good and effective security for any advances and accommodation granted or to be granted to me/us by your Bank." 
At the same time Mr. and Mrs. Crawford-Ross signed and Rosta executed a similar authority.

On or about 20 May 1985 Mr. and Mrs. Stavrianos and Mr. and Mrs. Crawford-Ross signed a document similar to that bearing date 30 March 1981 again beneath the words "We consent to the above". The relevant text read:- "Rosta Electrical Industries Pty. Limited hereby request and authorise you to increase its overdraft by $10,000 from $10,000 to $20,000 on the Banks usual terms and conditions." 
In the foregoing context Mr. and Mrs. Crawford-Ross executed the Crawford-
Ross/Rosta third party mortgage. That document on its first page clearly indicated that Mr. and Mrs. Crawford-Ross were the relevant mortgagors,
Commonwealth Bank of Australia was the mortgagee and the mortgage was given "in consideration of certain advances and accommodation granted or to be granted at the request of the Mortgagor to Rosta Electrical Industries Pty.
Limited." 
On 19 November 1986 Mr. and Mrs. Stavrianos and Mr. and Mrs. Crawford-Ross signed a further document similar to those quoted above under the words "We consent to the above". This document was also executed by Rosta under its
Common Seal and provided as follows:- "19 November 1986 
The Manager 
Commonwealth Bank of 
Australia 
FIVE DOCK NSW 
Dear Sir 
Rosta Electrical Industries Pty Limited hereby requests release of security in the form of unregistered mortgage by Theo 
Stavrianos and Evangelia Stavrianos over house at 3 Wallenbeen Place,
Arncliffe, NSW.

Security being released will be substituted by Guarantee unlimited as to amount supported by a Mortgage by Theo & Evangelia 
Stavrianos over house property at 32 Endeavour Street, Sans 
Souci, NSW.

The Common Seal of Rosta Electrical ) ..........................

Industries Pty Limited was affixed ) Director under the authority of Theo ) 
Stavrianos a Director whose signature ) appears opposite hereto. ) .........................

Countersigned. Secretary 
We consent to the above.
 ................................ ................................

Theo Stavrianos Evangelia Stavrianos ................................ ................................

Richard Saywell Marion Crawford-Ross" 
Crawford-Ross 
The Stavrianos mortgage over their 32 Endeavour Street, Sans Souci home, which bears date 21 June 1985, was not expressed to be a third party mortgage in respect of advances and accommodation granted or to be granted to Rosta. Its operation as security for Rosta's indebtedness to the Bank depended upon the later Stavrianos/Rosta guarantee. That guarantee was, as indicated above, made on 19 November 1986. On its first page it clearly indicated that the Bank had granted or agreed to grant Rosta certain advances and accommodation at the request of Mr. and Mrs. Stavrianos and that they were guaranteeing Rosta's indebtedness to the Bank. As indicated above Mr. Harris drew the attention of
Mr. and Mrs. Stavrianos at the time of their execution of the guarantee to the provisions of clause 4 and explained to them that the guarantee was supported by the existing mortgage over their home to secure the indebtedness of Rosta to the Bank.

Up until the time of the execution by Mr. and Mrs. Stavrianos of the
Stavrianos/Rosta guarantee the security given by them for the indebtedness of
Rosta to the Bank was their property situated at 3 Wallendbeen Place,
Arncliffe.

On 6 March 1989 the Bank wrote to Rosta advising that the Bank had approved an increase in Rosta's overdraft limit from $20,000 to $100,000 on certain terms and conditions. On the following day, 7 March 1989 the Bank wrote to, inter alia, Mrs. Stavrianos and Mrs. Crawford-Ross in the following terms: "ROSTA ELECTRICAL INDUSTRIES PTY LTD 
We have approved an increase of $80,000 from $20,000 to $100,000, in the overdraft account for the abovementioned.

However, we require your consent to the proposed increase.

Enclosed is the Bank's usual letter of acknowledgement which we require you to sign and return to our office.

Please note that your signature should be witnessed by a party other than a co guarantor/ mortgagor." 
On 13 March 1989 Mrs. Crawford-Ross responded to the Bank's letter to her by signing a letter of acknowledgment directed to the St.Peters branch of the
Bank in the terms set out hereunder. Her signature was witnessed, by her sister-in-law Mrs. Burke. The letter of acknowledgment provided as follows:- "I hereby acknowledge that the Bank has granted or may be granting from time to time to ROSTA ELECTRICAL INDUSTRIES PTY LIMITED (the Debtor) accommodation and otherwise permitting the Debtor to incur liabilities to the Bank not exceeding an aggregate amount at any one time and from time to time of $100000.* against the security of my mortgage(s)/guarantee(s) to the Bank referred to in the schedule below.

I clearly understand that my mortgage(s)/guarantee(s) will also secure the payment to the Bank of interest and any costs, charges and expenses with which the Bank shall be at liberty to debit and charge the account of the Debtor or for which I am liable under my mortgage(s)/guarantee(s).

Schedule * Mortgage dated 20 May 1985 (by you and Richard Crawford Ross) over house property at 7 Holmlea Place North Engadine NSW" 
On 17 March 1989 each of Mr. and Mrs. Stavrianos signed similar letters of acknowledgment. The text of their letters was the same as for Mrs. Crawford-
Ross except that in the Schedule reference was made to the Stavrianos/Rosta guarantee and their property situated at 32 Endeavour Street, Sans Souci. In the case of Mr. Stavrianos' letter of acknowledgment the words of the Schedule provided:- "* Guarantee dated 19 November 1986, by you and Evangelia Stavrianos, liabilities under which are secured by mortgage dated 21 June 1985 over the house property at 32 Endeavour Street SANS SOUCI." 
In the case of Mrs. Stavrianos the relevant words of the Schedule provided:- "*GUARANTEE DATED 19 November 1986 (by you and Theo Stavrianos) liabilities under which are secured by mortgage dated 21 June 1985 over the house property at 32 Endeavour Street SANS SOUCI.." 
Mrs. Stavrianos doubted whether the words just quoted were present in her letter of acknowledgment at the time when it was signed by her. I have no doubt that the words were there and her suggestion of more recent addition was without foundation. It was indicative of the defensive approach which she displayed when confronted with the reality of what she had done.

On 28 February 1990 each of Mr. and Mrs. Stavrianos and Mr. and Mrs. Crawford-
Ross signed further letters of acknowledgment in similar terms in relation to an increase in Rosta's indebtedness to $200,000. In the case of Mrs. Crawford-
Ross' letter of acknowledgment the schedule provided as follows:- "Mortgage dated 20/5/1985 over property at 7 Holmlea Place North Engadine NSW" 
Mrs. Crawford-Ross' signature was witnessed by her husband's secretary Jenny
Weatherstone JP.

Mrs. Stavrianos' letter of acknowledgment was also witnessed by Jenny
Weatherstone. The schedule to her letter of acknowledgment read:- "Guarantee dated 19/11/1986, the liabilities under which are secured by mortgage dated 21/6/1985 over property at 32 Endeavour St Sans Souci NSW." 
In respect of this schedule Mrs. Stavrianos gave evidence that the "clause stands out" and it "surprises me that I didn't question my husband" about this. Mrs. Stavrianos had no recollection of the words of the schedule being in the document when she signed it but again I have no doubt that the words were there.

On 9 March 1990 the Bank approved an application by Rosta for a rearrangement of its facilities increasing the liability of Rosta to the Bank to $750,000 with a new bills discounted facility of $650,000 an overdraft facility reduced to $50,000 and a contingent liability limit reduced to $50,000 making up the total of $750,000.

On 9 March 1990 each of Mr. and Mrs. Stavrianos and Mr. and Mrs. Crawford-Ross signed a letter of acknowledgment in favour of the Bank in respect of the increase in Rosta's indebtedness to $750,000 in the form of the earlier letters of acknowledgment. In the case of Mrs. Stavrianos the relevant schedule provided:- "Guarantee dated 19/11/1986, the liabilities under which are secured by mortgage dated 21/6/1985 over property at 32 Endeavour St Sans Souci NSW" 
Mrs. Stavrianos' signature was witness by Donna Adamson another of Rosta's secretaries at the time. Once again Mrs. Stavrianos suggested that the words in the schedule may not have been present on the form of the letter of acknowledgment when signed by her but I do not accept her evidence in this regard.

In relation to Mrs. Crawford-Ross' letter of acknowledgment the relevant schedule included the words:- "-Mortgage dated 20/5/1985 over property at 7 Holmlea Place North Engadine
NSW" 
On 12 September 1991 Rosta requested the Bank to increase its facility to $950,000 with an overdraft limit of $200,000, a bills discount facility of $650,000 and a contingent liability limit of $100,000. On the same day each of
Mr. and Mrs. Stavrianos and Mr. and Mrs. Crawford-Ross signed a further letter of acknowledgment to the Bank referable to the increase in Rosta's facility to $950,000. The schedule in the case of Mrs. Stavrianos' letter read as follows:- "Guarantee dated 19/11/1986, the liabilities under which are secured by mortgage dated 21/6/85 over property at 32 Endeavour St Sans Souci." 
Mrs. Stavrianos' signature was once again witnessed by Donna Adamson.

Mrs. Stavrianos said that she couldn't have seen the words of the schedule at the time when she signed and dated the relevant letter otherwise she would have questioned it.

I do not accept Mrs. Stavrianos' evidence in this regard. More probably than not she had no concern as to Rosta's ability to meet its obligations to the
Bank and accordingly was not hesitant about signing such an explicit letter of acknowledgment.

In the case of Mrs. Crawford-Ross the relevant letter of acknowledgment contained a schedule reading:- "Mortgage dated 20/5/1985 over property at 7 Holmlea Place North Engadine." 
On 3 November 1992 the Bank approved a temporary increase in Rosta's facility from $950,000 to $970,000. Once again, each of Mr. and Mrs. Stavrianos and Mr.
and Mrs. Crawford-Ross signed a letter of acknowledgment dated 17 November in favour of the Bank. All of the signatures on this occasion were witnessed by Mrs. Stavrianos' brother Mr. George Tsaccounis.

The letter of acknowledgment signed by Mrs. Stavrianos referable to the increase in Rosta's indebtedness to the Bank to $970,000 included a schedule as follows:- "Guarantee dated 19/11/1986, the liabilities under which are secured by mortgage dated 21/6/1985 over property at 32 Endeavour St Sans Souci." 
In the case of Mrs. Crawford-Ross her letter of acknowledgment included a schedule reading as follows:- "Mortgage dated 20/5/1985 over property at 7 Holmlea Place North Engadine." 
Turning to Omega Duplication Pty. Limited, the Manager of the St.Peters branch of the Bank wrote to each of Mr. and Mrs. Stavrianos and Mr. and Mrs.
Crawford-Ross on 23 October 1991. In the case of Mrs. Stavrianos the letter read as follows:- "Dear Mrs. Stavrianos, 
RE OMEGA DUPLICATION PTY LIMITED (Debtor) 
The document(s) described below are provided herewith for your signature.

Your present maximum liability to the Bank under the document(s) is $150,000 plus interest, costs, charges and expenses as provided in the document(s).

Prior to signing the document(s) you should satisfy yourself that you understand the full nature and effect of your liabilities to the Bank and obtain appropriate advice, legal or otherwise, if you are at all uncertain of your position.

Your signature to the document(s) should be witnessed by an adult person (specially qualified where so called for in the document(s)) who is not the borrower/debtor or a co-guarantor/mortgagor (if any) under the document(s).

DOCUMENT(S) 
Guarantee by you and Theo Stavrianos in respect of the indebtedness to the
Bank of Omega Duplication Pty. Limited liabilities under which are secured by mortgage by you and Theo Stavrianos over property at 32 Endeavour St Sans
Souci." 
In the case of Mrs. Crawford-Ross the Bank's letter was in similar terms except that under the heading "DOCUMENT(S)" the letter read as follows:- "Guarantee by you and Richard Saywell Crawford-Ross in respect to the indebtedness to the Bank of Omega Duplication Pty Limited liabilities under which are secured by mortgage by you and Richard Saywell Crawford-Ross over property at 7 Holmlea Place, Engadine." 
It may be noted that Mrs. Crawford-Ross had no recollection of receiving the original of this letter. A simple explanation is that the originals of each of the four letters to Mr. and Mrs. Stavrianos and Mr. and Mrs. Crawford-Ross were only recently discovered in Mr. Stavrianos' old briefcase and presumably handed to him for delivery to each of the addressees.

The relevant Omega Duplication guarantees were executed on 20 December 1991 and clearly identified Mr. and Mrs. Stavrianos in one case and Mr. and Mrs.
Crawford-Ross in the other as the guarantors of Omega Duplication's indebtedness to the Bank.

On 15 July 1992 the Bank wrote to each of Mr. and Mrs. Stavrianos and Mr. and
Mrs. Crawford-Ross in respect of proposed increases in Omega Duplication's facilities. The letters read as follows:- "Subject: Advances to Omega Duplication Pty. Limited 
The abovementioned wishes to increase its facilities and as a third party mortgagor the Bank requires your consent.

Should your consent be forthcoming, would you please sign and return the enclosed form ensuring the witness to your signature is at least eighteen years of age and not a party to the company or the loan." 
On 24 July 1992 each of Mr. and Mrs. Stavrianos and Mr. and Mrs. Crawford-Ross signed letters of acknowledgment directed to the Bank in the same form as those used in relation to Rosta and referred to above referable to an increase in Omega Duplication's indebtedness to the Bank to $216,640. In the case of
Mrs. Stavrianos the relevant schedule provided:- "Guarantee dated 20/12/91, the liabilities under which are secured by Mortgage dated 21/6/85 over property at 32 Endeavour St Sans Souci." 
Mrs. Stavrianos' signature was witnessed by Donna Adamson.

In the case of Mrs. Crawford-Ross the relevant schedule provided:- "Guarantee dated 20/12/91, the liabilities under which are secured by mortgage dated 20/5/85 over property at 7 Holmlea Place Engadine NSW." 
Once again Mrs. Crawford-Ross' signature was witnessed by Donna Adamson.

Apart from the documents referred to above referable to the borrowings of
Rosta and Omega Duplication Mr. and Mrs. Stavrianos and Mr. and Mrs. Crawford-
Ross had signed other security documents in relation to borrowings by them on the security of their homes from time to time. On 12 December 1969 Mr. and
Mrs. Stavrianos executed a mortgage in favour of NSW Permanent Building
Society Limited with their signatures relevantly witnessed by a solicitor.

There can be no doubt that each of Mr. Stavrianos and Mr. Crawford-Ross knew what it was that they were signing from time to time and understood the effect thereof. They fully intended to pledge their family homes as security for
Rosta's and Omega Duplication's indebtedness to the Bank.

Mrs. Stavrianos gave evidence in respect of her execution of the 11 July 1980 request for an increase in Rosta's overdraft from $5,000 to $10,000 as follows:- "HIS HONOUR: When you said, "I did not read the above" what did you mean by the word "above"? 
A. Sorry, if a form comes to me, I see who it is from. It didn't even come to me. My husband said, "Quick darling, I have to get to work. I need your signature to take it to the Bank", I would look at it, apply my signature and
I wouldn't really pay any attention. I now know I should but at the time, most definitely not.

STEVENSON: ...

Q. Reading the document from top to bottom now, it is clear what that says and means? 
A. Most definitely, yes.

Q. If you had taken the trouble to read it in July 1980 it would be clear to you then what it means? 
A. More than likely, yes.

Q. It is clear it was a Bank document, you have told us? 
A. Yes.

Q. You knew your husband was asking you whether you would sign it? 
A. He was asking me to sign it, not whether I would. "Darling, please sign this form" would be the way he would put it.

Q. You knew he would take it to the Bank with your signature on it? 
A. Yes.

Q. You knew from time to time the Commonwealth Bank prepared forms for customers to sign? 
A. Yes.

Q. You knew at the time this was one such form? 
A. Yes.

Q. You knew the Bank would rely upon your signature? 
A. Yes.

Q. You knew the Bank would assume from the fact you had signed the document you did agree with what was in the document? 
A. Now I know that.

Q. You knew it then? 
A. I did not.

Q. What on earth did you think you were doing signing it? 
A. I was following the assistance of my husband's business being successful.

Q. You knew what he was going to do with the document? 
A. Not at the time.

Q. Did you think he was putting it in the bin? 
A. I knew he was taking it to the Bank, that he was committing himself and I had to sign because I was his wife.

Q. And you knew the Bank would rely upon your signature on the document? 
A. Rely upon it, yes.

Q. So were you prepared to sign whatever it was without reading it? 
A. Most definitely." 
In respect of the document dated 30 May 1983 Mrs. Stavrianos gave the following evidence:- "Q. You looked at things that connected you but there was nothing in this document to connect you, was there? 
A. I don't know. "Why am I being asked to sign a form that does not even have my name on it if I am not part of the business", I asked my husband.

Q. Why did you sign it? 
A. Because my name is on it.

Q. Even though he told you you were not part of the business? 
A. Yes.

Q. Even though you could see it had something to do with the Crawford-Ross's new property? 
A. Yes.

Q. And even though there was otherwise nothing on the face of the document to explain why you were asked to sign it? 
A. My husband asked me. The Bank knew what they were doing. They had my name printed on it.
 ...

Q. Although I think you are telling us your husband wanted you to sign because the Bank wanted you to sign. Is that how you thought of it? 
A. Yes.

Q. When you looked at the document in May 1983 you could see firstly it was a document created by the Bank? 
A. Yes.

Q. It was a document drawn up as a letter to the Bank? 
A. Yes.

Q. It was a document that had something to do with the Crawford-Ross's property? 
A. Yes.

Q. It was a document that the Bank wanted you to sign? 
A. Yes.

Q. You knew you had nothing to do with the business which your husband told you? 
A. That is right.

Q. You knew you were the owner of your property, one of them? 
A. Yes.

Q. And surely it was obvious to you that that is why you were being asked to sign it? 
A. Not at all.

Q. Could you think of any reason at the time why the Bank would ask you to sign the document? 
A. No, none at all. This all happens in about one or two minutes before my husband leaves I asked. I am not the type to question my husband. Any move my husband makes - I get into someone's car, I am rigid; I get into my husband's car, I am asleep.

Q. You assume the Bank had a reason for asking you to sign the document? 
A. Yes.

Q. Did you tell His Honour you didn't know what that reason was? 
A. I did not know what that reason was.

Q. You knew the Bank wasn't autograph collecting? 
A. No, they were not autograph collecting.

Q. You knew the Bank would rely on your signature on the document? 
A. Yes.

Q. You knew the Bank would assume, by signing the document they will assume you would read the document? 
A. I did not assume but I now realise I should have read the document.

Q. Surely it was the case in May 1983 it was your assumption --? 
A. I had not assumed.

Q. -- that the Bank would rely upon your signature? 
A. No, I signed. If I hadn't signed and the Bank had questioned it, then I may have assumed something. It is there. My husband has asked me to sign it. The little bit of questioning I did was because I couldn't see my name where I had seen a name.

Q. My point is you could see it wasn't just your husband asking you to sign it, it was the Bank asking you to sign it? 
A. Yes." 
Mrs. Stavrianos assisted her husband and Mr. Crawford-Ross with the reconciliation of Rosta's bank records. In so doing she recalls seeing that most of the time the overdraft was in the vicinity of $20,000 to $30,000 at the most.

In this context she was called upon to sign the letter of acknowledgment of 17
March 1989 in which she acknowledged that Rosta's accommodation was to be increased to $100,000 and that the Stavrianos mortgage and the
Stavrianos/Rosta guarantee had the effect of providing her home at Sans Souci as security for the payment of Rosta's debt. In relation to her execution of this document she gave the following evidence:- 
Q. But looking at (it) now it's clearly enough an acknowledgment by you that the Rosta debt is going to $100,000, isn't it? 
A. Looking at it even a week ago I thought: How could I sign things like that without questioning them? 
Q. But looking at it now it's clearly enough an acknowledgment that you have signed - 
A. Yes.

Q. - that the Rosta debt has gone to $100,000? 
A. Yes.

Q. Or is to go to $100,000? 
A. Yes.

Q. And that debt is secured by a guarantee signed by you and secured over Sans
Souci by mortgage? 
A. Yes. It all makes sense to me now.

Q. Well, reading it now it's a clear enough document, isn't it? 
A. Yes.

Q. Again it's not in some code? 
A. No.

Q. It's not in excessive legalistic language, is it? 
A. No.

Q. It's clear enough? 
A. At the moment, yes. Am I to- excuse me, your Honour, am I to accept that the clause was there all the time? Could it have been placed after I signed? 
HIS HONOUR: Q. The typed words in the schedule? 
A. Yes, your Honour. I find it hard to accept that even in my mind I didn't question it.
 ...

Q. ... What you are saying is you can't say with certainty whether those typed words were there at the time when you signed them? 
A. Yes, your Honour.
 ...

STEVENSON: ...

Q. And do you see this is a little different from other documents because this one calls for signature by you alone? 
A. Yes, it does.
 ...

Q. And I think what you are suggesting to his Honour was that possibly the typing on this document wasn't present when you signed it..

A. It's just that with the knowledge of 8 years later that I have today, something that stands out as this does, I feel that I may have at least given it some attention.

Q. And --? 
A. Unlike other forms that just continue - 
Q. Can I suggest there's a couple characteristics of this document that would cause alarm bells to ring? 
A. Yes.

Q. One is the figure of $100,000 is mentioned? 
A. Yes.
 ...

Q. And the second reason an alarm bell might ring is if the document was in this form it refers to the guarantee and the mortgage as being security for this figure of $100,000? 
A. Yes.
 ...

Q. Now can I suggest to you that the document was in its present form, with the typing included, when it was presented to you for signature? 
A. I can't accept that because I - that's why I questioned it.

Q. And that you would have been just as alarmed, can I suggest, to sign a document acknowledging the company's liability if the figure was left blank? 
A. Not really. Not really. My husband would fill in the blanks. He would go to the bank and they would work out the amount. I've just signed it. They needed my signature, I've signed it. Whatever they decide, it's fine.

HIS HONOUR: Q. Mrs. Stavrianos, do I understand you to be saying that you can't believe that back in March 1989 you would have signed a document in this form if the words that are contained there had been included? 
A. Not necessarily, your Honour. I said that with the knowledge that I have today this is something that I would definitely look at. I don't know that back in 1989.

Q. But you use words to the effect of how could I sign it without questioning it? 
A. Yes, because every other form seemed to be just the basic form. This has an extra clause.

Q. When you are speaking about how could I sign without questioning it, I understood you to be speaking of a concern that you feel you would have had at the time you signed it if it had been in this form? 
A. Yes, that's what I feel; that I would have at least looked at it and either questioned it to myself or read it.

Q. In other words, because it was different and because it was your own document - 
A. Yes.

Q. - you feel that you would have been more careful about what you were signing than simply following your husband's instruction, "Here's a document, sign here"? 
A. I still would have signed it if my husband said "sign it" but I feel that this is the - a different document altogether that's come from the bank and there is a clause typed in there, it sort of stands out. That's how I think about it now.

STEVENSON: Q. Can I suggest a few things to you, one is that the document was in that form when you signed it? 
A. I cannot say that it was.

Q. The second is, that you are, as I think you suggested, you might be confusing now your state of knowledge, your state of knowledge now and the state of knowledge you had then and that you are overlooking when you give your evidence that back in March 1989, so far as you were concerned, the company was trading well? 
A. Yes, it has always traded well.

Q. You were optimistic as to the future of the company's business? 
A. I never had reason to doubt - 
Q. Because as you think you explained to us, because it looked, from your point of view, that the company was doing very well up to 1989? 
A. No, I never had a notion about the company, my husband was bringing in more than sufficient funds.

Q. And you knew he was bringing those funds in from the Rosta business? 
A. Yes.

Q. And you were living comfortably? 
A. Yes.

Q. And I suggest better than comfortably? 
A. Not necessarily.

Q. And you assumed that in those circumstances the company was healthy financially? 
A. Yes.

Q. And for that reason you were more content then than perhaps you would be now to sign documents such as this letter of acknowledgment?? 
A. No.

A. And that what is happening is, because of the bad experience that your family has had since the company collapsed, and your apprehension about the consequence for you of having signed these documents, that you are allowing your memory to be coloured? 
A. No, I am sorry, no. In the business that my husband and his partner had, even after I had read $100,000, that was nothing, because they spoke in hundreds of thousands of dollars at the time.

Q. Are you saying you cannot believe, or because the company was dealing in hundreds of thousands of dollars, you would have signed it anyway? 
A. I am saying that had there been a clause, or had I read a clause, I would have paid better attention to the clause and I would have questioned myself or my husband, but I would have signed regardless had my husband said, "Sign it anyway, there is nothing wrong.." 
Q. Again, you did understand when you signed the document that it would be one that would be delivered to the bank and relied upon by the bank? 
A. Yes.

Q. And that the bank would assume that by signing the document that you were agreeing to whatever was set forth in the document? 
A. Yes." 
As I have said above I have no doubt that the documents were complete at the time when Mrs. Stavrianos signed them. The documents were clear of meaning and
Mrs. Stavrianos had no difficulty in comprehending what they were about. She signed them because, as Mr. Stevenson suggested to her, the business appeared to be trading well, Mr. Stavrianos was bringing home sufficient moneys for the family to live comfortably and she had no apprehension about the company's ability to pay its own debts. Nevertheless, by her signature she was prepared to commit her interest in her home as security for the company's debt to the
Bank.

In respect of the Stavrianos/Omega Duplication guarantee Mrs. Stavrianos gave the following evidence:- "Q. You knew in 1991 that a guarantor was a person who had given or was to give a guarantee? 
A. Yes.

Q. And you knew that a guarantee was a promise, didn't you? 
A. Yes.

Q. And you knew a guarantee was a promise to pay someone else's debts if they couldn't or wouldn't? 
A. Yes.

Q. And you appreciated, didn't you, that this was a guarantee in relation to the company Omega Duplication Pty Ltd because that company is named on the first page of the document? 
A. No, I can't honestly say I did, I'm sorry. I don't know. It identifies myself and my husband. No one has ever approached me to explain anything to me. Am I expected to have to read all of these, all of this printed matter? ...

Q. What I am suggesting to you is whether or not you read every word you understood it was a guarantee by you of the company Omega's debts to the bank? 
A. No, I'm sorry, I knew my husband had commenced dealings with a company called Omega and I again, as his wife, was quite happy to sign with him." 
Given the earlier explanation by Mr. Harris of the Stavrianos/Rosta guarantee and its significance, I have no doubt that Mrs. Stavrianos knew, when she signed the Stavrianos/Omega Duplication guarantee, that she was agreeing to pay Omega Duplication's debt to the Bank if it failed to pay and that her house would provide part of the security.

So far as Mrs. Crawford-Ross was concerned her evidence was that it was not her practice to sign documents the contents of which she had not read. Her evidence was:- 
Q. ... you made it your practice to read documents that you were asked to sign before you signed them.

A. I would read them, yes." 
When asked about the execution of an earlier mortgage Mrs. Crawford-Ross gave the following evidence:- 
Q. You understood that if you wanted to borrow the money from the bank you would have to sign a mortgage? 
A. Yes.

Q. And you knew the mortgage would be a mortgage over the property? 
A. Yes.
 ...

Q. By that you are telling us that you knew that if you borrowed money from the bank to buy a house, for example, you would give the bank the deed? 
A. Yes.

Q. The title deed to the property? 
A. Yes.

Q. And the bank would keep the deed - 
A. Until you paid it back.

Q. And you understood that in that way banks would get security for the loan that they were making? 
A. Yes.

Q. They would keep the deed until you paid them back? 
A. Yes.

Q. When you paid them back you would get your deed back? 
A. Yes.
 ...

Q. But you knew, didn't you, that until the money was repaid you would not get your deeds back? 
A. Yes.

Q. And the mortgage would remain on the property? 
A. Yes.

Q. And you knew that if, contrary to what you expected would happen, you were not able to pay the money that was owing to the bank as it was due the bank could firstly keep the deeds until you did? 
A. Well, we didn't contemplate never being able to pay back the bank.

Q. I know what you are telling us is you expected you would pay it off eventually? 
A. Yes, always.

Q. And you are telling us in effect you did but you knew, didn't you, that the reason banks took mortgages was just in case you could not pay back as you expected to? 
A. Yes.

Q. And that in that unhappy event the bank could sell the property to get its money back and that was obvious to you, wasn't it? 
A. Well, I didn't think of it at the time. I guess I look at it now, I guess it is obvious to me now." 
When asked about the letter to the bank of 11 July 1980 which I have quoted above Mrs. Crawford-Ross gave the following evidence:- "Q. Do you have a recollection of the circumstances in which you signed it? 
A. Yes, one of the documents that came home and I signed it and my husband has taken it back.
 ...

Q. In July, 1980 you understood that you had no connection with the Rosta business, didn't you? 
A. Yes.
 ...

Q. You knew in 1980 that you were one of the owners of your home? 
A. Yes.
 ...

Q. Going back to July, 1980, you appreciated when you signed this document it had come from the Commonwealth Bank? 
A. Yes.

Q. And it was a document to do with the company's banking arrangements? 
A. Yes.

Q. You understood it had nothing to do with any borrowing you were making? 
A. That's right.

Q. And you understood it was quite separate from the home loan that you and your husband had taken out - 
A. Yes.

Q. - for the purchase of Engadine and it was clear enough to you when you looked at this document that you were being asked to agree to something? 
A. Yes, I was asked to sign the document, yes.

Q. You were asked to sign a document which was in the form of a letter addressed to the bank from Rosta? 
A. Yes.

Q. A company that you knew you had no association with? 
A. That's right.

Q. And you read the document, did you, before you signed it? 
A. I would say I read the document, yes.

Q. And it is not a terribly complicated document, is it? 
A. No.

Q. It would have been clear enough to you in July, 1980 that this was a request from the company, Rosta, to the bank to increase the overdraft from $5,000 to $10,000? 
A. Yes.

Q. And that you were being asked to agree to that arrangement? 
A. Yes.

HIS HONOUR: Q. Did you understand it when you signed it? 
A. I didn't pay a lot of attention at the time. I was asked to sign it. My husband was in business. They were started. They had been in business three years then. They needed money for whatever at that time. In order to get that money the bank required that we sign.

Q. I think you said "I would say I read the document".

A. Yes, I would have read the document.

Q. I understood you to mean that you did in fact read it at the time when it was presented to you for signature? 
A. Yes, yes.

Q. And I think you agree it was a relatively straight forward document? 
A. Yes.

Q. My question was did you understand it? 
A. I believe I would have understood at the time.

Q. What you understood was that it was a request by the company to the bank for an increase, in this case of an overdraft from $5,000 to $10,000 - 
A. Yes.
 ...

Q. And that you were consenting to that arrangement? 
A. I guess so.

Q. Along with Mr. and Mrs. Stavrianos and your husband? 
A. Yes.

Q. And that the reason you were being asked to consent to the arrangement was that because you were one of the owners of the Engadine property? 
A. Yes.

Q. Over which, as you understood it, the bank had a mortgage - 
A. They did have a mortgage, yes.

Q. To secure the company debts as well as the home loan? 
A. I didn't understand it in my mind at that time that it was connected in that way.

Q. All right but you understood that the reason you were being asked to sign was because you were one of the proprietors with your husband of the Engadine property? 
A. We owned the house.

Q. Sorry, you realised that the reason you were being asked to sign this document was because you were one of the owners of the Engadine property? 
A. Yes.
 ...

Q. You knew your husband would take the document, after signature by you, back to the bank? 
A. Yes.

Q. And you knew the bank would rely upon the document - 
A. Yes.

Q. And you knew that the bank would rely upon your signature as indicating that you agreed and agreed with and consented to what was in the document? 
A. Yes." 
In relation to the Crawford-Ross/Omega Duplication guarantee Mrs. Crawford-
Ross said she knew that the document which she signed was a guarantee given by her to the Bank and that at the time neither her husband nor herself were borrowing fresh moneys from the Bank. She doubted whether she read the fine print but said that she probably would have read the parts which had been typed into the form of guarantee. She understood that the Bank would rely upon her signature as signifying her agreement to everything that was in the document for better or for worse.

She said that when she signed it she didn't think too much of the document at the time and said:- "I felt that we were living quite well then, that Rosta was going very well. I had no worries about signing it because I knew Rosta would cover the debt." 
In my opinion the provisions of the Bank's security documents were reasonably necessary for the protection of its legitimate interests. If Mr. and Mrs.
Stavrianos and Mr. and Mrs. Crawford-Ross or any of them had had the benefit of independent legal or other expert advice in respect of the security documents they would have signed them regardless because of the recognised benefits for them in having the Rosta group of companies succeed. In relation to the several documents signed by Mrs. Stavrianos and Mrs. Crawford-Ross by way of consents and letters of acknowledgment I am satisfied that they would have signed same even if independent legal or other expert advice had been proffered to them in respect thereof and, if encouraged to obtain independent legal or other expert advice in respect of their execution of those documents, they probably would not have obtained independent advice in any event.

In my opinion neither the Stavrianos mortgage, the Stavrianos/Rosta guarantee, the Stavrianos/Omega Duplication guarantee nor the Crawford-Ross/Omega
Duplication guarantee nor any of the provisions of any of them were unjust in the circumstances which existed at the time when they were made. I am of the same opinion in respect of the Crawford-Ross mortgage and its execution by Mr.
Crawford-Ross. However, Mrs. Crawford-Ross' execution of the Crawford-Ross mortgage falls into a different category. Deprived as she was of the Bank's
Standard Memorandum registered No.T340042 at the time of her execution of the mortgage, there was, in my opinion, a significant procedural injustice.
Nevertheless, by virtue of the subsequent events and the numerous further advances made by the Bank to Rosta and to Omega Duplication to which Mrs.
Crawford-Ross consented and/or acknowledged I do not consider that it would be just to grant any relief to her in respect of the mortgage.

Whatever may have been the degree of sophistication of Mrs. Stavrianos and
Mrs. Crawford-Ross at the outset, as the Rosta indebtedness rose from $20,000 to $100,000 and then to $200,000, $750,000 and $950,000 each of Mrs.
Stavrianos and Mrs. Crawford-Ross became well aware of what was going on and assented to it. It would be quite unjust to grant either of them or Mr.
Stavrianos any relief in respect of any of the relevant security documents even if they had been unjust in the circumstances which prevailed at the times when they were made. Similarly, Mr. and Mrs. Stavrianos and Mr. and Mrs.
Crawford-Ross were well able to understand and in my view did appreciate the significance of what they were doing when they signed the Omega Duplication guarantees in October 1991 and later acknowledged the proposed increase in the
Omega Duplication indebtedness to $216,640 and thereafter the increase in the
Rosta indebtedness to $970,000.

There is no proper basis for the Court to deny the Bank its right to enforce any of the security documents.

The fact that the Crawford-Ross mortgage should only operate as an unregistered equitable mortgage does not deny the Bank a right to possession of the 7 Holmlea Place, North Engadine property given the terms of clauses E2 and E3(a) of the Bank's standard Memorandum and the events which have transpired (see Fisher and Lightwood's Law of Mortgage (Australian edition ) at page 385 and Mercantile Credits Limited v. Archbold [(1970) QLR ] (case 9) at 20).

In the circumstances the orders which I propose to make in respect of the plaintiff's claims are as follows:
Judgment for the plaintiff against the defendants in the sum of $1,866,192.54.
Judgment for the plaintiff against the third and fourth defendants for possession of 7 Holmlea Place, North Engadine.
Grant leave to the plaintiff to issue a Writ of Possession against the third and fourth defendants in respect of the judgment contained in paragraph hereof forthwith.
Order that the execution of the said Writ of Possession be stayed until 17
April 1998.
Judgment for the plaintiff against the first and second defendants for possession of 32 Endeavour Street, Sans Souci.
Grant leave to the plaintiff to issue a Writ of Possession against the first and second defendants in respect of the judgment contained in paragraph hereof forthwith.
Order that execution of the said Writ of Possession be stayed until 17
April 1998.
Order that the plaintiff serve a copy of the reasons for judgment herein upon the Registrar General and draw the attention of the Registrar General to the Court's finding that the registration of Memorandum of Mortgage No.Y949958 was fraudulently and wrongfully obtained, within 14 days of the date hereof.
Order that the defendants pay the plaintiff's costs.
Grant liberty to the plaintiff and to the third and fourth defendants to apply on 24 hours notice in respect of Order No.8.

The orders which I propose to make in respect of the defendants' cross-claims are as follows:-
Judgment for the plaintiff/cross-defendant on the second cross-claimant's cross-claims.
Judgment for the plaintiff/cross-defendant on the fourth cross-claimant's cross-claims.
Judgment for the plaintiff/cross-defendant on the cross-claims of all of the cross-claimants.
Order that the cross-claimants pay the costs of the plaintiff/cross- defendant of the cross-claims.
 * * * 
