

Balada Pty Limited versus The Registrar General Nos. Ca40281/94 and Ed5234/83 [1995] NSWSC 111 (31 October 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
CLARKE(1), SHELLER(2) AND COLE(3) JJA
HRNG
SYDNEY, 15 February 1995 #DATE 16:6:1995 #ADD 31:10:1995 
Counsel for the Appellant:    J Ireland QC/J Maston 
Solicitors for the Appellant:  Maclarens 
Counsel for the Respondent:   I M Wales 
Solicitors for the Respondent:  K C Hall
ORDER
Appeal dismissed with costs.
JUDGE1
CLARKE JA In 1883, a plan of sub-division for 2,267 acres of Luddenham Estate in the Parish of Bringelly, fronting Bringelly
Road was registered and became
DP 1452. This appeal concerns three lots in that subdivision. One was later divided into two in 1894.
The other two were sub divided in to 40 lots in 1886 (DP 1664). There were then 42 allotments in all.
In 1972 DP 553744, whose stated purpose was "redefinition", was registered at the Land Titles Office. In this plan the whole of the land constituted by the original three lots was shown as Lot 1 and there were no other lots in the plan. A fresh Certificate of Title, Vol 11 900 Folio 250, was issued and former Certificates of Title which had been issued were cancelled or partly cancelled.
On 3 September 1992 the appellant, the present owner of the land, requested that the Registrar General issue separate titles for each of the previous 42 lots. The Registrar General replied stating that before he could meet the request it was necessary for the appellant to obtain the approval of the local Council to the subdivision. Immediately upon receiving this information the appellant commenced proceedings in this Court. Those proceedings were heard by Cohen J who, after considering a number of different submissions, concluded that the appellant failed to establish its entitlement to have a 1992 subdivision plan containing the original 42 lots registered without the need for Council consent to the subdivision.
The appeal from that decision turns on the construction of <case> of the
Local Government Act 1919 ("the Act") and in particular sub-clause (b) of the definition of the phrase "plan of subdivision".
 "RESTRICTION ON DISPOSAL OF LAND IN A CURRENT PLAN
AA(1) In this section - 'current plan', in relation to any land, means - a plan of subdivision registered or recorded in the office of the Registrar-General (whether before or after the commencement of the [Local Government (Amendment) Act, 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/lga1970262/)) but does not include so muand of that plan as relates to land included in a plan of subdivision registered or recorded in that office after the plan of subdivision first-mentioned in this paragraph was so registered or recorded; or 'plan of subdivision' means - a plan registered in the office of the Registrar-General under paragraph (e) of subsection one or, or paragraph (c) of subsection two of section three hundred and twenty-seven of this Act; a plan registered or recorded in the office of the
RegistrarGeneral showing land that is a lot or portion in a lawful division of land, whenever made, not being land that is a lot in a plan of subdivision (as defined in paragraph , (c), (d), (e), (f) or (g) of this definition) so registered or recorded; a strata plan registered under the Strata Titles Act, ;
a map or plan of land comprised in an application made under Part IV of the [Real Property Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/); where a folio of the register has been created for any land following the correction of any error or misdescription of the boundaries of the land, any plan showing land with boundaries so corrected; a plan registered in the office of the Registrar-General in accordance with subsection (5) of section 314B of this
Act; and a plan registered or recorded in the office of the
RegistrarGeneral showing land that has been resumed, appropriated or purchased by a body authorised by any Act to resume or appropriate land."
The question which arises is whether the 1972 plan (DP553744), which contained only one lot, was a plan of subdivision under the above section. If so, it was accepted that the appellant was not entitled to the declaration which it had sought in the court below.
Although the 1972 plan would not normally be understood, as a matter of
English, as a plan of subdivision that is of no consequence in this case. The section provides its own definition of 'plan of subdivision' and the Court is concerned only to determine whether the 1972 plan was 'a plan of subdivision' within the meaning of that phrase in s327AA(1)(a). In order to resolve that question it is necessary to determine whether it falls within any of the separate paragraphs of the definition of a plan of subdivision. It is clear to me that some plans which contain only one allotment will, or may, fall within the definition. For instance, paragraph (d) concerns a plan comprised in an application made under [Pt 4](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/index.html#p4) of the [Real Property Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/) (a primary application) and this plan could well concern only one lot of land. A similar observation may be made in relation to the plan referred to in para (g). It follows that it is no answer to his Honour's decision to say that the 1972 plan only contained one lot. What is in issue is whether the 1972 plan is 'a plan ... showing land that is a lot or portion in a lawful division of land, whenever made...".
The plan does, as it seemed to me, show a lot or portion which was included within the lawful division of land made in 1883. Paragraph (b) does not require that the plan show land that is a lot or portion in a subdivision (as that expression is normally understood) which is then being effected. It is enough that the plan shows a lot of a subdivision which had been previously made for the plan to fall within the sub-paragraph. The words 'whenever made' make that clear. Cohen J was troubled by the use of the word 'a' before 'lot' or 'portion'. He was of opinion that in order that paragraph (b) have any practical meaning it must be read as saying "a lot or lots" or "a portion or portions". I agree with what his Honour has said but in the light of [s 8(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/s8.html) of the [Interpretation Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/), which indicates that a word or expression in the singular form includes a reference to the word or expression in the plural form,
I see no difficulty in reaching a conclusion that the section should be read in the way his Honour indicated. Once that is appreciated it will be seen that the 1972 plan does show lots in a lawful division of land made previously and falls within the four comers of paragraph (b).
This approach conforms with the Minister's explanation for the need to introduce the section which is quoted in full in the judgment of Cole JA, a draft of which I have read. The Minister said that "in effect", a current plan will be the latest plan registered in the Registrar-General's office. For these reasons I am unable to agree with the fundamental proposition of the appellant that the 1972 plan was not a subdivision because it did not divide the land the subject of the plan. As the 1972 plan falls within paragraph (b) of the definition earlier plans of subdivision of the land do not constitute a current plan in relation to that land within the meaning of <case>(a). In my opinion the appeal should be dismissed with costs.
JUDGE2
SHELLER JA I agree with Clarke JA.
JUDGE3
COLE JA By this appeal, Baiada Pty Limited (Baiada) seeks to have overruled the decision of Cohen J delivered March 1994 in which his Honour held, in effect, that the appellant was not entitled to have issued to it separate certificates of title for 42 allotments created by two plans of subdivision contained in DP1452 and DP1664 registered in 1883 and 1886 respectively.
Deposited Plan 1452 relevantly divided certain land into 26 lots including lots 1,2 and 3 in Section B. Deposited Plan 1664 further subdivided lots 1 and in DP1452 into 40 allotments. Subsequently, in 1894, lot 3 in DP1452 was subdivided into 2 allotments. Thus there were 42 allotments created from resubdivision of lots 1,2 and 3 DP1452. Subsequent to registration of those plans separate certificates of title in respect of each of the 42 lots were issued. However, in 1972, the predecessor in title to the appellant lodged a plan which, subject to minor road frontage discrepancies in consequence of anticipated main road resumptions, consolidated the 42 allotments into Lot 1 in DP553744. The 42 certificates of title for the previously subdivided lots were cancelled and a new certificate of title volume 11900, folio 250 issued on 16 August 1972 for lot 1. Cohen J held that that consolidation extinguished the previous subdivisions which had created the 42 lots.
I agree. That finding removes the substratum of the appellant's application to compel issue of 42 certificates of title upon the basis that there exists now a subdivision of 42 allotments.
As I agree entirely with Cohen J's recital of the facts, the arguments addressed, and his Honour's findings set forth in pages 1 to 16 of his
Honour's judgment, I respectfully adopt the statements, findings and reasons up to and including his Honour's finding in the following terms: "When the certificate of title issued for the new consolidated land, contained in one lot, in my opinion it could no longer be said that there were extant subdivisions which contained 42 lots.
The land had been changed from having a number of lots in five certificates of title to being one lot in one certificate. It did not leave it open for the registered proprietor or its successor in title to say that there was a consolidation of all of the land in one parcel but leave in reserve for some future occasion a subdivision which could be relied upon when it was though appropriate. In my view the effect of the consolidation had been to merge all the previous subdivisional lots which made up the new parcel so that they no longer could be said to be existing subdivisions.
This would dispose of the plaintiffs application."((1) Appeal
Book, page 174-175.)
The appellant sought to render nugatory Cohen Ts finding by the following argument:
The subdivisions creating the 42 allotments from lots 1,2 and in DP 1452 were lawful subdivisions at the time the subdivisions occurred.
After the introduction of the Local Government Act 1919, in consequence of s.323, land could not thereafter be subdivided except in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
After 1920, persons wishing to sell land were permitted to do so by reference to either lots in new subdivisions created in accordance with the provisions of the Local Government Act including the requirement for Council consent, or by reference to pre-existing subdivisions created prior to the Act. This led to obviously inconvenient results because allotments created prior to the 1919 Act and which thereafter might have been regarded as inadequate, could still be sold.
In consequence, in 1970, there was introduced s.327AA. In substance that permitted alienation of land only by reference to what was termed the "current plan". The reason for the introduction of the section was explained by Powell J in
Starr and Anor versus Barbaro and QrS((2) New South Wales Conveyancing
Cases 1986-1987, case number -315, page 56913 at 56921.) where his Honour quoted the Minister's second reading speech introducing the amendment. The
Minister said: "Land which is shown as a lot on any plan of subdivision registered in the office of the Registrar General may, generally speaking, be transferred by reference to that lot and plan. A particular parcel of land may have been subdivided two or three times or more and each plan of subdivision registered. The different lots in that parcel may be transferred by reference to any of those plans. It will be appreciated that most undesirable features can flow from this fact. Before building land was often subdivided into lots with a frontage of 25 feet. if the plan has been registered, there is nothing to stop substandard lots such as these being transferred by referring to that plan ...
The second new section defines a current plan. In effect, a current plan will be the latest plan registered in the
Registrar General's office. The section then forbids a
transfer of land otherwise than by reference to lots in a current plan. This will mean that it will not be possible to transfer land by reference to lots in an old plan."
Mr Ireland QC on behalf of the appellant submitted that the 1972 plan was not a current plan within the meaning of the section. The consequence was that the subdivision of lots and 2 in
DP1644 effected in 1886, and the subdivision of lot 3 effected by memorandum of transfer in 1894, thus creating the subject lots, were the "current plans".
Subdivision approval was thus not required and there was no need to seek council's consent.
In those circumstances the Registrar General should be obliged to issue 42 separate certificates of title.
The argument is thus a narrow one. Is the 1972 plan a "current plan" within the meaning of s.327AA? Section 327AA(2) prohibits the sale, conveyance transfer, partition or lease for more than five years of land unless it is included in a current plan.
Section 327AA relevantly provides: "RESTRICTION ON DISPOSAL OF LAND IN A CURRENT PLAN
AA(1) In this section- "current plan", in relation to any land, means - a plan of subdivision registered or recorded in the office of the Registrar- General (whether before or after the commencement of the [Local Government (Amendment) Act, 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/lga1970262/)) but does not include so much of that plan as relates to land included in a plan of subdivision registered or recorded in that office after the plan of subdivision firstmentioned in this paragraph was so registered or recorded; or "plan of subdivision" means- a plan registered in the office of the Registrar-General under paragraph (e) of subsection one, or paragraph (c) of subsection two of section three hundred and twenty-seven of this Act; a plan registered or recorded in the office of the
Registrar-General showing land that is a lot or portion in a lawful division of land, whenever made, not being land that is a lot in a plan of subdivision (as defined in paragraph , (c), (d), (e), (f) or (g) of this definition) so registered or recorded; a strata plan registered under the Strata Titles Act, 1973; a map or plan of land comprised in an application made under Part IV of the Real Property Art 1900; where a folio of the register has been created for any land following the correction of any error or misdescription of the boundaries of the land, any plan showing lane with boundaries so corrected; a plan registered in the office of the Registrar-General in accordance with subsection five of section 314B of this
Act; and a plan registered or recorded in he office of the
Registrar-General showing land that has been resumed, appropriated or purchased by a body authorised by any Act to resume or appropriate land.' .
The appellant argued that the 1972 plan which designated, save for minor road resumptions, the whole of the land previously in lots ,2 and 3 in
DP1452, being also the whole of the land in DP1664 together with the lots created by the memorandum of transfer in 1894 as lot 1 in DP553744, was not a plan of subdivision. Thus, even though it was registered it was not the "current plan" as defined in s.327AA(1)(a). If it was to be a "plan of subdivision" it could only fall within subparagraph (b) of the definition thereof. It did not fall within that subparagraph, so it was argued, because, whilst it was both a registered plan and a plan recorded in the office of the
Registrar General, and whilst it showed land, that land, being lot 1, was not shown in any plan as "a lot or portion in a lawful division of land whenever made". It was said there must be a complete concurrence between the lot shown (lot 1) and an allotment of the same dimensions in some prior lawful division of land. Concurrence between lot 1 and lots 1,2 and 3 in DP1452 was not sufficient, nor was concurrence in dimensions with the 40 lots in DP1664 and the subdivision of lot 3 created in 1894 by memorandum of transfer.
In my opinion the submission fails. Ile definition of "plan of subdivision" in section 327AA is an artificial definition for the purposes of the section. The plan referred to in subparagraph (f) of the definition is, in truth, a plan of consolidation of two pre-existing lots, not a plan of subdivision at all. The provisions of s.327AA, including the definition of "plan of subdivision", is to be approached, if there be ambiguity in the construction of the definition, having in mind the purpose indicated by the
Minister in introducing the section. The purpose was to prevent owners of land selling portions of land by reference to earlier subdivisions when there was subsequently registered a later plan affecting land in the prior plan of subdivision. The intent was, no doubt, to ensure that modem concepts of appropriate allotments as determined by councils and other planning authorities should regulate the alienation of parcels of land.
I doubt if it is necessary to have regard to concepts of purposive construction of statutes in determining whether the 1972 plan was a "plan of subdivision" within paragraph (b) of the definition in s.327AA. The 1972 plan shows "a lot", being lot 1. That lot was previously lots 1,2 and 3 in DP1452 which was a lawful division of that land from its neighbouring land. Shortly put, the land shown in lot 1 had previously been lawfully divided from its neighbouring land. The fact that it was previously three lots, or 42 lots, is in my view immaterial. Lot 1 defined boundaries which were the boundaries which lawfully divided it from adjacent land. It was thus a "plan of subdivision" within the definition and was registered in 1972. It follows that it, and not DP1452, DP1664 or the subdivision of lot 3, DP1452 in 1894, is the "current plain "within the meaning of s.327AA. It follows that, in consequence of s.327AA(2), no portion of lot 1 may be alienated without registration, after council's approval has been obtained, of a further plan of subdivision.
It also follows that there is no basis upon which the Registrar General should be compelled to issue certificates of title in respect of the 42 allotments contained in the 19th century subdivisions.
The appeal should be dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/111.html  
