

Cotton Trading Corporation Pty Ltd versus Pengilley and Anor Matter No 10865/98 [1998] NSWSC 498 (7 August 1998) 
Last Updated: 10 November 1998 
COTTON TRADING CORPORATION PTY LTD versus PENGILLEY & ANOR /98 August 1998 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: On 8 January 1988, Mr Pengilley gave a Mortgage over the land known as 12 Oxley Street, Warren (the land) to National Australia Savings Bank Limited (the Bank). On 8 February 1991, he gave a further Mortgage over that land to the Bank. The Mortgages were registered under the provisions of the [Real Property Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/), 1900. In 1995, he executed a Guarantee which was secured by the Mortgages. The Guarantee secured moneys owed by Logima Pty Limited. 
By at least 1996, he was in default (including under the Guarantee). He was made bankrupt on 30 October 1996 and the Official Trustee in Bankruptcy was appointed as the Official Trustee.

On 24 December 1996 the Bank assigned the securities to the plaintiff. This was effected by Deed.

These proceedings were commenced by Statement of Claim filed on 6 April 1998.
Mr Pengilley was named as the first defendant and the Official Trustee in
Bankruptcy was named as the second defendant. The plaintiff claimed possession of the land. The claim was founded on default under the Mortgages.

The process was served on 16 April 1998. The time for the filing of a Notice of Appearance expired on 30 April 1998. Mr Pengilley subsequently filed an
Appearance on 12 May 1998. By that time, the plaintiff had moved for default judgment. The time for the filing of a Defence expired on 14 May 1998. Default judgment was entered on 22 May 1998. A Defence was filed in the registry on 25
May 1998.

On 25 May 1998, Mr Pengilley filed a Notice of Motion seeking, inter alia, the setting aside of the default judgment. This application was heard on 22 July .

Mr Pengilley has relied on a number of affidavits (including one sworn by himself on 22 July 1998). This document was filed in Court on the day of the hearing. The plaintiff has relied on an affidavit sworn by Mr Desgrand. It was also filed in Court on the day of the hearing. There was no cross-examination.

The late filing of affidavits, as usual, produced an unsatisfactory situation.
New arguments were agitated upon short notice and Counsel were not in a position to give the assistance which would have been otherwise given.

The Court has a discretionary power to set aside a default judgment. The power is exercised having regard to the relevant circumstances of the particular case and so that justice is best served between the parties. The applicant bears the onus of satisfying the Court of an entitlement to relief.

Apart from questions relating to locus standi, the discretionary consideration in issue between the parties was whether or not Mr Pengilley had a bona fide defence on the merits. It is common ground that there has been default under the Mortgages.

Mr Pengilley sought to agitate a number of matters. These were largely of technical nature. It was said that the default judgment was irregularly entered. It was said that the proceedings are void because they amounted to enforcement action taken otherwise than in compliance with the Farm Debt
Mediation Act, 1994 (the Act).

In addition to these matters, there were the questions of locus standi. Mr
Pengilley challenges the standing of the plaintiff to bring these proceedings on two bases. Firstly, it was said that notice of the assignment was not given to him in accordance with the provisions of section 12 of the Conveyancing
Act, 1919. Secondly, it was said that the proceedings were brought without leave (such leave being required by the provisions of section 58 of the
Bankruptcy Act, 1966). Also, the plaintiff challenges the standing of Mr
Pengilley to bring this application on the ground that he is a bankrupt.

I shall first deal with the contention that the judgment was irregularly entered. This is founded on the argument that Mr Pengilley ceased to be in default upon filing his Appearance out of time. In my view, there is no substance in the argument. I reject the contention that the default judgment was irregularly entered.

At this stage, it is convenient to refer to certain of the material deposed to in Mr Pengilley's affidavit. It contains the following:- "2. In about 1994 I borrowed the sum of $500,000 from National Australia Bank for the purpose of purchasing land upon which to conduct a cotton farm to be conducted by me at "Ingelara" Warren in the state of New South Wales. The said borrowings were secured over the land being lots numbered 7, 9, 14, 15, 16, , 18, 19 and 20 in deposited plan 755316 together with the land the subject of these proceedings. The land comprised in lots numbered 7, 9, 14, 15, 16, , 18, 19 and 20 in deposited plan 755316 was the land "Ingelara" at Warren.
I continued to conduct the said cotton farm at "Ingelara" Warren until
October, 1996.
Since that time I have continued to conduct business as a farm consultant and cropping.
I have not received any notice in writing from the plaintiff informing me of the plaintiff's intention to commence these proceedings and advising me of the availability of mediation under the Farm Debt Mediation Act in respect of the debt alleged to have been assigned to the plaintiff by the National
Australia Bank Limited.
I did not receive on 24th December, 1996 or at any other time notice from the National Australia Bank Limited or from any other person of an assignment of the debt the subject of these proceedings.
I am not aware of any application by the plaintiff having been made to the
Federal Court for leave or of leave having been granted by the Federal Court for the plaintiff to commence these proceedings or for the plaintiff to file default judgment." 
It is common ground that no notice has been given pursuant to section 8 of the
Act. The land itself is not a farm within the meaning of the Act. The relevant question is whether the Act applies in respect of the plaintiff. It will only apply if the plaintiff is a creditor under a farm debt within the meaning of the Act. For the purposes of considering this question, it is necessary to look to the definitions of "creditor", "farm", "farm debt", "farm mortgage" and "farmer". These definitions are to be found in section 4 of the
Act.

After giving consideration to both the evidence and the statutory provisions,
I am of the view that the Act has no application in this case (inter alia, the requirements of a farm mortgage and of a farm debt have not been satisfied).

For completeness, I should add that Mr Pengilley remains a bankrupt. It would be an exercise in absurdity (apart from the needless expense that may be incurred) in committing the parties to a mediation process. I observe that the
Act is expressed not to apply in the situations mentioned in section 5(2)(a) and (b).

I now turn to the argument founded on section 58(3) of the Bankruptcy Act,
Subsection (3) is in the following terms:- 
Except as provided by this Act, after a debtor has become a bankrupt, it is not competent for a creditor: to enforce any remedy against the person or the property of the bankrupt in respect of a provable debt; or except with the leave of the Court and on such terms as the Court thinks fit, to commence any legal proceeding in respect of a provable debt or take any fresh step in such a proceeding.

Mr Pengilley contends that leave is required under (b) thereof.

The argument depends on these proceedings being characterised as a "legal proceeding in respect of a provable debt". I was not referred to any authority. "Provable debt" is defined in section 5 of the Bankruptcy Act, .

I am not satisfied that I should accept this submission. In my view, these are proceedings in which a claim for possession of land is made and which is founded upon default under a Mortgage. It is not a legal proceeding in respect of a provable debt.

I now turn to the contention founded on section 12 of the Conveyancing Act,
Although it had been thrown up as an issue by traverse to the Statement of Claim, the documents that had been filed on Mr Pengilley's behalf did not identify it as an issue to be argued.

The satisfaction of the requirements of this provision enables, inter alia, the assignment of any debt or other legal chose in action to have been deemed effectual in law. The section requires the giving of express notice in writing to the debtor, trustee, or other person from whom the assignor would have been entitled to receive or claim such debt or chose in action.

The evidence from Mr Pengilley merely goes to the question of whether or not he was given notice of the assignment. He was made a bankrupt prior to the assignment. As this was one of the matters unexpectedly argued by his Counsel at the last minute, I did not have the benefit of full argument. Again, I was not referred to any authority. However, the better view seemed to be that compliance with the section may require the giving of the express notice in this case to the Official Trustee in Bankruptcy. There is no evidence to suggest that he did not get notice. Indeed, it could be expected that he had received notice in writing of the assignment. I should add that Counsel did not explore the question of whether it was necessary, in the circumstances of this case, to satisfy the requirements of section 12. The Deed is not in evidence. However, it could be expected that it assigned, inter alia, the assignor's interest in the Mortgages. As I apprehend the position to be, the plaintiff would be looking to this interest as providing the locus standi to bring these proceedings. I am not satisfied that there is any merit in this contention made on behalf of Mr Pengilley.

The remaining question is that of the locus standi of Mr Pengilley to bring this application. In the light of what has already been determined, it is unnecessary to resolve this question. Mr Pengilley relies on what was said in
Cummings versus Claremont Petroleum 185 CLR 124. There was dispute between the parties as to the application of that case in the present circumstances. There are cases which establish the proposition that a bankrupt has no right to bring or prosecute proceedings to protect, enhance or add to property of which he has been divested on bankruptcy. Whatever may be the correct view of what was decided in Cummings, it may be that Mr Pengilley has some standing as an occupier independently of the Mortgage.

In my view, Mr Pengilley has failed to discharge the onus of showing an entitlement to relief. It must be borne in mind that the Court is concerned to see whether or not the applicant has a bona fide defence on the merits. The "bona fide" aspect of this consideration is of importance. After all, the purpose of the discretionary power is to ensure that justice is best served between the parties. The matters advanced on his behalf were, at best, of a technical nature. There was no issue as to default and, save as to those matters, there was no issue as to entitlement to possession. In the circumstances of this case, I am not satisfied that he has a bona fide defence on the merits. It seems to me, that justice is best served by dismissing his application.

The Notice of Motion is dismissed. Mr Pengilley is to pay the costs of the application.
 * * * 
