

Apram versus Franklins Limited Matter No 11499/97 [1998] NSWSC 193 (13 February )

Last Updated: 10 June 1998 
APRAM versus FRANKLINS LIMITED /97 February 1998 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: On 2 April 1996, Beveridge LCM delivered judgment on a claim brought by Masis Apram (the plaintiff) against Franklins Limited (the defendant). The claim was for damages arising out of personal injury. It appears to have been founded on alleged breach of implied conditions (section 71 of the Trade Practices Act, 1974 (the Act)). 
It is said that the plaintiff purchased a fig from the defendant. It is further said that the plaintiff suffered personal injury when he bit into the fig and his teeth came into contact with pieces of stone contained in the fig.
It was further said that the fig was not of merchantable quality and that it was not reasonably fit for oral consumption.

The Learned Magistrate found in favour of the defendant. On 8 May 1997, he signed a Stated Case. These proceedings were commenced by Summons filed on 16
May 1997. The plaintiff seeks to disturb the decision reached by the Learned
Magistrate.

Apart from the Stated Case, the Court has had certain other material placed before it. There is an affidavit sworn by Stephen Arthur Teen (the solicitor for the plaintiff) on 13 August 1997. It deals with, inter alia, the pleadings. There is Exhibit 1 (a copy judgment of the Learned Magistrate).
There is Exhibit 2 (a copy transcript of the proceedings before the Learned
Magistrate).

At the outset, it may be helpful to make some brief comment concerning the remedy pursued by the plaintiff. The authorities make it clear that the remedy of case stated provides a limited avenue of appeal. The Court has jurisdiction to determine only questions of law and only such questions of law as are submitted to it (Allen versus Kerr & Anor [(1995) Aust Torts Reports -354] and The Australian Gas Light Company versus The Valuer-
General <case>; [(1940) 40 SR 126).]
The matter of what is a question of law (as opposed to a question of fact) was considered, inter alia, in Allen and Azzopardi versus Tasman UEB Industries Ltd [(1985) 4 NSWLR 139] at 155-156. The facts stated are to be taken as the ultimate facts for whatever purpose the case is stated (Press versus Mathers <case>; [(1927) VLR 326] at p 330).

At this stage, I should briefly refer to the contents of the Stated Case.
Paragraph 1 sets out the Determination. Paragraph 2 sets out the Facts found by the Learned Magistrate. Paragraph 3 sets out the Grounds of Determination.
Paragraph 4 sets out the Appellant's Contentions.

The Grounds of Determination are as follows:- "3.1 I formed the strong opinion that the plaintiff was an untruthful witness whose evidence could not be accepted without reliable corroboration.
 .2 I did not accept that the plaintiff was telling the truth about chewing or what happened when he chewed the fig in question.
 .3 I accepted the evidence of Dr Macgee.
 .4 I was not satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the plaintiff suffered the injuries of which he complained as a result of chewing on a hidden stone in the fig which he purchased from the defendant." 
During the making of submissions, the Learned Magistrate made a decision which he purported to found on the rule of practice known as the rule in Browne v
Dunn. It may be that this decision was erroneous. However, for present purposes, it is not necessary for the Court to express any view on that matter. The decision has relevance to what happened thereafter in the proceedings.

The plaintiff advances a number of contentions. It suffices to reproduce just one of those contentions. It is the contention to be found in 4.2. It is in the following terms:- "4.2 That my finding that I was not satisfied that the plaintiff had sustained injuries as a result of having bitten into the fig was the product of an unfair trial in that the defendant's counsel addressed me to the effect that I should disbelieve the plaintiff as to the manner in which the plaintiff sustained injuries and, although I disallowed that submission when it was objected to by the plaintiff's solicitor as being in breach of the rule in
Browne versus Dunn, I in fact disbelieved the plaintiff as to the manner in which the plaintiff sustained injuries when it had not been put to the plaintiff that he had sustained injuries other than in the manner in which he alleged." 
The language of this particular contention raised some comment. However, it seems to me that closer examination reveals that it was intended to state no more than the contention which was sought to be advanced on behalf of the plaintiff. There is dispute which attends the question of the precise ambit of the decision purportedly made pursuant to the rule. The decision is not recorded in the transcript. It is not formulated in the Stated Case. The judgment itself provides some assistance but does not record the precise terms of the decision that was actually made.

The judgment contains the following passages:- "In those circumstances I'm of the opinion that the plaintiff is certainly not a witness of truth and frankly I don't believe what he tells me except where it's reliably corroborated by other evidence. That brings me back to the central issue then, certainly the plaintiff has now a subluxation on one side of his jaw. He has a tooth that's been broken but has been repaired. Now the evidence is that a subluxation of the jaw can occur naturally. That is without any insult or injury. What can occur because of some incidents such as biting on something hard, it maybe asymptomatic for years as Dr McGee says some of his patients say oh yes I've always had a funny bite, or things of that kind, may become symptomatic. But the question is has the plaintiff satisfied me that he dislocated his jaw and broke his teeth by chewing on the stone and the fig. Now part of the difficulty in answering this is that he was never hounded in cross-examination on the basis that he never did chew on a fig which had the stone in it. It was put to him that it might have been a different fig from the fridge. There were questions put to him indicative of, or would seem to be trying to lay the basis for a submission that a sort of chewing affect would have been such as to - while it was being held by the stem, and that was the plaintiff's evidence, would have been such as perhaps to break the front teeth but not the molar, and indeed I think that is a fair submission, but not unequivocally so. It's not unequivocally established though.

And whilst the plaintiff was very capably cross-examined about what he said were his symptoms and the agonies he suffered and comparing them with reports and so on, I don't think it was ever said to him, well you're simply lying when you say you chewed on the stone in the fig. However the position seems to me to be this that whilst that may mean that the defendant can't make a submission along those very lines, it remains a matter for the Tribunal of fact to decide whether it's satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the defendant's pains and troubles, if I can put it that way, and his injuries, did result from chewing on the fig with the stone in it, and I am simply not satisfied that they were. There could have been other causes. It's I say might be a subluxation that's occurred naturally. The defendant might have chewed on something else, even a stone from the dates he bought at the same time. I mean the naturally occurring organic stone. There could be many other explanations.
It's not necessary for one of them to be a prominent one, or the defendant might have done it by chewing on a stone that was in the figs, when I look at the possibilities and when I assess the credibility of what the plaintiff's told me about everything else, I'm certainly not satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the plaintiff did suffer the damage ... injury from chewing on a hidden stone in the fig. That being so, it seems to me that whilst the other things pleaded are all plain enough from the evidence, that it can't be said that the plaintiff suffered damage from a failure of the goods, namely the figs to be fit for the purpose or to be of merchantable quality, because I don't accept that the goods were not of merchantable quality and that they did have the stone inside them. It follows therefore that there should be a verdict for the defendant." 
The passages give some guidance as to the nature of the submission that was the subject of the decision made by the Learned Magistrate. The passages accord with what was said in the Stated Case (viz. that in reaching his determination, the Learned Magistrate did not accept the plaintiff's evidence and in forming that view he took into account his assessment of the plaintiff's credibility).

On behalf of the plaintiff, it is said that what was done by the Learned
Magistrate deprived the plaintiff of a fair trial. Whilst there is issue between the parties as to what was actually done by the Learned Magistrate, there was no issue that the plaintiff's complaints, if made out, could give rise to an error of law.

Although there may be some doubt as to the precise ambit of the decision made by the Learned Magistrate, it is clear that there has been a miscarriage of justice and that the matter has to be remitted back to the Local Court. I have reached that decision with the greatest reluctance. Unfortunately, the Learned
Magistrate took a course which may be seen as a determination of the plaintiff's claim on a basis which he had not allowed the defendant to put before the Court. The decision that he had made was material to, inter alia, the issues which remained before him for determination and the manner in which the case was conducted thereafter. It cannot be said that the plaintiff was given the opportunity to fully litigate the issue of whether or not he sustained his injuries as alleged. Justice requires that he have that opportunity.

Counsel for the plaintiff has directed the Court's attention to other errors made by the Learned Magistrate. In my view, it is unnecessary to dwell on these matters. I do not regard them as being material for present purposes.

It seems to me that the Learned Magistrate was confronted with a task that was not an easy one. The plaintiff's originating process has its pleading deficiencies. There seemed to be some present uncertainty as to the precise case that was being alleged by the plaintiff. Whilst the pleading is certainly not couched in the terms of section 82 of the Act, it could be seen as the propounding of a claim founded on that section. The section confers an action for damages where there is the suffering of loss or damage "by conduct of another person that was done in contravention of a provision of Part IV or V".

As I have already said, it is with the greatest reluctance that I proceed to disturb the decision of the Learned Magistrate. The claim is a very modest one. There is evidence which suggests that the alleged injuries have been grossly exaggerated. There has already been an arbitration and a rehearing. It would seem to be inevitable that further time will be spent in Court by the parties. I gained the impression that the endeavour of the Court to encourage the parties to reach a compromise was a fruitless exercise.

The matter is remitted to the Local Court for determination according to law.
The defendant is to pay the costs of the Summons. The exhibits may be returned.
 * * * 
