

Regina versus Karagiannis Matter No Cca 60454/97 [1998] NSWSC 225 (27 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 19 June 1998 
REGINA versus MARIO KARAGIANNIS /97 May 1998 
Studdert J, Carruthers AJ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
STUDDERT J: The applicant, Mario Karagiannis, pleaded guilty before his Honour Judge O'Reilly QC in the Liverpool District Court on an indictment charging him with a single count of break enter and steal. The judge was also asked to take into account two further offences of malicious damage on a schedule under the Criminal Procedure Act. 
The learned sentencing judge imposed a total sentence of two years penal servitude but fixed a minimum term of eighteen months to commence on the date upon which sentence was imposed, namely 3 September 1997. I note that as at that date the applicant was serving a sentence for stealing offences, which sentence was imposed in the Bankstown Local Court on 22 May 1997 and was not to expire until 21 November 1997.

The offence of break enter and steal is one which attracts a maximum penalty under <case> of the Crimes Act of penal servitude for fourteen years.

The applicant seeks leave to appeal against the sentence imposed.

The facts were that at about 1.30 am on 11 November 1997 police were informed that a service station at Georges Hall had been broken into and upon attending the service station police confirmed that the premises had been broken into, that the front door had been forced and that property had been taken.

Some nineteen minutes after the police had been advised of the commission of the offence a vehicle was stopped near the Carramar railway station. There were four occupants, one of whom was the applicant. The vehicle was searched and fifty-nine cartons of cigarettes and forty-three other packets of cigarettes were found in the boot. In addition $184 in cash was found in a bank bag.

The four young men were arrested and taken to the police station at Bass Hill.
The applicant was one of those four men and he denied any knowledge of the cigarettes, asserting his innocence of any wrongdoing when interviewed.
Indeed, it was not until very shortly before he was arraigned in the District
Court in the following year that the applicant first indicated he proposed to plead guilty.

The applicant has a fairly extensive criminal record with a number of offences of break enter and steal and other offences of dishonesty. Following a successful appeal to the District Court against a sentence imposed in the
Local Court for break enter and steal, he was sentenced in the District Court at Liverpool to a minimum term of nine months which expired on 31 October
He was serving an additional term of one year three months on that sentence when he committed the subject offence. Indeed, this offence was committed within two weeks of his release from prison. The offence was also committed whilst he was on a recognizance to be of good behaviour in respect of a receiving charge, that recognizance having been entered into in the
Bankstown Local Court on 1 February 1996.

The scheduled offences were committed whilst the applicant was on bail for the break enter and steal charge for which he was sentenced by Judge O'Reilly.

Those matters of history were not favourable to the applicant. Indeed, they were distinctly unfavourable.

His Honour took into account, in the applicant's favour, that the applicant pleaded guilty, albeit belatedly. Nevertheless the judge expressly indicated the applicant was to be given credit for the saving of expense and court time associated with the plea. His Honour also took into account that the property taken had been recovered.

Little appears to have been proffered in the applicant's favour in the hearing on sentence. The applicant was born on 22 December 1972, so that he was twenty-four years of age when he committed the break enter and steal offence.
He had a bad criminal record and there were the aggravating features of offending whilst on a recognizance and whilst on parole and later whilst on bail for the scheduled matters.

The applicant was not legally represented on this present application but in the notice of appeal the grounds of appeal were identified in this way: that the sentence was manifestly unjust; that the sentence was a two year sentence cumulative on a six month sentence already being served.

In my opinion there is no substance whatsoever in either of those grounds.
Having regard to the nature of the offence, a total sentence of two years with a minimum term of eighteen months must be regarded as well within the range of an appropriate sentencing discretion.

Nor is it correct that the sentence was to be cumulative upon a six month sentence which the applicant was already serving. On the contrary, Judge
O'Reilly fixed the sentence to commence on the date on which sentence was passed, that is, 3 September 1997. At that date the applicant had only served a little over three months of the sentence imposed in the Bankstown Local
Court in the previous May so that, in effect, some ten weeks of the sentence imposed in the District Court was to be served concurrently with the Local
Court sentence.

The applicant has today submitted further written submissions, putting to this
Court other matters that he asks to be taken into account on his present application.

The first of these concerns complaints of disparity between his sentence and that of other co-offenders. Two of the co-offenders were dealt with in the
Local Court. One of these, Daniel Armanious, was only eighteen years old at the time of the offence and he had never received a custodial sentence before.
His subjective features differed significantly from those of the applicant and it is to be noted that he entered a plea of guilty very much earlier than did the applicant. So far as the offender, Poblet, was concerned, once again he was dealt with at Local Court level.

His Honour specifically addressed the question of parity in relation to the co-offenders and, having done so, remarked that, "the only one that is worthy of scrutiny from the parity viewpoint if Mr Spain." He then went on to distinguish Spain's case. Spain was convicted and sentenced for two break and enter offences. His criminal record was more substantial but the sentence imposed for Spain was a total sentence of three years penal servitude with a minimum term of two years three months. When it is borne in mind that the offender Spain pleaded guilty in the Local Court and was committed for sentence pursuant to <case> of the [Justices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ja119/), it seems to me that the applicant can have no justifiable sense of grievance comparing his sentence with that of the co-offender Spain.

Nor, to my mind, has any ground for a justifiable sense of grievance been established by reference to the other co-offenders who were dealt with in the
Local Court. In my opinion, therefore, there is no merit in the complaint of disparity in this case.

The other matter addressed by the applicant and which this Court is asked to consider is the question of his ill health. In a note sent to the Court the
Court was advised that it was to be asked to consider as a mitigating circumstance that the applicant was positive to hepatitis C. It is not a matter for complaint that the District Court did not bring that feature into account when sentencing the applicant because there was no evidence placed before the District Court concerning that complaint. There is no evidence that this Court can properly evaluate on the concept or issue of ill health. It is to be observed that generally ill health will be a factor which tends to mitigate punishment only when it appears that imprisonment will be a greater burden upon the offender by reason of that ill health or when there is a serious risk of imprisonment having a gravely adverse effect on the offender's health: see Smith [(1987) 27 ACR 315], in particular the judgment of King CJ at 317). There was no material before the sentencing judge relevant to those considerations addressed in Smith and nor is there any such evidence here.

In my opinion the applicant has failed to establish any error of approach on the part of the Judge O'Reilly and I would regard the sentence imposed as altogether appropriate. For those reasons I would refuse leave to appeal.

CARRUTHERS AJ: I agree. 
STUDDERT J: Leave to appeal is refused. * * * 
