

Regina versus Ralf Eckhard Mueller [1996] NSWSC 232 (26 June 1996) 
R versus RALF ECKHARD MUELLER /95 
WEDNESDAY 26 JUNE 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
PRIESTLEY JA, SULLY J, DUNFORD J 
REVISED 
JUDGMENT 
PRIESTLEY JA: I ask Sully J to give the court's judgment. 
SULLY: On 24 May 1995 Mr Ralf Eckhard Mueller, the present applicant, pleaded guilty before his Honour Judge Viney QC at Deniliquin District Court to a charge of receiving. He pleaded, as well, not guilty to a cognate charge of stealing, and the Crown accepted the plea of guilty in full satisfaction of the indictment that had been presented against the applicant.

The learned primary Judge heard submissions on sentence, and imposed upon the applicant a sentence of imprisonment for six months to commence on 24 May 1995 and to expire on 23 November 1995.

On 28 June 1995 the applicant sought, and was granted by a Judge of this
Court, bail pending the hearing of the present application. He has been at liberty on that bail until today; and in connection with that bail, and among other conditions, has been reporting daily to the police at Albury, where he now lives.

The relevant facts as found by the learned primary 
Judge are stated succinctly and as follows in his Honour's Remarks on
Sentence: "The facts of the matter are that around late September 1994 somebody broke into the laundry of a house in Poitiers Street, Deniliquin and stole 114 pieces of an heirloom type dinner set of crockery, valued say the facts at $10,000. On 3 October 1994 the prisoner and his defacto, a lady called Rabbis, sold some of the crockery to an antique dealer at Tocumwal. On 13 October they returned and sold more of the crockery. A total of $1000 was paid by the secondhand dealer for the crockery sold.

In the result, the prisoner was spoken to by the police as was his co-offender
Sandra Joan Rabbis, and ultimately he was charged. The story he gave was that his defacto had obtained the material. She told him she had bought it from a person named Dom in a hotel. Dom, according to the police facts has been identified as Dominic Peacock now living in Port Macquarie and formerly of
Tocumwal. He denied any involvement in the transaction. He said he was a drinker at the hotel. Anyway in the result the prisoner has pleaded guilty to receiving." 
It was, in my opinion, entirely open to his Honour to find the relevant facts in the way that his Honour did so find them. His Honour canvassed in his remarks on sentence everything else that seems to me to be relevant, both as to the objective facts of the offence, and as to those matters personal to the applicant and requiring to be taken into account.

Were the facts before this Court exactly the same as they were before the learned primary Judge, I would see no error in principle in the way in which his Honour approached the matter. The only thing that makes it possible, in my opinion, for this Court even to consider reviewing what his Honour did, is the fact that it is conceded for present purposes that the applicant not only suffers from what appears to be a fairly acute form of Hepatitis C, but that he was suffering from that disease at the time of the sentence, although that condition was then unknown both to him and to the sentencing Judge.

That difference between what was known to the learned primary Judge and what is now known to this Court provides, I would say, a slender, but nonetheless a sufficient, base in point of principle to empower this Court to look again at the question of the sentence imposed upon the applicant.

Of course, it does not follow that this Court will automatically review and reduce that sentence. It must first be shown to this Court that a different sentence is "warranted in law", as provided in the relevant section of the
Criminal Appeal Act.

The first matter to be taken into consideration in that regard is, I think, the relevant medical condition of the applicant. He has been receiving, apparently, methadone treatment, both for pain relief in connection with a foot injury, and in connection with a condition of cirrhosis of his liver, from which he is also currently suffering. Of that latter condition the specialist clinical nurse whose opinion is before the Court says this: "The latter has been causing Ralf a lot of pain. He has had to alter his lifestyle somewhat due to days when he is unable to have a pain-free day or even get out of bed. He has been receiving treatment for his liver condition which does not seem to be having much effect." 
The nurse advances the view that, "any term in gaol for Ralf would not be conducive to his health...".

It is true that the mere demonstration of these illnesses, severe as they undoubtedly are, does not, of itself, warrant a review and reduction of the sentence; but I think that those conditions are a factor, and in my view a factor of some substance, bearing upon the question now to be decided by this
Court.

I think that it is proper to take into account, also, the fact that the applicant has been on bail pending this application since 28 June last year.
It would seem that during the whole of that time he has fulfilled, punctually, the requirements of his bail conditions, and in particular has reported to the police as so required. He says, and there is no evidence to the contrary, that he has not offended while he has been at liberty on bail. These considerations also, I think, are of some importance for present purposes.

The applicant has an extremely bad record. It is not necessary to rehearse the details of it, but it is necessary, and sufficient, to note that it is a record that contains a number of entries for offences similar in kind to the offence which brings the applicant before this Court today.

The learned primary Judge observed, as in my respectful opinion he was entirely entitled to do, that all manner of penalties and opportunities by way of suspended sentence, and even the periodic imposition of gaol sentences themselves, had not, as of the time at which his Honour was dealing with the applicant, proved sufficient to cause him to reform and to abstain from committing criminal offences. I think that what has happened since then gives some reason for a somewhat more cautious optimism about the future prospects of rehabilitation of the applicant, and that, too, is, in my view, something to be given a proper weight for present purposes.

The applicant's position is, of course, quite clear. It is that he should not be required to serve any further period in custody, but should be permitted simply to walk free upon a recognizance or a suspended sentence or some provision of the kind.

I do not think that that would be a proper approach for this Court to take. I think that the nature of the offence which, although not the gravest offence known to the criminal law, is nonetheless a serious criminal offence, and the extremely bad record of the applicant, would not make it a dutiful exercise by this Court of its relevant powers and discretions simply to dispense altogether with a custodial sentence. I do think, however, that there is proper room for a reduction even in the lenient sentence imposed by the learned primary Judge. I myself would think that substantive justice had been done in this case if the sentence were reduced to a sentence of imprisonment for three months, credit being given for the 35 days spent thus far in prison by the applicant.

To that end, I would propose that the application for leave to appeal be granted; that the appeal be allowed and the sentence imposed in the Court below quashed; that in lieu thereof the applicant be sentenced to imprisonment for a fixed term of three months to commence today, 26 June 1996, and to expire on 20 August 1996 which, upon my calculation, is three months less the days of which I have earlier spoken.

I would wish to make some further comments as follows. The history of the present proceedings points up a problem which needs to be addressed seriously by this Court before unwholesome precedents are set in place. It ought not to be permitted to become the view of those who break the criminal law and are fortunate enough to receive, at first instance, lenient sentences, that all they need to do is to lodge an appeal to this Court, and persuade a Judge of this Court, sitting in an over-burdened daily bails list, to give what might be described as compassionate bail pending appeal; and then to use the fact of that bail as a lever for what will otherwise be an undeserved reduction in the sentence imposed by the primary sentencing tribunal.

Anybody who has regular experience with the bail lists in this Court will be well aware that from time to time, and not infrequently, such applications for appeal bail are made. As this Court itself has said on prior occasions, it is, generally speaking, much better that they be refused, and that proper steps be taken to expedite the hearing of the appeal or the application for leave to appeal, as the case might be.

Subject to those comments, I am of the opinion that orders in this case might properly be made in the terms I have suggested, and I propose orders accordingly.

PRIESTLEY JA: I agree with the orders proposed by Sully J and with his reasons for proposing those orders.

DUNFORD J: In my opinion, there was no error of any kind in the sentence imposed by Viney DCJ, either in his Honour's reasoning or in the ultimate result, particularly in view of the applicant's previous record which, on my calculations, included 12 previous convictions for burglary, 19 previous convictions for stealing or theft and two previous convictions of receiving or handling stolen goods. In my opinion, the sentence was well within a proper sentencing discretion. In fact, I regard it as being extremely lenient, and in ordinary circumstances such that this court should not interfere.

However, it has been conceded by the Crown that the applicant's illness, although pre-existing, was not known at the time of sentencing; and it is only on this basis that this court has power to intervene.

The applicant obtained bail because, if it had not been granted, he would have completed serving his sentence by the time of the hearing of his application for leave to appeal. The fact that he has been at liberty on bail and that the dismissal of his appeal would involve a return to prison is no reason for upholding the appeal, and this case should not be relied on in the future as authority to the contrary.

However, in this case the requirement to report to the police every day as a condition of bail has constituted a moderate limitation on his liberty in that it has restricted his freedom of movement away from the town in which he was required to report. Notwithstanding this and the applicant's ill health, I nevertheless see little reason for interfering in the sentence, but for the sake of unanimity I am prepared to agree with the orders proposed, and I do so.

PRIESTLEY JA: The orders of the court are as proposed by Sully J.
 * * * 
