

Lackey versus Southdown Press Pty Limited Matter No 20456/94 [1998] NSWSC 680 (20 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 13 January 1999 
LISA LACKEY versus SOUTHDOWN PRESS PTY LIMITED /94 March 1998 
Simpson J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
Defamation List 
JUDGMENT 
HER HONOUR: In this matter the plaintiff seeks damages for defamation arising out of the publication of the magazine entitled TV Week on or about the 12 March 1994. 
The present application is not directly concerned with the matters raised in the amended statement of claim other than the particularisation by the plaintiff of her claim for aggravated damages arising out of an earlier publication allegedly by the defendant which the plaintiff claims showed her or purported to show her naked to the waist for the purpose of making her appear hypocritical in certain complaints she had made about her employment as an actor on a television series.

Apparently during the course of discovery or otherwise an additional representation of the plaintiff was discovered in another magazine which, so far as one can tell, contains a number of photographs of her in some of which she was also naked to the waist.

The defendant seeks to interrogate the plaintiff by asking her to identify herself in that magazine and asking whether she was paid a fee for being the subject of the article and the photographs and if the answer to that is affirmative by disclosing the fee she was paid.

The plaintiff objects to answering that interrogatory, principally on the ground that it is irrelevant to the plea of aggravated damages and is designed to lay the foundation for cross-examination of the plaintiff when the matter comes to trial.

I think the objection on the ground of relevance should succeed. When the particulars of aggravated damages are examined it can be seen that the plaintiff is objecting to an apparently false representation of her for a particular purpose.

It will of course be open to the defendant to raise the question, if it is able to establish it, of her appearance and association with the second magazine but at the moment I am unable to see how whether or not she is paid for it makes any material difference to the allegations which are in issue.
Accordingly, I decline to direct the plaintiff to answer that interrogatory.

I note that the plaintiff agrees to provide copies of documents 1 to 23 in her supplementary list of documents to the defendant by 4pm today the 20 February and I note that the defendant does not expect that inspection of those documents will hold up the allocation of a hearing date.

I order the defendant to pay the costs of the argument between 2 and 2.30pm today about the administration of interrogatory 13 E. That order for costs does not extend to any other matters that were initially brought before the
Court today but for one reason or another did not proceed.
 * * * 
