

Nut Trading Company (Australia) P/L versus Kkl (Kangaroo Line) P/L [1997] NSWSC (11 April 1997) `NUT TRADING COMPANY (AUSTRALIA) P/L versus KKL (KANGAROO LINE) P/L ` ``5003/86 
THURSDAY 10 APRIL 1997 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application by motion to extend the time for appealing against a decision of Master McLaughlin given on 18 December 1996. 
The modern practice in this sort of application is to consider whether the strict application of the Rules as to time limits may occasion injustice. In that inquiry one looks at various factors including whether there is any prejudice to the respondent, whether there is any legitimate expectation that the matter would come to a complete halt and weight is also given to the history of litigation and the period for which an extension is required. One also considers why it was that the appeal was not filed in time.

In the present case the decision of the learned Master was given in the last week of term. As time does not run in vacation up until 20 January I think that the time for appeal expired on 18 February 1997. During February, the applicant had been trying unsuccessfully to obtain a copy of the learned
Master's decision. I can speculate the reason why he did not get one earlier is because the learned Master was probably away from his chambers and that the typescript judgment may not have been available to him for revision until afterwards. Nonetheless, it was not until 19 February 1997, after time for appeal had expired, that the applicant received a full set of documents from which he could consider his appeal and he was ready to file his Notice of
Appeal on 13 March 1997. When he endeavoured to do so he was told the appeal was out of time and the respondent liquidator has objected to any extension of time.

The Notice of Appeal is, as one might expect with a litigant in person, not in completely logical form, but it certainly raises issues as to whether the
Master's judgment, which was a discretionary judgment, can be supported. It would seem to me that the core of the attack on the judgment as mentioned in the Notice of Appeal is that the Master seemed to think, despite the matter he records at the end of his reasons, that the applicant was a party to proceedings before Bryson J in August 1995 involving similar matters. It is common ground that the applicant was only a witness in these proceedings and not a party.

It seems to me that the Notice of Motion does raise an arguable issue and I do not favour Ms Cheeseman's submissions for the liquidator that it does not. I have taken into account the outline of the history of the litigation which was handed up by Ms Cheeseman, but it seems to me that when there is a reason for lateness because of the time of the year and difficulty in getting the transcript and there is an arguable ground for appeal, that it would be unjust to enforce strictly the Rules as to time.

Accordingly, I extend the time for appealing up to 11 April 1997. Costs of this motion will be costs in the appeal.
 * * * 
