

Kyriacos Kyriacou, Mary Kyriacou and Bonhomie Pty Limited versus Kogarah
Municipal Council and Sophie Antoniades No. 13869/92 [1995] NSWSC 32 (8
September 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COMMON LAW DIVISION
DUNFORD J
HRNG
SSYDNEY #DATE 18:8:1995 #ADD 8:9:1995
ORDER
Orders made
JUDGE1
DUNFORD J:  In these proceedings the plaintiffs sue the first mefendant for damages for negligent misrepresentation and the second defendant for professional negligence as their solicitor. They allege that a council officer was negligent in answering a telephone inquiry from the second plaintiff concerning alleged "existing use" rights in respect of a property they were contemplating purchasing and that the second defendant, who acted for them on such purchase, was negligent in the advice she gave them and the steps she failed to take to protect their interests in that regard. Each of the defendants has cross-claimed against the other for indemnity or contribution pursuant to <case>, [Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1946404/).
 
FACTS
For some time prior to 1989 the plaintiffs who are husband and wife and their family company had run a business hiring cars out for weddings. They sold that business in August 1989 and started looking for something else. The second plaintiff saw an advertisement in a local newspaper for "Bay Vista" at Carlton Crescent, Kogarah Bay (the subject premises) described as "Prestige
Waterfront Subdividable Land, Existing Use Rights for Wedding Receptions" which was for sale by auction on 12 September 1989. The billboard sign outside the premises also stated "Existing Use Rights". Mr and Mrs Kyriacou inspected the premises which appeared to be suitable for use for a wedding reception business, and on the advice of the agent Mrs Kyriacou telephoned Kogarah
Municipal
Council, asked to be connected to the Town Planning Department and spoke to an employee. According to her the conversation was along the following lines:
I rang the council and asked to be connected to the Town
Planning Department, which I was. When the man answered the phone I said, "Could I speak to someone who knows about the property at Kogarah Bay called 'Bay Vista'?" and he said, "I know that property, I can help you." 
I said: "I am Mary Kyriacou and my husband and myself are interested in purchasing this property." I said, "Who am I speaking to?" and he said, "Michael Bronotte, I am with the
Planning Department."
I said, "My husband and myself are interested in purchasing this property and continuing its current business which is a wedding reception business and I am ringing to confirm that it has been advertised with existing use rights and I am ringing to confirm that it does have these rights." 
He said, "I will go and get the file, I won't be a moment."
He left the phone and came back and said, "I have it in front of me." I said, "I'm very concerned it does have existing use rights because
I have to sell my home and borrow heavily to purchase this property and I will have to give up my beautiful home and live in a small flat on the property and I just want to confirm it does have these rights." 
He said, "Everything is all right, it does have existing use rights and it has been there forever, that place has been there forever." I said, "That's great, because my husband and I want to go into this new venture and build up the business." 
He said, "With existing use rights you can increase its current use by 10 per cent with council approval." I said, "I don't think there is really much we can do because it is an old Federation home and I cannot see what extension work we would do but the information you have given me is quite helpful and I feel in a position to go and bid for this at the auction and thank you very much."
She denied that he said she should get a letter from the council, that he told her that she would need to have any information he gave her certified by a letter from the Council, or that if she had any evidence to verify existing use of the property she should put that in a letter to the Council. She believed the reference to 10% meant that they could, with Council approval, increase the floor space by up to %, and she said that she did not at the time know that existing use rights meant being able to establish that the premises had been so used continuously since 1951; or that consent to such use had been given between 27 June 1951 and 29 October 1975 and that the premises had been used continuously as such since the grant of such consent.
She said that she then rang the second defendant, a solicitor who had regularly acted for them in the past, told her they were interested in purchasing the wedding reception centre which was in a residential area but run with existing use rights and asked her to get a copy of the auction contract and to prepare contracts for the sale of their home. On about 4
September the second defendant rang Mrs Kyriacou concerning a carport extension to the home and in the course of that conversation raised the question of the permitted use of the subject premises and suggested it might be a good idea to ring the Council about existing use rights, to which Mrs
Kyriacou replied that she had already rung the
Council and there was no problem with continuing with the current business of wedding receptions. She said the second defendant never suggested that she should obtain Council advice in writing or that she should personally deliver a letter from her to the Council.
She (Mrs Kyriacou) did not know how long it needed to be there to have existing use rights.
Mrs Kyriacou said she again rang the Planning Department at the Council but did not identify the person to whom she spoke, and said she was ringing in reference to the Bay Vista, she said she had spoken to Michael Bronotte and confirmed it had existing use rights and she was wondering whether they could add an extra storey. He replied that that would be increasing its use by more than 10%.
The information received by the plaintiffs from the lessee of the premises was that she was usually doing a Friday evening wedding, two on Saturday, one on
Sunday and a Lions Club dinner during the week. The plaintiffs believed that they could cover their mortgage repayments and make a profit by upgrading the premises and increasing the number of functions, although in their time there they did not significantly increase the number of functions, but they did have larger crowds, louder music and later finishes.
The auction took place on 12 September 1989 and the plaintiffs were successful bidders at $1,425,000 most of which was borrowed from the
Commonwealth Bank of Australia, the advance being secured over a mortgage of the subject property. The Contract for Sale was in the standard form, and in accordance clause 12 a certificate from the Council was annexed to the contract showing the land zoned as Residential 2(A1) which in effect prohibited the use of the premises for wedding receptions or any other business. There was no reference in the Contract for Sale to any existing use.
Completion took place on 27 October 1989 although the former lessees continued to conduct the business until 31 December 1989. After the purchase the plaintiffs commenced living on the premises in a former boathouse which had previously been converted for use as a residential flat, and moved their car hire business to the site. They also spent a significant amount of money on improvements and modification of the premises.
The Council wrote to the plaintiffs on 13 December 1989 advising that, whilst Council records indicated the premises had existing use rights for use as a wedding reception centre, complaints have been received alleging use of the premises for a car hire business and for on site weddings, and giving 30 days to stop such unauthorised use. From this letter it is clear that at that time the Council believed that use of the subject premises for wedding receptions was a lawful existing use.
When the plaintiffs received such correspondence from the Council they went to see the second defendant who according to the second plaintiff told them "I handled the purchase of the premises, not the purchase of the business". In fact there had been complaints from residents prior to the auction about the use of the premises for wedding receptions, eg a letter from
Miss E Eager dated 30 August 1989, and from R N Collins dated 11 September , and Mrs E H Boulton, Kogarah Bay Progress Association dated 21 August , but a letter written in reply by the Council dated 18 September 1989 said, inter alia, "Council's records indicate that the property has the benefits of existing use rights as a reception centre," and a similar letter followed on 23 January 1990.
Following a meeting between the first plaintiff and council officers on 5 February, the Council again wrote on 13 February pointing out that it would be necessary for the plaintiffs to make a
Development Application for the use of the premises for a wedding car hire business and unless it could be established that the premises had been used for such purpose since prior to the introduction of the County of Cumberland
Planning Scheme in 1951, a similar application would need to be made in respect of the use for on site weddings.
On 25 March 1990 Mrs Patricia Veronica Vollmer, a part owner of the premises from 16 December 1949 until 27 September , made a statutory declaration to the effect that apart from her own daughter's wedding reception (a private family affair) on May 1951, the property had not been used commercially for wedding receptions until November 1952 (and that from then until 1969 such functions were held on an average of twice a week) and no outside wedding ceremonies were held at the premises.
A Development
Application was submitted on 27 March 1990 for use of the premises as a "Reception Lounge including Ancillary Uses such as Wedding
Ceremonies and Car Service for Weddings", but by letter dated 27 June 1990 the
Council advised the plaintiffs that in view of evidence available existing use rights did not apply, the activities on the premises were unlawful and in any event, even if there were existing use rights, the intensification of such activities without Council approval was unlawful and development approval could not be granted.
This was followed by letters from the Council's solicitors dated 29
August and 6 September 1990 requiring the plaintiffs to cease the unlawful use within 21 days in default of which proceedings would be commenced, and ultimately on 20 December 1991 the
Land and Environment Court granted injunctions restraining the present plaintiffs from using the subject premises for any purposes other than as a private dwelling house, the order being suspended for 6 months to permit the plaintiffs' clients who had made advance bookings to make alternative arrangements. They were also ordered to pay the
Council's costs which were ultimately allowed at $37,026.44.
Having received legal advice the plaintiffs decided not to appeal and the plaintiffs sold the subject property by auction to Demetre
Dimitropoulos for $1,005,000 by contract dated 4 July 1992.
Mrs Kyriacou said that the second defendant never gave them any advice or warning about non-confirming use or existing use rights; and if they had been warned, they would not have purchased.
Michael Bronotte is a draftsman employed by Kogarah Council since 1985.
In 1989, apart from his duties as a draftsman, he also dealt with counter and telephone enquiries in regard to zoning and land use, although he is not a qualified town planner.

He recalled receiving a number of telephone enquiries about the use of the subject premises, in August/September 1989 but he did not specifically recall receiving such an enquiry from the second plaintiff, although he did recall one particular enquiry he did not know who from, when he looked at the files and replied that the property would appear to have existing use rights, but that the enquirer should write to the Council for the answer to be "qualified". It is clear from his answers that by "qualified" he did not mean that the information being supplied was not necessarily correct or that
Council accepted no responsibility for it, but simply that it should be in writing.
He agreed his recollection of any such enquiries was hazy. He could not recall the enquirer saying (as Mrs Kyriacou claimed she had said) that they were selling their home to buy the property. He knew the subject property and that it had operated as a wedding reception centre for a substantial time. He remembered going away to check the file which supported the conclusion he already believed, namely that the property had existing use rights, and he knew of no facts or circumstances which qualified that belief. He also recalled a discussion with one enquirer in respect of a 10 per cent increase in use of the property which he thought related to increase in floor area rather than intensity of use, and this is confirmed by his file note dated 26
June 1990.
Documents on the Council file at the time of such enquiry included a memo dated 28 October 1968 from the Health
Surveyor to the Town Clerk stating, "These premises were approved by Council many years ago for Wedding
Receptions, birthday parties and similar functions. To my knowledge these premises have been operating for many years ...," an enquiry from Forshaws, solicitors on behalf of proposed purchasers dated 3 March 1980, a reply dated March 1980 stating that to have existing use rights it would be necessary to show that development consent to such use had been granted under the County of
Cumberland Planning Scheme or that the property was used for such purpose prior to the introduction of the Scheme in 1951 and a further reply dated 6
March by the Council (doc 4 of Ex A) stating that further information had come from a resident opposite stating the premises had become a wedding reception lounge around 1950 and remained so since. The file may or may not at that time have contained a letter from Miss E Eager dated 30
August 1989 complaining of the proposed sale "with existing use rights" and raising matters which could be said to question the existence of such rights.
According to Mr Sim, then Chief Town Planner, if a letter had been received by him requesting information on whether the property enjoyed existing use rights as a wedding reception centre, he would have firstly checked the file carefully and then drafted a response, which would have been qualified to the effect that the persons involved should make their own enquiries.
Mrs Kyriacou and Mr Bronotte both impressed me as honest witnesses, but not surprisingly Mr Bronotte had no specific recollection of the conversation, whereas Mrs Kyriacou claimed to recall it clearly. As the conversation was of particular importance to her at the time (being crucial to deciding whether to bid at the auction) and of no particular significance to him, I consider her recollection likely to be more accurate.
Mrs Kyriacou says he went away to get the file, and he agrees that he would have. In view of the material that was then on the file it would not be unlikely that he would say it had existing use rights rather than it "may" have, particularly in answer to a specific question about such rights, and it may be that when his attention was first directed to this alleged call in June and he made the file note, he subconsciously re-constructed the conversation to accord with what he believed was approved practice at the
Council for answering such enquiries, and that such subconscious reconstruction continued down to the time he gave his evidence. They both agree there was a discussion about increasing the use of the premises by up to %, Mr Bronotte personally knew that the business had been on the premises a long time and in those circumstances may have made reference to that fact, although he denies the use of the word "forever" as claimed by the second plaintiff, and I find it difficult to accept that, if he had only said that the premises may have existing use rights or appeared to have such rights but that it was necessary to write to the Council for a proper reply, Mrs Kyriacou would have failed to do so or asked her solicitor to do so. There would be no reason for her to falsely represent to her solicitor the answer she had received. In any event, even on Mr Bronotte's evidence he said nothing to suggest that the information may not be correct or that the Council accepted no legal responsibility for his answer.
Mrs
Kyriacou was extensively cross-examined and her evidence concerning her conversations with the two council officers and the second defendant were (except as to minor irrelevant details) consistent, and even when given the opportunity by counsel for the second defendant to "improve" on her version of her second conversation with a council officer (T 82-3), she did not do so.
Although she conceded that she had made some false statements concerning the extent of her real estate experience in her various applications for Real
Estate Licence that does not persuade me that I should disbelieve her.
For these reasons I prefer Mrs Kyriacou's version of the conversation and find that she did identify herself to Mr Bronotte and did say she wanted to know whether the property had existing use rights because she and her husband were considering buying it and wanted to continue the existing use, that Mr
Bronotte checked the file and then replied that he had done so and that it did have existing use rights. I find he did not qualify the response in any way or suggest or invite a written enquiry, and that there was also reference to increasing the premises by up to ten per cent.
The second defendant said that she had been admitted as a solicitor in
March 1976 and had practised mainly in general practice and conveyancing since that time. She had known the second plaintiff Mrs Kyriacou since the latter had worked for George
Lazarus Real Estate between 1976 and 1979 and they had become personal friends. Prior to 1989 she had acted as solicitor for the plaintiffs, mainly doing conveyancing work, on about four or five occasions.
She said that in about August 1989 the second plaintiff said to her that she and her husband were looking at buying a wedding reception business, and, having heard nothing further, on 4
September she rang the second plaintiff who told her they intended bidding for one at Kogarah and that she would send the contract over.
The second defendant claims she then said "We need to check with the (Council to find out whether they have ever approved an application for the business to he used as a wedding reception centre" but Mrs Kyriacou replied "I have already done that, I have checked with the Council and they have told me that the place has existing rights". The solicitor said "Well we should get that in writing. I have a letter that I would like you to take down to the
Council" but the second plaintiff said "Do I have to? It has been there for forty years", and the solicitor replied "Well forty years is a long time but what if the Council has made a mistake? I'd prefer to get their advice in writing", and "You should also know that existing use rights are not as sure as other rights, and you can lose them if the premises are closed for more than twelve months" to which Mrs Kyriacou replied "Well, we wouldn't close the place for more than twelve months". The solicitor then said "You are being very foolish, its your funeral" but Mrs Kyriacou also asked the solicitor to check with the lessee to see if she was interested in selling the business.
She said that she received the contract on 5 September but there was no
Certificate under <case> or drainage diagram attached to it so she telephoned the agent and arranged for him to fax them through to her almost immediately.
She said that on 6 September she rang the lessee of the premises,
Lorraine
Dixon, and had a conversation about the possibility of the Kyriacous buying the business, but she also said "Before we talk about that, could you please tell me whether you have had Council approval to run your business from there". Mrs Dixon replied "No,
I think the place has always been here. When I bought it, I am not a hundred per cent sure, but my solicitor got a letter from the
Council, I don't want to give out any more information, I don't want to talk about the price. I don't want to sell the business over the counter. I want to wait until after the auction ....."
A few days later Mrs Kyriacou called to see the second defendant and in discussion the latter said "I am still worried about the use of the premises" to which Mrs Kyriacou replied "I have checked with the Council again, they have told me it has existing use rights and that I can't intensify those rights by more than ten per cent". The solicitor said "I'd still prefer if we got it in writing. Have you got time to take a letter to the Council," to which
Mrs Kyriacou said "But surely if it has been there for forty years everything should be all right". The solicitor said "Well it is unlikely that the Council would have allowed it to go on for so long if there had been any problems". They also discussed other matters namely the liquor licence and the survey, and the use of the boatshed as a residential flat, but ultimately Mrs
Kyriacou got up, picked up the draft contract for the sale of their residence and went to leave. Ms Antoniades handed her back the copy of the proposed auction contract and told her to check it with the auction contract and then said she had a letter ready for her addressed to the
Council in a standard form and said "This is a letter that I would like you to take to the council, it is up to you whether you do it or not, but it is in your best interests to do so" to which she replied "all right, all right" and left. The proforma of the letter became Exhibit 6.
She denied that when problems arose she had said to the second plaintiff that she handled the purchase of the property not the purchase of the business.
In cross-examination it was apparent that although she had some knowledge of what was involved in existing use rights, such knowledge was by no means detailed or complete and in particular she was not aware that the use to be traced back to 1946, rather than 1951, the date of the commencement of the
County of Cumberland Planning Scheme, but the Council seems to have taken a similar view as to the relevant date. She said that she assumed that because of Mrs Kyriacou's real estate agency experience (and she was not aware precisely how much actual experience she had had in that field, although she knew that she had been a licensed agent), she assumed that she really knew what she was talking about, although she now realises that such assumption was wrong. She said that she was aware that from the time an existing use was established as at the relevant date it needed to also be established by evidence that it had been so used, and that if the use had stopped for twelve months it was presumed to have been abandoned; but she did not draw Mrs
Kyriacou's attention to these matters except to say that if the premises were closed for more than twelve months the existing use rights were lost, but that was in the context of if Mr and Mrs Kyriacou closed the business down for more than twelve months rather than whether it had been closed for that period in the past, and she agreed that was something that she should have made Mrs
Kyriacou aware of.
She agreed that without confirmation of the existing use rights from the
Council in writing, there was a risk that neighbours might query the use of the premises, but she did not draw
Mrs Kyriacou's attention to that fact. She agreed that generally speaking where the question of existing use rights arises a solicitor is under a duty to warn the client of the aspects in which such use lacks the security of other rights but she said that she did not consider herself under such a duty in the present case because Mrs Kyriacou had a real estate agent's licence, she had gone to the Council before she came to see the solicitor, when she asked her to take the letter to the Council she had said "Do I have to?
It's been there for forty years", and that she did not appear interested in that or in the question of the liquor licence.
 .
She agreed she did not in clear and explicit terms point out to Mrs
Kyriacou the dangers involved and, in particular, the fact that without written proof of the existing use either from the Council or from persons with prior knowledge of the premises, it was open to the Council at the instigation of neighbours or otherwise to bring about a cessation of the use of the premises as a wedding reception home.
In evidence in reply Mrs Kyriacou denied that she had any conversation with Ms Antoniades in about August 1989 about two smaller wedding reception establishments as the latter claimed, but said that conversation took place about twelve months later, and the tender of the auctioneer's brochure in respect of those places (Exhibit F) which shows the auction date for both properties as 4 December 1990, tends to confirm the second plaintiff's evidence in this regard.
Ms Antoniades appeared to be an honest witness and gave her answers spontaneously, but agreed that her recollection was largely based on a reconstruction of the entries in her diary notes.
Those entries are in my view equally consistent with the evidence of the second plaintiff as with that of the second defendant. The second plaintiff said that after speaking to Mr Bronotte she rang the second defendant and asked her to get a copy of the auction contract and to prepare contracts for the sale of the home and that Ms Antoniades telephoned her on September about the lack of Council consent to the garage extension at 56 The Promenade premises which was when there was a discussion about the enquiry to Mr
Bronotte about existing use. This is all consistent with the diary entry of 4
September 1989. I am satisfied
Ms Antoniades rang Mrs Kyriacou on that occasion but an enquiry in respect of the contract for which she is preparing is, I believe, a much more likely reason for her making the call than mere curiosity about the plaintiff's intentions as to whether they intended to purchase a wedding reception business. The reference to 40 years is consistent with the plaintiff recounting the conversation she had had with Mr Bronotte.
I note that there is no reference in the diary to a written enquiry or taking a letter to the
Council, but as the diary does not purport to be a summary of every item discussed on the telephone by the solicitor, this consideration is perhaps of no significance, although if Ms Antoniades at the time considered a written enquiry so essential or gave any warning about relying on existing use rights, or if Mrs Kyriacou was tending to reject her advice about inquiries, I would expect that she would have made some diary entry or file note, if only for her own protection.
The other diary entries of Ms Antoniades are also in my view consistent with the evidence of the second plaintiff, particularly the entry of 8
September which would be consistent with the second plaintiff having had the further conversation with the unidentified council officer by that date.
The letter she claims she prepared for Mrs Kyriacou to take to the
Council was not really apposite for an enquiry as to existing use rights, there was no copy of it in the file but it was a pro-forma kept in the memory of the typewriter. If a letter had in fact been prepared and given to the second plaintiff, as the second defendant claims, it is surprising that a copy was not kept in the file.

There may also be some degree of reconstruction on the part of Mrs
Kyriacou, but for reasons I have given, I consider her version more likely to be true, and I find that although the second defendant may have suggested to
Mrs Kyriacou that she take a letter to the Council, she did not press Mrs
Kyriacou on this point when the latter said she had already spoken to the
Council; and in any event a letter in terms of Exhibit 6 would not have elicited the information sought.
Mrs Kyriacou said she did not specifically instruct the second defendant to enquire of existing use rights but gave her the contracts and expected her to make such enquiries as were necessary (and presumably in such form as was necessary). There seems to be a deal of logic in her answer that she was not borrowing a million dollars and not taking a letter to the Council if her solicitor suggested it.
I am satisfied that the second defendant did not explain the nature of existing use rights, the onus of proving such rights by evidence, the date from which they had to be proved and that such use had to be continuous in the sense of not having been suspended for more than 12 months or that any enquiry to Council should elicit a written answer (to avoid future arguments as to what the answer was).
There are two other matters worth observing at this stage. Mrs Kyriacou appears to have believed that "existing use" meant the use in existence at the time (ie 1989) and that it was not significant for how long in the past the premises had been so used, and no one (particularly the second defendant) told her anything different.
The second defendant made an enquiry of Law and Milne, Solicitors for the vendors, concerning existing use rights (Exhibit E) and did not receive a satisfactory response but failed to advise the plaintiffs of this fact; also she received an unhelpful answer from the lessee (Mrs Dixon) who referred to the possibility of her solicitor having obtained a letter from the Council about existing use rights, but this aspect was never followed up.
It was common ground that planning control in the then Kogarah
Munucipality commenced on 12 July 1946, and the form of that control was by
Ordinance made under the Local Government Act 1919. That was displaced by the County of Cumberland Ordinance which commenced on 27 June under which the subject property was zoned as a "living area".
That ordinance was displaced by the Kogarah Planning Scheme
Ordinance which was made on 29 October 1976 pursuant to which the subject property was zoned "residential 2(a)(1)". Consequently, it would appear that the relevant date, if approval was not given, for determining whether there was an existing use would be 12
July 1946, or alternatively at the latest, 27 June 1951. It would be necessary for the use to have commenced prior to the relevant date and to have continued since that time. The issue as to intensity did not become relevant in planning legislation until amendments to the Planning and
Environment Assessment Act which took effect in 1986.
 
CLAIM AGAINST THE COUNCIL
In L Shaddock and Associates
Pty Ltd versus Parramatta City Council <case>; [(1981) 150
CLR 225] a solicitor acting for a proposed purchaser of real estate made an enquiry by telephone from an unidentified officer of the Council whether there were any road widening proposals affecting the land, and was erroneously told there were not. He subsequently applied to the Council for a Certificate wider s 342AS of the Local Government Act 1919, and such certificate when issued did not refer to such proposals. It was held that the Council owed a duty of care to the purchaser in respect of the certificate, but not in responding to the telephone enquiry, described by Gibbs CJ at 236 as "an unconfirmed answer given by an unidentified person in response to an inquiry made over the telephone" and Stephen J (at 238) said: "It must be but rarely that information conveyed by unidentified voices answering a telephone at the offices of municipal councils will render those councils liable in damages for negligence if the information should prove to he incorrect. In my view, neither a council nor an enquirer would, in the absence of quite special circumstances, regard the response to such an enquiry as carrying with it liability in damages if incorrect; this must especially be the case when there exists a customary and more formal means of obtaining from a council the information which is sought."
This case was distinguished in Kyogle Shire Council versus Francis [(1988) 13
NSWLR 396] where the prospective purchaser had by appointment met the town planner who gave his name as did the enquirer, and a Certificate under <case>, [Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/) had also been obtained. At 401,
Kirby ACJ said: "The analogy breaks down. Here, the answer was not unconfirmed. It was confirmed by the [s 149](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s149.html) Certificate upon which the respondent sued. The enquiry was not made over the telephone. It was made by a direct interview by a person who had taken the trouble to come to the Council and seek out the officer with the relevant responsibilities.
The enquirer was not unidentified. According to the evidence, the respondent disclosed his name on purpose. It was not disputed that "Mr Westright" was the relevant officer on behalf of the Council to give the relevant advice. The
Council must act by such officers. In these circumstances, no comfort can be drawn by the appellant from L Shaddock."
In South
Australia versus Callipari (unreported, Court of Appeal, 16 October ) one of the issues concerned advice given over the telephone by an identified officer of the South Australian Motor Registration Division (Mr
Azzopati) to the respondent to the effect that, if he paid certain moneys for registration and insurance of a prime mover and received an interim receipt which he affixed to the windscreen of the vehicle, he could drive the vehicle upon public roads, whereas the vehicle at the time technically remained unregistered and uninsured and so could not be so driven, and so the owner was liable to the Nominal Defendant for the damages recoverable by two persons injured when the vehicle was involved in an accident, whilst still unregistered. Kirby P at 18 quoted from the judgment of McHugh JA (as he then was) in Lutz versus Parramatta City Council [(1988) 12 NSWLR 293] at 324 concerning the duty of care in relation to the giving of advice and went on (at 19) that it is "essential that the plaintiff should be able to prove, from the circumstances of the particular inquiry, the seriousness of the matter in hand, the trust being given to the official involved, the intention to rely upon the information provided, the fact of reliance and the detriment that flows as a result". His Honour then dealt with the fact that the enquiry had been by telephone and held (at 21) that Shaddocks case should not be regarded as holding that liability in a government authority cannot be established in any circumstances for advice given orally, and particularly over the telephone, and noted that in the instant case the enquiry was undoubtedly specific, the officer was clearly identified, the enquiry had been clearly made for a serious purpose which was sufficiently identified, and self-evidently carried grave consequences if the response given were incorrect; and it was held the State of South Australia was liable to the owner for the negligently given inaccurate advice.
I am satisfied that similar considerations apply here. When Mrs Kyriacou telephoned the Council she asked to be connected to the Town Planning
Department, and when put through asked to speak to someone who knew about the specific property. She then identified herself by name and gave the purpose of her enquiry explaining the future intentions of her husband and herself with the subject property, and also took care to identify by name the person to whom she was speaking. He apparently treated it as a serious enquiry as he went and got the file, and on his return Mrs Kyriacou emphasised her concern at having to sell her home and borrow heavily to purchase the property.
The seriousness of the enquiry and the fact that the enquirer intended to rely on the information or advice that was given has been established, and in those circumstances I am satisfied that the defendant Council by its officer was in a relationship of proximity to the plaintiffs; and if the enquiry were answered it was under a duty to take reasonable care to ensure that any answer or information given was not inaccurate or misleading, notwithstanding that it was given orally over the telephone. I am also satisfied that the plaintiffs intended to and subsequently did rely on the information provided by Mr
Bronotte, notwithstanding that they also relied to a degree on the second defendant and that in the circumstances, such reliance was reasonable.
Although Mr and Mrs Kyriacou intended that their solicitor would make such enquiries as needed to be made, Mrs Kyriacou made this enquiry so that she and her husband would be in a position to decide whether to bid at the auction.
The advice given by Mr Bronotte was negligent in that he failed to tell her that the onus was on the person asserting existing use rights to establish those rights, he failed to tell her the relevant date for such purposes, failed to inform her that the intensity of the use would be as at 1986, and that increase in the intensity of such use related to such matters as frequency, noise etc and not just to floor area. In short, once he agreed to tell her anything, he should have told her that the Council could not certify existing use rights, but that they needed to be proved by the user when occasion arose, and that the relevant date was July 1946, or June 1951. If Mr
Bronotte was not sufficiently knowledgeable or experienced to answer such a query, he should not have done so and should have been expressly forbidden to do so, or alternatively all officers should have been forbidden to answer oral inquiries.
It was not sufficient for the management of the Council to give a direction that enquirers were to be told to have any advice confirmed in writing if (as I have found to be the case here) the officer fails to pass on such instruction - and it may not have been sufficient even if it were passed on, if it were done in such a way that the enquirer may still feel entitled to rely on the oral advice.
If Mr Bronotte had told Mrs Kyriacou these things I am satisfied that either the plaintiffs would not have bid at the auction, or at least would have sought more detailed and specific legal advice which if properly and adequately given would have persuaded them not to bid at the auction. But Mr
Bronotte's advice left them with a false sense of security and they did not realise (as Ms
Antoniades should have told them) that they were outlaying a substantial sum of money on a very risky purchase. The Council's negligence (through Mr Bronotte) was therefore a cause of the plaintiffs loss.
 
CLAIM AGAINST THE SOLICITOR
The standard of care to be applied by a solicitor in acting for or advising a client is that of "a reasonably competent solicitor": Midland Bank
Trust Co Ltd v Hett, Stubbs and Kemp [(1979) Ch 384] at 402-3, Jackson and
Powell: Professional Negligence 3rd ed at para 4-39, and the duty of care must be related to the retainer:
Midland Bank Trust Co Ltd versus Hett Stubbs and Kemp, supra, Beneficial Finance Corp Ltd versus Karavas (1991) 23 NSWLR 255 at 277, Boyce v Mouat (1994) 1 AC 428 at 437, Macindoe versus Parbery (unreported Court of Appeal - 17 August 1994) per Young AJA at 14. In the same case, at 18-19, his Honour said: "Accordingly, there is no lack of authority for the proposition that the retainer of a solicitor for the purchaser on the purchase of a business ordinarily extends beyond mere documentation and includes the duty to warn the purchaser of anything that is unusual and anything that may affect the purchaser obtaining the benefit of the contract which he or she discloses to the solicitor is sought to be obtained."
While Kirby P at 34 said that the solicitor's duty went beyond the obligation to explain the usual perils, and included a duty to explain unusual risks which were reasonably foreseeable and which the client should weigh.
When Mrs Kyriacou first contacted the second defendant she asked her to get a copy of the auction contract and prepare contracts for the sale of her house, telling her that the business was run with existing use rights.
The second defendant did receive a copy of the contract on 5 September and when there was no certificate under [s 149](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s149.html) or drainage diagram attached, she followed these matters up, and later gave advice about the liquor licence, survey and use of the boatshed, and there was discussion about the so-called "existing use" rights. I am satisfied that prior to the auction the solicitor was retained to advise the plaintiffs on the form of the auction contract and that this included advising on any matters which should have been dealt with in the contract or enquiries which should have been made before bidding at the auction, and also included the duty to warn the plaintiffs of anything which may have affected them obtaining the benefit of the contract in respect of their disclosed intentions. After the auction the solicitor was retained to act for the plaintiffs on the purchase, and this included making the appropriate enquiries and requisitions and advising the clients in relation thereto. At all times the second defendant was aware that the plaintiffs were purchasing the premises for use as a wedding reception place.
In the present case Messrs Tebbut,
Moses and Macquarie, three solicitors each with extensive practice and experience in conveyancing, gave expert evidence as to the steps which they believed a reasonably competent solicitor should have taken when acting for a purchaser on the purchase of premises being bought for a wedding reception business in September 1989, and not surprisingly, their views substantially coincided in all material respects.
They agreed that the first thing a solicitor should do when confronted with a problem such as existing use would be to check the statute to ascertain what was provided for and also to ascertain what was the relevant date. This the second defendant failed to do, and so she was never in a position to give adequate or proper advice on the issue.
They also agreed that when advising the plaintiffs prior to the auction, the solicitor should have sought a written confirmation from the Council that such existing use rights existed and should have sought to have a special condition put in the contract. However, they all agreed that it is unlikely that the Council would have supplied such a letter in time for the auction, or the vendors agreed to the insertion of a special condition; and accordingly the failure to take either of these steps could not have been causative of the plaintiffs' loss.
However, the solicitor should not have assumed that the second plaintiff knew all she needed to know about "existing use rights" merely because she had held some form of real estate agent's licence and had worked for some time in such an office.
After all, it is because solicitors claim to have so much more knowledge and expertise than real estate agents and others that the public is urged to utilise their services. I am of the opinion in the light of the expert and other evidence, that she should first have ascertained how much, if anything, Mrs Kyriacou knew about existing use rights and, in particular, ensured that she was aware that to enjoy existing use rights one had to be able to establish (by evidence if necessary) that on the relevant date the property was so used (be that date 1946 or 1951), and that the Council was not bound by any information its officers may have given in this regard, that it had been so used continuously since that date in the sense that the use had at no stage been interrupted for more than 12 months, that there had been no increase in the intensity of the use by more than 10% since 1986, and that increase in intensity of use related not to floor space, but to the number of guests, the level of noise, number of cars and matters of that nature, and that existing use did not include related activities which were not part of the use at the relevant date. (The solicitor may not have been aware of the plaintiffs' intended use of the premises for conducting weddings and running wedding cars, and if not aware, would not be expected to deal specifically with these items). If the Council had refused to confirm the existing use rights in writing, and the vendor's solicitors refused to agree to insertion of a special condition, both of which matters were likely, the plaintiffs should have been advised so that they could have made an informed choice as to whether to bid at auction.
As I said earlier,
Mrs Kyriacou did not have any real understanding of existing use rights, believing the concept related to the use of the premises at the time (1989), not at some past date, she thought the problem of twelve months interruption related to the future not the past, and that "increasing the use" of the premises related to floor space. Mrs Kyriacou said that if she had been aware of all the possible problems, she and her husband would not have bid at the auction and I believe that is probably correct, having regard to the risks they were taking in selling their home and borrowing such a large sum of money. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the failure to give such advice constituted negligence on the part of the solicitor and was a cause of the plaintiffs' loss.
It is also apparent from Exhibit E that the solicitor made a useful enquiry from the vendor's solicitors but failed to follow it up and failed to advise the plaintiffs that she had not received a satisfactory answer.
I am also satisfied on the evidence that the solicitor should have advised the plaintiffs that the oral advice was unsatisfactory because if a dispute should subsequently arise it may be that the oral advice would be regarded as informal and not therefore giving rise to a cause of action for negligent advice, as well as leading to difficulty in proving what the advice in fact was; and that for these reasons a written reply should be obtained. It was not sufficient merely to say that she would prefer to have it in writing, nor to give the second plaintiff a letter to take to the
Council (which I have found was not done), particularly a letter that was in any event totally inappropriate to the enquiry as it related to what zoning was in force rather than what uses were permitted contrary to the zoning. However, the evidence is that it is unlikely that a written reply would have been received prior to the auction date, and as I have found the Council liable for the information given orally by Mr Bronotte, the plaintiffs have not shown that they suffered any financial loss as a result of the second defendant's failure to make a written enquiry of the Council prior to the auction.
After the contract but prior to completion, the reasonably prudent solicitor should have made written enquiry of the Council and sought to obtain copies of any evidence (by way of statutory declaration or otherwise) which the Council had and which tended to establish the existing use rights.
Notwithstanding the letters received by the Council from Mrs Eager dated August 1989 and Mr R W Collins dated 11 September 1989, I believe in the light of Council's replies to those letters dated 18 September, that in answer to such an enquiry, the Council would probably have advised that the property did have, or appeared to have, existing use rights as a wedding reception centre. In the light of the judgment of Stein J in the Land and Environment
Court, especially at p 7, this would probably have made no difference to the outcome of the proceedings in that Court, although the possibility cannot be excluded.
The solicitor should also have raised requisitions on the vendor relating to the existing use but the answer to such requisitions would probably have been to the effect that the purchasers should make their own enquiries. Mr
Tebbutt was of the opinion that after contract and before completion the reasonably prudent solicitor would have pursued the vendor's solicitors to ascertain the factual basis on which the vendors claimed existing use rights and sought to have a clause inserted in the contract that the plaintiffs were relying on the representation that existing use rights attached to the property or to that effect, and that in the event that the vendor did not provide a credible factual basis for existing use rights and was not prepared to include a clause in the contract that existing use rights existed, the purchasers would have been advised so that they could more fully assess the risks associated with the transaction, and considered whether they could avoid the contract - but it is not clear to me that in those circumstances they could have avoided the contract unless they (the purchasers) could positively prove that it did not have existing use rights, which at that time would have been difficult if not impossible.
Taking these factors into account, I am satisfied that the solicitor was negligent in failing to take these steps between contract and completion which
I have outlined; but I am not satisfied that it would have ultimately made any difference to the plaintiffs' position if she had, and so her failure to take these latter steps has not been shown to have been a cause of any part of the plaintiffs' loss.
There was a suggestion in the second defendant's evidence that she advised the second plaintiff that "existing use rights" were not as secure as other rights and that when the second plaintiff was reluctant to take the letter to the Council the second defendant told her words to the effect that it was her funeral; and it was submitted that from these facts I should infer that notwithstanding the advice she was given the plaintiffs insisted that the second defendant proceed with the purchase thereby absolving her from any further responsibility. However, not only have I found against the second defendant on these facts, but if the plaintiffs did instruct the second defendant to proceed contrary to her advice it was because, for the reasons I have given, they were not given adequate or sufficient advice as to the risks and problems, so as to enable them to make an informed judgment.
Although the first plaintiff was not engaged in any discussions with the second defendant, I am satisfied from the nature of the relationship between the first and second plaintiffs and the fact that they were purchasing the property as joint tenants that at all material times in her dealings with the second defendant, the second plaintiff was acting as agent for herself and the first plaintiff and that they both relied on the advice or lack of it given by the second defendant. I shall deal with the third plaintiff later.
 
CONTRIBUTORY NEGLIGENCE AND MITIGATION
The defendants pleaded contributory negligence on the part of the plaintiffs under two heads, by extending the use of the premises in relation to the size and frequency of functions, wedding car service and on site weddings and by failing to appeal against the decision of Stein J, but the latter head was abandoned during the course of the hearing. In relation to the increased user, whilst these matters did, it would seem, increase the concern of the neighbours thus leading to complaints to Council and the further investigations which established that the subject premises did not enjoy existing use rights for wedding receptions, at least one of the local residents had written to the Council on the subject, including complaining of increased user, prior to the auction, so the problem may well have surfaced in any event. In addition, Mr
Bronotte had erroneously led Mrs Kyriacou to believe that the right to increase the use by 10% related to increase in floor space, not intensity of use; and part of the advice which the second defendant negligently failed to give was the restrictions that applied to increasing or widening the so-called existing use.
Whilst the holding of outdoor wedding ceremonies in the gazebo and the keeping of wedding cars on the site may have been the catalysts that led to the detailed investigation, I consider these matters could ultimately have been overcome eg by moving the wedding ceremonies inside, but the effective cause of the injunction and the plaintiffs' loss was that the property did not have existing use rights as a wedding reception centre.
Accordingly, I am not satisfied that either defendant has established contributory negligence on the part of the plaintiffs.
It was also submitted on the part of the second defendant that the plaintiffs should have mitigated their losses by confining their non-residential use of the subject property to the scale and extent of the uses at the time of purchase; but this is really the same argument as the claim of contributory negligence and fails for the same reasons.
 
CROSS-CLAIMS
In relation to the cross-claims by each defendant against the other it seems to me that the solicitor must be regarded as bearing a greater proportion of responsibility for the plaintiffs' loss. The Council had a large number of duties to perform for all the residents and ratepayers and gratuitously answering enquiries was only one of such duties, whereas the solicitor had been specifically retained for reward to protect the interests of the plaintiffs, and as a member of the profession held herself out as having special expertise in the field of conveyancing. Accordingly, I find the solicitor responsible as to two thirds for the plaintiffs' loss and the
Council as to one third and there will be judgments on the cross-claims to give effect to this finding.
 
DAMAGES
The basic measure of damages for negligent advice either by the Council or by the solicitor is the amount by which the sum paid by the plaintiffs exceeded the true value of the subject premises at the date of purchase: Lake v Bushby [(1942) 2 All ER 964]; which in the present case means the difference between the price paid in the belief that it had existing use rights as a wedding reception centre and the value of the premises at the time of purchase without those existing use rights but in accordance with its zoning as "residential 2(A1)". On behalf of the second defendant it has been submitted that alternatively the damages may be assessed by reference to the actual loss on resale, and I was referred to Jackson and
Powell: Professional Negligence at 4-177. Commonwealth of Australia versus Amman
Aviation Pty Ltd <case>; [(1991) 174 CLR 64] at 81-2.
However, recently the Court of Appeal has re-affirmed that in the case of fraudulent or negligent misrepresentation which induces the plaintiff to enter into a contract to purchase property, the loss should be measured as the difference between the price paid or payable under the contract and the value of the property at the date of the contract: Morgan Corporate Ltd versus GWG
Leving
Pty Ltd (unreported, Court of Appeal, 5 May 1995), and I proceed on that basis.
The price paid by the Kyriacous for the property was $1,425,000 by
Contract of Sale dated 12 September 1989, and they sold it for $1,005,000 by contract dated 4 July , a difference of $420,000.
Three valuers were called, Mr Cornish and Mr Nalty on behalf of the plaintiffs who both valued the property as at September 1989 without existing use rights at $850,000, and Mr Dundas on behalf of the first defendant who valued it at that time for residential purposes at $1,140,000.
Mr Dundas' opinion was that at September 1989 the properties highest and best use (even if it had existing use rights) was as a residential block or blocks and claimed that as a wedding reception centre it was only worth $500,000, which disregarded the price actually paid by the Kyriacous which he did not include in his list of comparable sales, nor did he include the sale price of $1,005,000 in July 1992, also at public auction. If Mr Dundas' valuation is correct, it would mean that this property fell in value for residential purposes from $1,140,000 in September 1989 to $1,005,000 in July ,
contrary to the general movement of 7% increase in the St George basin area during this period.
For these reasons I prefer the valuations of Messrs Cornish and Nalty and find that the value of the subject property as at September 1989 for residential purposes without existing use rights was $850,000 and the plaintiffs are entitled to the difference between that and the price they paid, namely $575,000 (the difference in value figure).
The alternative method of assessment pressed on behalf of the second defendant namely the difference between the purchase and sale prices $420,000 would in any event need to have regard to the 7% increase in values in the St
George area in the relevant period and when that percentage is deducted from the sale price it reduces it to $934,650, leaving a difference of $490,350.
However, having regard to the lapse of time between the purchase and the sale
I consider the comparison between the September 1989 purchase price and the valuation at that date as a more reliable assessment of the plaintiffs' loss, and in any event, it is in accordance with the authority I have cited above.
The plaintiffs are also entitled to the costs associated with the purchase, $63,865 for stamp duty and $1,920 for solicitor's costs making a total $65,785. They also claim the costs of the sale of their former house at The Promenade being $11,250 for commission and $1,070 for legal expenses, a total of $12,320. In my opinion these costs did not flow directly from the negligent misstatement or advice and are not recoverable as such. However, they would be entitled to the costs of the resale of the subject premises in , and whilst there is no evidence of what these costs were it can be inferred that the costs of a sale by auction for $1,005,000 by auction in 1992 would be not less than the costs of a sale by private treaty for $570,000 in and accordingly I allow this amount of $12,320 as being the best evidence available regarding the costs of the resale of the subject premises.
Another consequential loss flowing from the breaches of duty by the defendants is the costs incurred by the plaintiffs in the Land and Environment
Court proceedings namely $61,128 paid to their solicitors Sly and Weigall, $28,524 still outstanding to such solicitors and $30,026 outstanding to the
Council pursuant to the order for costs made against them, a total of $119,680, and they are entitled to recover this. It was submitted that as the costs appear from the taxation returns and profit and loss accounts to have been paid by the third plaintiff and are not shown as gifts or loans to Mr and
Mrs Kyriacou, those sums are not recoverable by the latter, and that as
Bonhomie Pty Limited was not a purchaser of the property it could not recover anything, as neither defendant owed any duty of care to it; but in the circumstances this is a very artificial argument: Mr and Mrs Kyriacou were the only shareholders in Bonhomie Pty Limited and any loss or expenditure by it reduced their dividends and capital asset value in the company to an equivalent extent, and so was in effect a loss or expenditure by the first and second plaintiffs. In my view, it makes no difference what mechanism was used to make the payments, and until the joinder of Bonhomie Pty Limited as a third plaintiff, these artificial arguments can be disregarded.
The plaintiffs next claim the sum of $42,000 for moneys expended on improvements to the property, which ultimately failed to enhance the value of the property when it was resold for residential use. Some of these items however related to structural alterations (eg removal of an internal wall, erection of an outdoor gazebo) which were carried out without council building approval and which, in the light of all the evidence now available, if approval had been sought would have been prevented by Council before the expenditure was incurred. To take account of these features I allow only $20,000 under this head.
Finally there is a claim for interest. The plaintiffs in one set of calculations presented claimed interest on the difference in value together with the costs of purchase and costs of sale (a total of $653,105) from the date of purchase to the date of sale (settlement date in each case) at the then prevailing Commonwealth
Bank of Australia rate of 23% per annum and from the sale date at the Supreme Court rate. They also claimed interest on the amount of their own money used in the purchase ($557,750) at the Supreme Court rate from the date of purchase to the date of sale. However, in final
Submissions on their behalf they only claimed interest in respect of this head of damages on the difference in value figure ($575,000) referred to above.
Counsel for the second defendant has submitted that against this an offset should be allowed in respect of any benefits received and refers to the rents received by the plaintiffs as shown on their tax returns for years ended June 1990, 1991 and 1992, namely $100,453. However, in my view because of the relationship between the first two plaintiffs and the third plaintiff, this amount would in turn have to be offset against the losses shown in the tax returns of Bonhomie Pty Limited, no doubt substantially due to the rents received by the first two plaintiffs. These losses for the same three years totalled $99,387, virtually the same amount.
The loss was suffered at the time of completion of the contract to purchase (27 October 1989), and accordingly I allow interest on the difference in the value figure ($575,000) from 1 November 1989 to date at the Supreme
Court scale. This scale has varied during that time and to take account of these variations I have allowed it at 14% per annum.

I allow interest on the costs of the purchase ($65,785) for the same period at the same rate. I also allow interest on the amount
I have allowed to represent the costs of sale of the subject property ($12,320) from 1 September to date at 11% per annum, likewise fixed by reference to the Supreme
Court Scale, and interest on the amount already paid to Sly and Weigall for the Land and Environment
Costs ($61,128) from 1 April 1992 to date at 11% per annum and on the $20,000 for additional costs for alterations from the approximate mid point of their occupation (1 April 1991) to date at 12% per annum.
The interest is accordingly calculated as follows:
On $640,785 (ie $575,000 and $65,785) from 1 November 1989 to 31 August 1995 - 5 years 10 months at 14% per annum $523,008.00 
On $12,320 from 1 September 1992 to 31 August 1995 -3 years at 11% per annum                 4,065.00 
On $61,128 from 1 April 1992 to 31 August 1995 - 3 years 5 months at % per annum             22,970.00 
On $20,000 from 1 April 1991 to 31 August 1995 - 4 years 5 months at 12% per annum             10,598.00 
Total interest:                $560,641.00
Accordingly the various heads of damages are:
Difference between price paid and valuation for residential purposes            $575,000.00 
Stamp duty                   63,865.00 
Solicitors costs on purchase   ,920.00 
Allowed as representing costs of sale      12,320.00 
Costs of proceedings in Land and Environment
Court                     119,680.00 
Money spent on improvements etc         20,000.00 
Interest as above               560,641.00 
Total:                   $1,353,426.00 
CONCLUSIONS
There will therefore be judgment for the plaintiffs in the sum of $1.353,426.00, judgment for the Council on its Cross-Claim against the
Solicitor in the sum of $902,284.00 and for the Solicitor on her Cross-Claim against the Council in the sum of $451,142.00.
I will hear submissions on costs and any consequential matters before making formal orders.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/32.html  
