

Regina versus Fraser Matter No Cca 60441/97 [1998] NSWSC 286 (10 August 1998) 
Last Updated: 28 August 1998 
REGINA versus ROBERT McKAY FRASER /97 August 1998 
Mason P, Wood CJ at CL, Sperling J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal from Mahoney DCJ 
FILE NO/S: 60441 of 1997 
HEARING DATE/S: 29 April 1998 
DELIVERED: 10 August 1998 
PARTIES: REGINA versus Robert McKay FRASER 
JUDGMENT OF: MASON P, WOOD CJ at CL, SPERLING J 
COUNSEL: 
APPELLANT - J C Papayanni 
RESPONDENT - C K Maxwell QC 
SOLICITORS: 
APPELLANT - 
RESPONDENT - SE O'Connor, Solicitor for Public Prosecutions 
RESULT: Appeal re conviction allowed - new trial ordered 
CATCHWORDS: Criminal law and procedure - - Appeal against conviction - indecent assault (s61E Crimes Act); sexual intercourse (s66C, 78K Crimes Act)--admissibility of evidence relating to incidents not the subject of charges tendered to prove relationship and guilty passion --directions relating to lies by accused - verdicts unsafe and unsatisfactory -- Appeal upheld - new trial ordered 
No. of pages: 34 
REGINA versus Robert McKay FRASER 
The Appellant was found guilty of 4 counts of indecent assault (s61E Crimes
Act), 2 counts of homosexual intercourse with a male aged between 10 and 18 (s78K Crimes Act) and one count of sexual intercourse with a child between the age of 10 and 16 (s66C Crimes Act). He was found not guilty of a further 2 offences allegedly committed against the same person at a later date. Acquittal was directed on one further count by reason of the inability of the Crown to date the alleged offence.

The offences for which the appellant was convicted allegedly occurred over three separate days, at a time when the complainant, who was aged between 13 and 14, had been engaged to do odd jobs for the appellant. The 3 counts on which he was acquitted related to alleged incidents when the complainant was between 19 and 20 years of age, and in respect of which absence of consent was an essential ingredient of the offence.

The Crown relied on conflicts between the evidence given by the appellant at trial and statements he had made in an ERISP conducted after arrest. The evidence related to the period during which the complainant had performed odd jobs for the appellant and the type of work performed. The Crown submitted that the conflicting statements demonstrated a consciousness of guilt on the appellant's part so far as he sought to minimise the extent of contact between the complainant and himself at his house (where these offences allegedly took place), or sought to deflect the police investigation.

The Crown also led evidence relating to three later alleged incidents of a sexual nature between the complainant and the appellant which were not the subject of charges. His Honour directed the jury that the evidence of these incidents, along with the evidence of the later incident upon which a direction for acquittal had been given, could be used by them to understand the relationship between the complainant and appellant; to explain the context and circumstances of the incidents which were the subject of the charges; and to show the guilty passion the accused felt for the complainant. No direction was given regarding the use which the jury could make of the evidence relating to the charges in respect of which they had found the appellant not guilty.

There were three principal grounds of appeal against conviction: ) That His Honour had erred in law in the directions given to the jury concerning the matters said to have constituted lies told by the appellant; ) That the evidence of the "other incidents" should not have been admitted and that His Honour had erred in the directions given concerning the use to which such evidence, and the evidence in relation to the counts upon which the appellant was acquitted, could be put; ) That the verdicts were unsafe and unsatisfactory 
HELD: 1) Great care must be exercised before lies revealing a consciousness of guilt are left to a jury since there is a danger that a jury will place undue reliance on an apparently inaccurate or untruthful answer by an accused during police questioning or in the witness box, without balancing the materiality of the answer and the possible existence of innocent explanations for it. There were 5 reasons why the case did not qualify as a proper one to be left to the jury on the basis of lies demonstrating a consciousness of guilt: 
A) There was no clear identification of the matters said to constitute lies, or any clear explanation as to whether they could be taken into account as corroborative of the complainant or as an implied admission of guilt.

B) There was no clear evidence that any lies had been deliberately told.

C) So far as the lies went to show the tasks that the complainant had performed for the appellant, they did not concern a material issue.

D) Proof that the answers by the appellant in the ERISP or at trial concerning whether or not the complainant had been to the appellant's home during the period relevant for the counts on which the jury returned verdicts of guilty, were in fact a lie, depended on acceptance of the complainant's evidence, and had not otherwise been established either through any concession by the appellant at trial or through independent evidence.

E) His Honour failed adequately to identify the factors which needed to be taken into account by the jury in determining whether to place any weight on the matters said to constitute lies.

Ground of appeal made out.

Applied 
R versus Edwards <case>; [(1993) 178 CLR 193] ) HELD: 
In admitting the evidence relating to other incidents His Honour had failed to give consideration to s409B(3)(b) of the Crimes Act, and to [Sections (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s97.html) [101](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s101.html)(2) and [135](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s135.html) to [137](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s137.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/). Key considerations in relation to the probative value and prejudice to the appellant of this evidence were the remoteness in time of the later events and the age of the complainant at the time of those events. The existence of sexual contact between the complainant and appellant when both were adults, and when the complainant was able to consent to such activity had little probative value in demonstrating a guilty passion by the appellant for the complainant when he was a boy of thirteen, and provided little by way of assistance to the jury in understanding the relationship between the complainant and appellant when the former was a minor. On the other hand, such evidence was highly prejudicial to the appellant.

Care needs to be exercised in determining the issue to which relationship or tendency evidence goes in determining its admissibility, and in explaining the use to which it might be put by the jury.

Unless the High Court holds otherwise, (the decision in Gipp versus R lacking a clear ratio) the law in relation to the admission of such evidence should be taken to be as declared in R versus Wickham, R versus Beserick, and R versus AH.

Applied 
B versus R <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 599] 
R versus Wickham, NSW Court of Criminal Appeal, Gleeson CJ, Carruthers and
Mathews JJ, December 17 1991 
R versus Beserick [(1993) 30 NSWLR 510] 
R versus A H [(1997) 42 NSWLR 702] 
R versus Frawley [(1993) 69 A Crim R 208] 
Considered 
Gipp versus R [[1998] 155 ALR 52] ) HELD: 
The factual issues identified were not such as ought to have left a jury with a reasonable doubt as to the guilt of the appellant - 
Ground of appeal not made out - 
Applied 
M versus R <case>; [(1997) 149 ALR 598] 
ORDERS: Appeal allowed - new trial ordered.

REGINA versus Robert McKay FRASER 
JUDGMENT 
THE COURT: The appellant brought this appeal following his conviction in the District Court, on 7 counts preferred in an indictment containing 10 counts. The outcome of the proceedings, in summary, was as follows: 
Count 1: indecent assault, occurring between 31 March 1986, and 31 December 1986 (S 61E Crimes Act) - guilty; 
Count 2: indecent assault, occurring between 31 March 1986 and 31 December 1986 (S 61E Crimes Act) - guilty; 
Count 3: indecent assault, occurring between 31 March 1986 and 31 December 1986 (S 61E Crimes Act) - guilty 
Count 4: homosexual intercourse with a male aged between the age of 10 and 18 years, occurring between 31 March 1986 and 31 December 1986 (S 78K Crimes Act) - guilty; 
Count 5: homosexual intercourse with a male aged between the age of 10 and 18 years, occurring between 31 March 1986 and 31 December 1986 (S 78K Crimes ) - guilty; 
Count 6: indecent assault, occurring between 31 March 1986 and 11 April1987 (as amended during the trial) (S 61E Crimes Act) - guilty 
Count 7: sexual intercourse with a child between the age of 10 and 16 years, occurring between 31 March 1986 and 11 April 1987 (as amended during the trial) (S 66C Crimes Act) - guilty.

There were three further counts, for which the outcome was as follows: 
Count 8 indecent assault, occurring between 19 May 1992 and 31 December 1992 (S 61L Crimes Act) - not guilty; 
Count 9: attempt to have sexual intercourse without consent occurring between 19 May 1992 and 31 December 1992 (S 61I / 61 P Crimes Act) - not guilty; 
Count 10: sexual intercourse without consent, occurring between 19 May 1992 and 31 December 1992 (S 61I Crimes Act) - verdict of not guilty by direction.

The appeal concerned both the convictions and the severity of sentence, although by reason of the fact that this Court decided on 19 April 1998, to allow the appeal for reasons to be delivered, the sentences have not been reviewed.

The Facts 
In each instance the alleged victim was the same young man, CL, who was born on 13 April 1973. The offences of which the appellant was convicted were alleged to have occurred after the thirteenth birthday of the complainant, on April 1986 and before his fourteenth birthday on 13 April 1987. The offences of which he was acquitted were alleged to have occurred after the complainant's nineteenth birthday on 13 April 1992 and before his twentieth birthday on 13 April 1993. Lack of consent was not an ingredient of the offences charged in counts 1 to 7, but it was an essential element in relation to the offences of which the appellant was acquitted.

The Crown case in respect of these offences may be briefly summarised. It commenced with the allegation that the complainant met the appellant shortly after his thirteenth birthday. At the time, the appellant was the principal of a car dealership at Corowa where a person WS, referred to as the brother- in-law of the complainant, was employed as a motor mechanic. The introduction followed a message passed to the complainant through WS, inquiring whether he wanted to do some part time work. On a Saturday afternoon, the appellant allegedly drove the complainant to his home, where he carried out some tasks around the garden.

The matters giving rise to Counts 1 to 7, allegedly began on the following
Saturday. Each was said to have occurred at the appellant's home, after the complainant was taken back there to do some casual work. The conduct charged in counts 1 and 2 was alleged to have occurred on the one day; that charged in counts 3, 4 and 5 was alleged to have occurred on another day; while that alleged in counts 6 and 7 was alleged to have occurred on a third day.

Count 1 
On that day, the appellant was alleged to have played with the complainant's penis after pulling off his underpants, while he was having a shower. This followed the appellant's request that he dive into a swimming pool to retrieve a wedding ring from the bottom of the pool.

Count 2 
After the incident in the bathroom, the appellant was alleged to have tied the complainant's legs to each corner of a bed in the master bedroom , and to have then tied his arms above his head. He was said to have removed his own clothing and to have masturbated the complainant while he masturbated himself.
The complainant was allegedly given $40 and instructed not to tell anyone, otherwise his `brother-in-law' would lose his job, and his family's name would be put to shame.

Counts 3 and 4 
On a Saturday, one or two weeks later, the appellant allegedly picked up the complainant again and drove him to his home. He was said to have tied up the complainant on the bed in the master bedroom, and after placing a crepe bandage around his face, to have masturbated him, and to have performed fellatio on him. When the complainant loosened the ties, the appellant allegedly re-tied him, placed his penis on his groin and moved up and down on him.

Count 5 
The complainant was then allegedly moved to the shower, where he was fondled and forced to perform fellatio upon the appellant, who masturbated himself.
The complainant was given $50 and driven home.

Counts 6 and 7 
On the following weekend, the appellant was said to have again picked up the complainant and to have taken him home. In the master bedroom, he allegedly handcuffed the complainant's hands behind his back and commenced to masturbate him. When he was pushed away, the appellant was said to have released the handcuffs, to have resecured them above the complainant's head and to have tied a rope between the links and the back of the bed. He allegedly placed cream on the complainant's anus and tried to insert a finger. According to the complainant he was penetrated "just a little bit".

Counts 8 to 10 
The conduct charged in these counts, of which the appellant was acquitted, allegedly occurred after the eighteenth birthday of the complainant.

In summary, it was the evidence of the complainant that he went to the appellant's car dealership to collect a character reference from him for a court matter. This was on or about 20 May 1992, the date which the reference bears. The appellant allegedly required him, in return for that reference, to lie on his back on a desk, whereupon he masturbated him, committed fellatio and attempted to insert a finger in his anus. He was said then to have masturbated himself while squeezing the complainant's testicles. (counts 8 and ).

On another occasion (count 10) the complainant said that the appellant drove him to a caravan park, where he was introduced to a man identified as "Bob," taken to "Bob's" caravan, and tied to a bed. He said that from beneath a crepe bandage placed around his face, he saw the appellant masturbating him while `Bob' committed fellatio upon the appellant. Both then allegedly performed fellatio upon him. Next he said the appellant tried to insert a finger in his anus. The complainant's inability to date this incident, other than to say that it occurred after his fourteenth birthday, led to the directed verdict upon this count.

Evidence of Relationship 
The Crown led evidence of a number of other incidents of a sexual nature, between the appellant and the complainant which were not the subject of specific charges. In summary, they related to incidents when, according to the complainant: at some time after his seventeenth birthday, but otherwise unidentified, the appellant tied him to a stairwell at his house, placed cream on his anus and tried to penetrate him, before untying him and taking him to the master bedroom where he was retied and masturbated. After being taken to the shower, he was asked to perform fellatio on the appellant. He was given $90 for his services; in early 1995, the appellant met him in a motel room in Melbourne, where he was tied to a bed and handcuffed. A crepe bandage was placed over his face.
Polaroid photos were taken of him in this position which were tendered by the
Crown. The complainant said that this camera was used on other occasions, although no photographs in respect of any other incidents were produced; in August 1995, after the complainant moved back to Corowa, from Melbourne where he had lived for about two years he again met the appellant. He was driven to the home of the man `Bob'. He was tied to a bed in a rear bedroom of those premises, where he was masturbated, and an attempt was made to insert a finger in his anus.

The man "Bob" gave evidence confirmatory of the complainant, so far as he confirmed that he had met him in the company of the appellant once at the caravan, and once at his home. He said that the appellant had given him the
Polaroid photographs of the complainant to mind. He also said that the appellant admitted to him that he had tied the complainant to a staircase and used his finger on him sexually. He denied, however, having any sexual contact with the complainant himself.

The Crown additionally relied upon certain conflicts between the evidence of the appellant at the trial, and statements he had made in an ERISP, post arrest, concerning the period during which the complainant had performed odd jobs for him, and the type of work he had performed. These conflicts were said to display a consciousness of guilt, since they were designed to minimise the contact the appellant had with the complainant, and hence to reduce his opportunity to commit the offences charged.

The case for the appellant 
The appellant denied committing any of the acts complained of, and also denied that he had taken photographs of the complainant or that he had handed them to `Bob'. He similarly denied having any conversation with `Bob' about tying the complainant to a staircase.

He said that he had first met the complainant in 1988 at the wedding of WS (an event which was shown during the appeal to have occurred in fact on 4
November 1989). He acknowledged that the complainant came to his house on several Saturdays subsequently, to do odd jobs. There was some evidence to the effect that the house was kept unlocked, and was occupied by the appellant's wife and two children during holidays and weekends. It followed, so it was argued, that it was unlikely that any sexual misconduct occurred, on his part, on the days suggested. However, in cross examination, these witnesses agreed that they were away from the house for part of the day on Saturdays when involved in sporting activities.

The appellant said that the bed in the master bedroom between 31 March 1986 and 13 April 1987, was a king size double water bed, which was replaced with two single beds with castors in late 1989 or early 1990. Photographs were tendered of these beds, and there was evidence to the effect that a label said to have been taken from the base or box spring to one of those beds, showed its date of manufacture to be November 1989. A cleaner employed by the appellant, between 1982 and 1995, corroborated the appellant's evidence as to the type of beds kept in the master bedroom, as did the wife and two children of the appellant. This evidence was said to be in conflict with the complainant's evidence that the beds in the master bedroom, where most of the offences took place, were single beds, with legs.

The appellant said that the complainant's brother in law, WS, did not commence employment at his car dealership until December 1986. He suggested that this threw into question the complainant's evidence that it was the threat to WS's job that caused him to remain quiet, and to go along with the misconduct alleged. No employment records were tendered, and WS was not certain of the year in which his employment began. He did, however, say that cars used by the appellant were available to others working in the car dealership, and that there were a number of people who had keys to the offices giving them access at any time. The appellant said that used vehicles associated with the dealership which he drove were also used by his wife, and were cleaned twice a week.

This evidence, so it was submitted, made it unlikely that the appellant engaged in the conduct alleged at the dealership or that he carried devices such as a rope or handcuffs around with him in a car. The members of his family called, said that they had not seen such items, or a Polaroid camera, in the home.

Finally, in relation to the complainant's statement to the police that the appellant had no visible scar on his body, there was evidence that he did, in fact, have a prominent appendectomy scar during the period in question.

Ground 1 - Lies 
It was submitted that his Honour erred in law in directing that lies by the appellant, contained in the ERISP, could be considered by the jury in determining their verdict, and failed to give a sufficient or correct direction on those matters which were left as lies.

The general direction of law which his Honour gave was in accordance with principle. It was in the following terms.
 "There are four matters which the Crown must demonstrate to your satisfaction beyond reasonable doubt before you can regard a lie as being told in consciousness of guilt, and those four matters are as follows: 
First, the assertion of fact must be contrary to the truth.

Secondly, it must be deliberate.

Thirdly, it must relate to a material issue, that is, an issue which is important to the case.

And fourthly, it must be told solely from the motive of the realisation of guilt and the fear that if the truth gets out, he would be likely to be in trouble.

You can only use a lie as demonstrating a consciousness of guilt when there can be no other reason to tell lies but to stop the truth emerging because of the realisation that guilt would follow the disclosure." 
The problem which arose related to the application of this principle to the facts of the case, i.e. to the matters said to constitute a lie or lies. When turning to this topic his Honour reminded the jury of the terms of the electronically recorded interview (ERISP) between detective Sergeant Devine and the appellant on 16 October 1996. The relevant passage was in the following terms: "Q. OK thank you. As we already discussed a short time ago in a separate room whilst awaiting this electronic machine to be ready, I asked you about your knowledge of (the complainant), and I believe you replied that he was employed on a casual basis with your company.

A. on a very, yeah, on a very short period of time ...

Q. 24 Right. During what time-frame was (the complainant) employed by yourself? 
A. Nuh, 1993, approximately 93.

Q. 25 What sort of duties did he perform for your company or yourself? 
A. Oh, just mowing the lawns in the main.

Q.26 Where at? 
A. Ah, mixture of the garage and the house.

Q. Did you supply the lawn mower for that purpose? 
A. Yes.

Q. 28 Did he do any other duties? 
A. Around the garage he'd wash the cars occasionally. That would be very infrequent.
 ...

Q. 50 Earlier you spoke about the type of work that (the complainant) performed for you at either your company or your home. Does, is it a fact that he didn't do any work other than one lot of chopping wood for you whilst at your premises? 
A. I can't recall but I don't believe that to be so. Definitely mowed lawns." 
In his evidence in chief, and again in cross examination, the appellant admitted that at least some of the answers he had given to the police were wrong, in that he acknowledged that the complainant had worked for him in 1989 and 1990 mowing lawns, chopping wood, and carrying out general cleaning and raking. He said that the complainant may also have mown lawns for him once or twice at the garage, but acknowledged that he may have been mistaken when he had suggested that the complainant had also washed cars around the garage. In this regard, he said that he had honestly mistaken him for some other people who had washed cars, as a lot of casuals had worked for him over the years.

The complainant gave evidence to the effect that there was only one occasion when there was any work for him to do at the appellant's home, and that was chopping wood and raking leaves.

There was evidence from the appellant's son that he had mowed the lawns, and had carried out work around the house except for those things that he was not big enough to do. The son was born in January 1976, and was aged ten years during the period covered by counts 1 to 7, and sixteen years during the period covered by counts 8 to 10. He said that he would not have been allowed to use the mower in 1986; that activity he thought did not begin until he was eleven or twelve years old.

In summing up on this issue, his Honour reminded the Jury that the Crown relied upon the alleged conflicts as to who had cut the lawns and carried out the odd jobs about the house, and as to whatever other work the complainant had done for the appellant, on the basis that it revealed a desire on the part of the appellant "to keep the complainant out of the house," and to minimise knowing much about him. The Crown submission was encapsulated thus: `He submitted to you that if it was a genuine mistake then this part of his submissions will amount to nothing, but he said to you that if you come to the view that the accused, when he was answering the police at those portions of his record of interview, withheld information that he knew about from the police, only - and you will remember the turn of the phrase - `only to throw dust in their eyes', he said then there would be .....' the consequences which arise where a lie is told indicating a consciousness of guilt.

His Honour additionally directed the jury that "as a matter of general principle, lies told to an investigating police officer are able to be used to indicate in the accused a consciousness of guilt", where they were "told for the sole purpose of deflecting police investigation".

The direction given in relation to a lie told to deflect a police investigation was not entirely in accordance with principle although it may have been understandable, if intended as an example of the fourth element which needs to be established where lies are relied upon as corroboration, or as an implied admission of guilt.

The care which is required in relation to lies was underlined in Edwards <case>; [(1993) 178 CLR 193], where
Deane, Dawson and Gaudron JJ at 208/9, observed: "Ordinarily, the telling of a lie will merely affect the credit of the witness who tells it. A lie told by an accused may go further and, in limited circumstances, amount to conduct which is inconsistent with innocence, and amount therefore to an implied admission of guilt. In this way the telling of a lie may constitute evidence. When it does so, it may amount to corroboration provided that it is not necessary to rely upon the evidence to be corroborated to establish the lie. At one time it was thought that only a lie told out of court could amount to an implied admission, (Tumahole Vereng versus The King [(1949) AC 253], at p 270; Reg versus Chapman (1973) QB at pp 783-784) but the distinction is not logically supportable and is no longer drawn. (Eade versus The
King <case>; [(1924) 34 CLR 154], at p ; R versus Tripodi <case>; [(1961) VR 186], at pp 193-194; Reg versus Perera <case>; [(1982 VR 901], at pp 904-905; Reg versus Heyde [(1990) 20 NSWLR 234], at pp , 241; Director of Public Prosecutions versus Boardman [(1975) AC 421], at pp 4288-429;
Reg versus Lucas (Ruth)M(1981) QB, at pp 724-725; Heydon, `Can Lies
Corroborate?' Law Quarterly Review, vol 89 (1973) 552). When the telling of a lie by an accused amounts to an implied admission, the prosecution may rely upon it as independent evidence to "convert what would otherwise have been insufficient into sufficient evidence of guilt" (Dearman versus Dearman <case>; [(1908) 7 CLR 549], at p. 555, per Griffith CJ) or as corroborative evidence.

But not every lie told by an accused provides evidence probative of guilt. It is only if the accused is telling a lie because he perceives that the truth is inconsistent with his innocence that the telling of the lie may constitute evidence against him. (Eade versus The King (1924) 34 CLR, at p. 158) In other words, in telling the lie the accused must be acting as if he were guilty. It must be a lie which an innocent person would not tell. That is why the lie must be deliberate. Telling an untruth inadvertently cannot be indicative of guilt." 
In relation to the subject matter of the lie, their Honours said, at 210: "A lie can constitute an admission against interest only if it is concerned with some circumstance or event connected with the offence (ie it relates to a material issue) and if it was told by the accused in circumstances in which the explanation for the lie is that he knew that the truth would implicate him in the offence. Thus, in any case where a lie is relied upon to prove guilt, the lie should be precisely identified, as should the circumstances and events that are said to indicate that it constitutes an admission against interest (see M versus R (unreported; S.A. Court of Criminal Appeal; 18 August 1993, pp.4-5). And the jury should be instructed that they may take the lie into account only if they are satisfied, having regard to those circumstances and events, that it reveals a knowledge of the offence or some aspect of it (see, eg Credland versus Knowler [(1951) 35 Cr. App. R. 48];
Tripodi versus The Queen (1961) 104 CLR1, at p 10; Reg versus Buck [(1982) 8 A Crim
R 208], at P 214; Reg versus Preval [(1984) 3 NSWLR 647], at pp.
-651; Reg versus Evans (1985), 38 SASR at pp 348-349; People versus Showers [(1968) 440 P. 2d 939], at p 942) and that it was told because the accused knew that the truth of the matter about which he lied would implicate him in the offence, or, as was said in R versus Lucas (Ruth) because of `a realisation of guilt and a fear of the truth'.

Finally of relevance to the present case is the reminder at :

If the telling of a lie by an accused is relied upon, not merely to strengthen the prosecution case, but as corroboration of some other evidence, the untruthfulness of the relevant statement must be established, otherwise than through the evidence of the witness whose evidence is to be corroborated. If a witness required to be corroborated is believed in preference to the accused and this alone establishes the lie on the part of the accused, reliance upon the lie for corroboration would amount to the witness corroborating himself.
That is a contradiction in terms." 
In the manner in which the inconsistencies relied upon were used in the present case, we fail to see how they related to a material matter, ie were "concerned with some circumstance or event connected with" the offences charged. Whether or not the work undertaken by the complainant at the appellant's home involved lawn mowing, cutting wood or other chores, and whether or not he carried out car washing activities at the car yard, had precious little to do with opportunity. If the complainant was at the appellant's home or at the car yard, an opportunity arose whatever the nature of the work carried out at those locations.

What was of potential significance was whether or not the complainant's first visit to the home occurred during the period covered by the first seven counts (i.e. between 31 March 1986 and 11 April 1987) or during the period covered by the remaining charges (ie between 19 May 1992 and 31 December 1992). Had the ground been sufficiently laid to show that the appellant had lied deliberately, when suggesting in the ERISP, or in his evidence at the trial, that the complainant had not been to his home during those periods, then that may have reflected a consciousness of guilt.

However, the appellant did not in his evidence admit that the complainant had been to his home during the critical period for the first seven counts, or that his answer in the ERISP had been incorrect save to substitute 1989 for as the time of the first visit. To show that the accused had lied in relation to the first of the critical periods, either in the ERISP or in his evidence at the trial, would have depended upon acceptance of the complainant's evidence - an approach which would have been impermissible for the reasons earlier mentioned.

Further, there was no evidence that, before the interview, the appellant was informed by police that they were investigating allegations of sexual assault occurring at his home, involving the complainant, during the years 1986 and , such that might have placed him on notice of the criticality of the date of the first contact between them.

The problems which arose in this respect were then compounded by the lack of any clear instruction to the jury as to whether the evidence of the accused at the trial, and in particular any concession he made as to the date when the complainant first worked for him, was relied upon as corroborative of the complainant or as tending to prove his guilt. From the way that the evidence was summarised and the manner in which the accused had been cross examined, the jury were certainly entitled to assume that this was a matter of some importance. Yet there was no clear explanation or direction in this regard, nor any caution that they could not find that the accused had lied, as to any contact before 1989, by reference to the evidence of the complainant.

We are of the view that the case did not qualify as one where it was proper for lies to be left as revealing a possible consciousness of guilt since: [a] there was no clear identification of the lies that were relied upon, nor any clear statement as to whether they could be taken into account as corroborative of the complainant, or as otherwise standing as an implied admission of guilt; [b] there was no clear evidence of any lie or lies having been deliberately told; [c] if the lies went to the actual tasks carried out at the appellant's home, or at the garage, then they did not concern a material issue; [d] proof that the answers given in the ERISP and at the trial were a lie, insofar as the appellant asserted that the complainant had not been to his home until after the period relevant for counts 1 to 7, depended upon acceptance of the complainant's evidence. That was not otherwise established through concession of the appellant at trial, or through independent proof; [e] the manner in which the principles of law, correctly stated by his Honour, were applied to the facts were confusing and did not adequately identify the factors which needed to be taken into account by the jury in determining whether to place any weight upon the matters said to constitute lies.

The authorities reveal the need for great care to be exercised before lies revealing a consciousness of guilt are left to a jury: Preval [(1984) 3
NSWLR 647]; Sutton <case>; [(1993) 178 CLR 193.] The reason for that stems from the danger that a jury will place undue reliance upon an apparently inaccurate or untruthful answer given to police, or in the witness box, by an accused without balancing against it the materiality of the answer and the possible existence of an innocent explanation for it.

Having regard to these principles and the possibility that the jury in this case used the evidence for an inappropriate chain of reasoning, we were of the view that ground 1 had been made out and that a new trial should be ordered.

Grounds 2, 3, 5 - Guilty Passion/relationship evidence 
This appeal was argued and decided before the High Court handed down its decision in The Queen versus Gipp (1998) 155 ALR 15. Although there is nothing in that decision which would alter the outcome of this appeal, and although it was not a case subject to the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), we propose to make some reference to it, so far as the question of relationship evidence was there addressed.

Objection was taken to the tender of the evidence earlier summarised in these reasons, and as to the directions given concerning its use. Objection was also taken to the use of that which was led in relation to the count (count 10) upon which there was a directed acquittal.

Its tender was pressed and, it would seem, allowed in accordance with the
Chamilios principle (Court of Criminal Appeal, NSW 24 October 1985 unreported, and also in accordance with the principles considered in
Wickham, Court of Criminal Appeal NSW 17 December 1991, unreported; and B <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 599)], to show that the appellant entertained a guilty passion for the complainant, and also to establish the true nature and extent of their relationship.

After explaining that the nine charges, which remained after the 10th count was taken away, were "what the law describes as representative charges", an unhelpful if not misleading expression, so far as it carries an implication that there were other criminal charges available which may have been preferred and proved against the appellant had the Crown so elected, his Honour directed the jury in relation to the ways the evidence could be used: "The purpose for `that other evidence' being placed before you is that so that you may understand first, the nature of the relationship that existed between the complainant and the accused at the relevant period; secondly, the context and the circumstances in which the Crown alleges that the incidents in the indictments occurred; and thirdly, what the Crown alleges was the attitude of the accused towards the complainant - what the Crown referred to as `guilty passion'. 
The evidence has been admitted for those purposes alone. It cannot be used to found a verdict of guilty in respect of any of the counts in the indictment in substitution for the evidence admitted specifically in respect of any one of those counts.
 ...
 "If you go to the list of essential elements under any one charge and if you decide that the Crown has failed to establish the complete list beyond reasonable doubt, you must not say that there is enough evidence in what I have been referring or calling `that other evidence', and use that to make up any short fall in the Crown's case. So that is the reason why you have been presented with that additional evidence." 
Evidence of this kind, when used for the third of the purposes identified, as it was in this case, is a form of tendency evidence within the meaning of the [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), which defines tendency evidence as: "... [e]vidence of the character, reputation or conduct of a person or a tendency that a person has or had ... [which proves] that a person has or had a tendency (whether because of the person's character or otherwise) to act in a particular way, or to have a particular state of mind" (Dictionary [Part )](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/index.html#p1) 
It must satisfy the requirements for the admission of that class of evidence.

It may also be capable of explaining the nature of the relationship between an accused and his victim, and of placing any matter alleged against him into a true and realistic context: Beserick [(1993) 30 NSWLR 510], and B at 605-5 per Brennan J, and at 610 per Deane J.

When employed for either purpose, its admissibility depends upon its relevance, which in turn depends upon it being shown to be capable of rationally affecting (directly or indirectly) the assessment of the probability of the existence of a fact in issue: [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) [SS ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s55.html) and [56](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s56.html).

Additionally, although it seems not to have been used in this way in the present trial, evidence of this kind can be relevant to subsidiary matters such as rebuttal of good character, explanation for delay in complaint, and other aspects raised as forensic issues by the defence.

For discussion of the necessity that "relationship evidence" must be relevant in some discernible way in order to be admissible, see Frawley [(1993) 69 A
Crim R 298] (per Gleeson CJ at 218 and following, and per Sheller J, at .

For the reasons identified by Ireland J in AH [(1997) 42 NSWLR 702], with whom Hunt CJ at CL and Levine J, agreed, it is important that the use to which evidence of this kind is to be put is clearly identified, and explained to the jury, particularly now having regard to the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/). In that case, Ireland J observed, at 708: "Prior to the [Evidence Act 1995](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), and in R versus Beserick [(1993) 30 NSWLR 510] at 515, this Court held on the basis of respectable authority, that evidence of conduct with a sexual connotation between the complainant and the accused other than that which is the subject of an offence or offences charged is relevant in two different ways: the relationship revealed may place the evidence of the events which give rise to a particular charge into their true context as part of the essential background against which the evidence of the complainant and of the accused necessarily fall to be evaluated: B versus The Queen <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 599] at 610 (see also 602-603) and the guilty passion of the accused revealed - or, in less inflammatory terms, the sexual desire or feeling of the accused for the complainant - is directly relevant to proving that the offence charged was committed: R v
Ball [(1911) AC 47] at 71; see also Pfennig versus The Queen <case>; [(1975) 182 CLR 461] at 526.

The evidence - once admissible for either or both of those purposes - will also necessarily make the complainant's evidence more credible in relation to the events upon which the charges were based.

Where the Crown introduces the evidence for the former purpose, it is not tendency evidence, and the requirements of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s97.html) and [s 101](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s101.html) are irrelevant R versus Harvey (CCA, 11 December 1996, unreported) at 5-6. Once admitted for that purpose, however, the evidence cannot also be used as tendency evidence in the sense that, because the accused had the guilty passion, he did the act in question unless it does comply with those requirements (Evidence Act, [s )](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s95.html), and the judge should direct the jury that they may not use it in that way unless it does comply." 
In a case such as the present, where the "other evidence" (to use the trial
Judge's expression) concerns sexual conduct involving the complainant, the relevant starting point is S 409B(3) Crimes Act. That section makes inadmissible in "prescribed sexual offence proceedings," as defined in S4 of the Crimes Act (which would include the present proceedings), any evidence which discloses or implies that the complainant has or may have had sexual experience, or has or may have taken part in any sexual activity except in certain defined situations, and then only where its `probative value outweighs any distress, humiliation or embarrassment which the complainant might suffer as a result of its admission".

So far as the transcript discloses, consideration was not given to this section, although as this Court held in Beserick it would have been appropriate to do so, by assessing the probative value of the evidence, and by examining whether one of other of the exceptions (most relevantly those mentioned in S409B(3) (a) or (b)) was applicable. In most instances, as
Beserick makes clear, the evidence will satisfy the exception in S409
B(3)(b) as falling within the term "relationship" used in that provision, ie so long as the relationship was "existing or recent" at the time of the prescribed offence.

There were further thresholds, arising under the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), to be passed before this class of evidence could have been admitted.

First, the evidence was not admissible to prove that the accused had a tendency to act in a particular way unless the Court thought that it would have "significant probative value" [(S97(1))](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s97.html) and then only if its probative value "substantially outweighed" any prejudicial effect it may have had on the accused [(S101(2)).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s101.html) 
The expression "significant probative value" has been interpreted to mean that its degree of relevance to the events giving rise to the offence charged is important or of consequence: Lockyer [(1996) 89 A Crim R 457] at ; Lock [(1997) 91 A Crim R 356]; and AH per Ireland J, at 709. Evidence of guilty passion can qualify as such (Harriman <case>; [(1989) 167 CLR 590] at 597-599; S <case>; [(1989) 168 CLR 266] at 275; B  <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 599] at 618; and Gipp.

Next, its admission, whether as tendency evidence or as relationship evidence, must have been refused by the court if its probative value was judged to be "outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice" to the accused [(S137).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s137.html) 
Finally, general discretions were exercisable, first under [S ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s135.html), to exclude the evidence if its probative value was "substantially outweighed by the danger that the evidence might be unfairly prejudicial" to the accused; and secondly, under [S ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s136.html), to limit the use to which it might have been put if there was a "danger that a particular use (of it) might be unfairly prejudicial to" the accused. These discretions were also equally applicable whether the evidence was pressed as tendency evidence, or as relationship evidence, or otherwise.

The task of applying these provisions of the Crimes Act and of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) to any given case is not made any easier by the different terms in which each is expressed.
However, common to each is the need to assess the probative value of the evidence. Additionally, its potential prejudice to the accused needs to be considered in relation to the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), and in relation to any residual discretion that may exist at common law.

It was with these matters that the present ground was primarily concerned. So far as the transcript reveals, they were not matters to which his Honour gave any consideration.

The uncharged conduct sought to be relied upon comprised three events, two in and another said to have occurred not earlier than 1990. The jury were informed that, notwithstanding the acquittal of the accused upon count 10, they were also entitled to take evidence of the conduct the subject of that charge into account "as part of the overall circumstances of which the first 9 counts are representative charges". The best date that the complainant could give to this event was that it occurred some time after April 1987. If Bob was correct in his evidence as to the time he lived in the caravan park, then it could only have occurred between 1991 and 1994.

No specific direction was given in relation to whether or not the jury could similarly take into account evidence of the conduct charged in counts 8 and 9, occurring in May 1992, in the event of them reaching a not guilty verdict through failure of the Crown to prove absence of consent. It is likely that this was the basis of the acquittal, and that by parity of reasoning, having been given the direction mentioned in relation to count 10, that they did add the evidence concerning these counts to the evidence in relation to the uncharged conduct.

No allowance was made for the lapse of at least five years between the period charged for the conduct concerning counts 1 to 7, and that charged for counts and 9; or for the lapse of at least eight years between the period charged for counts 1 to 7, and that for the first two of the uncharged episodes. Nor was any consideration given as to the potential time difference between the conduct charged in those counts and that which was undetermined for Count 10, or that which was applicable to the remaining uncharged episode, but which would appear to have been not less than four years and three years respectively.

While there is authority for taking into account, as evidence of guilty passion, conduct subsequent to that charged: Beserick at 510, and Fordham (Court of Criminal Appeal, NSW 2 December 1997 unreported), clearly the circumstances in which it occurs, and the time at which it occurs, can be very relevant to weight.

As was observed by Hunt CJ at CL, in Beserick at 521 to 522: "Trial judges must ... give anxious consideration in the exercise of their discretion in every child sexual abuse case to the weight of each piece of evidence tendered to establish a guilty passion on the part of the accused.
... remoteness of the other activity from the time of the offence charged goes to the weight of that evidence. The more remote the other sexual activity is, the less will be its weight; and in general (as a matter of commonsense), the weight to be afforded to subsequent sexual activity will be less than that to be afforded to previous sexual activity." 
Ireland J, similarly observed in AH at 709: "If the conduct in question is not remote from the time of the alleged offence, the Crown should usually have little difficulty in establishing that the evidence has importance in establishing the guilt of the accused, and thus that it is of significant probative value." 
Otherwise, we would add where the additional conduct is remote from the time of the alleged offence.

The remoteness in time of the conduct in question, and of any change in the legal status of the complainant as a participant in sexual activity with the appellant, were accordingly important in any consideration of the probative value of the evidence.

Against this was to be weighed any prejudicial effect of the evidence so far as tendency evidence was concerned. The prejudice potentially lay in the circumstance that the ordinary person may well think that someone with an established tendency, desire or passion to behave in a particular way, whenever a suitable opportunity arises, will yield to that personality characteristic or emotion and so behave in the circumstance of the particular case; or, in a case where an offence is known to have occurred, but the identity of the perpetrator is in issue, will ignore the possibility that some person other than the accused, but of like propensity, may have committed that offence: Pfennig at 488.

By 1990, the complainant was seventeen years of age, by 1992 he was nineteen, and by 1995 he was twenty-two. An obvious question arises as to whether the existence of sexual contact between the two men, in 1992 or 1995, when they were adults and capable of consensual activity had any significance in demonstrating a sexual attraction on the part of the appellant for the complainant in 1986, when he had been a thirteen year old boy. Particularly is this the case where it seems likely that the jury regarded the later conduct as consensual, or at least had a reasonable doubt about that.

We were of the view, having regard to the remoteness in time, and the age of the complainant when the uncharged events occurred, that evidence of conduct in these later years lacked significant probative value. It was, moreover, potentially extremely prejudicial, particularly since it laid the way for the tender of the Polaroid photographs, which may well have been regarded by the jury as corroborative of the complainant so far as he said that he had been bound and restrained when the other charged events had occurred.

Upon that basis, it seems to us that evidence concerning these uncharged events should not have been received as evidence of guilty passion, or for that matter as background relationship evidence. In the latter regard, we are of the view that events in 1992 or 1995 between the appellant and the complainant, when they were adults, were incapable of placing acts alleged to have occurred between them many years earlier, when one was still a minor, into any relevant context, or to assist the jury with an understanding of their relationship.

We were also of the view that it was erroneous for his Honour to have left to the jury the evidence in relation to Count 10, once the jury had been directed to acquit the appellant of that count. Not only was the accused entitled to assume once that part of the case had been taken away (as occurred at the close of the Crown case), that he need not deal with it any further in his case; but additionally, the conduct alleged was simply unfixed as to time, so that it could not have been said with any certainty to have had a significant probative value, or to have contributed much to the relationship or context in which the other events alleged occurred.

Similar principles apply in relation to the evidence concerning Counts 8 and
No direction was given as to the manner in which the jury should approach this evidence, in the event of them deciding to acquit the accused on those counts. Nor was the evidence shown to have had much in the way of probative value in that the conduct alleged related to a period not sooner than five years later than that charged for the first 7 counts, and at a time when the complainant was an adult.

Additionally, although a general caution was given in relation to the evidence, it fell short of the clear explanation and warning which this Court considered appropriate in Beserick. Hunt CJ at CL there said at 516, in the event of the discretion to exclude the evidence being exercised unfavourably to the accused, then "... an explanation should invariably be given to the jury - as soon as the first of that evidence is given and, if necessary, again in the summing-up - is to the purpose for which the evidence is admitted, together with a warning to the jury that they must not either substitute evidence of such other sexual activity for the specific activity which is the subject of the offence charged or reason that, because the accused may have done something wrong with the complainant on some other occasion or occasions, he must also have done so on the occasion which is the subject of the offence charged." 
Accordingly, we consider that this ground of appeal has been made out.
However, before parting from it we wish to make some reference to the decision in Gipp.

In Gipp, where the High Court split three to two, divergent views were expressed as to the circumstances in which relationship evidence might be received, and as to the use to which it might be put. As the three separate majority judgments by Gaudron J, Kirby J and Callinan J have little common ground, it is difficult, if not impossible, to extract any clear ratio from the case.

Gaudron J, expressed the view (at 19) that "general evidence of sexual abuse on occasions other than those charged does not have that special probative value which renders it admissible as similar fact or propensity evidence". In the absence of a feature of the kind present in Ball, that made it directly relevant to the question of guilt, then it was admissible only to meet some subsidiary issue arising in the trial to which it was relevant, arising from the way in which the defence case is conducted, for example to explain lack of surprise or failure to complain.

Kirby J, who preferred to categorise relationship evidence as tendency evidence, accepted that it could be admitted upon a limited basis (ie for a purpose other than proving a particular tendency), if its probative value outweighed its prejudicial effect (at 54). In quoting with approval a statement by the Victorian Court of Appeal in Vonarx (court of Appeal Vic 15
November 1995, unreported at 12-13) that such evidence may be used to enable "the evidence relied upon by the Crown in proof of the offences charged to be assessed and evaluated within a realistic contextual setting". His Honour appears to have accepted the correctness of the statements of Brennan and
Deane JJ in B, and of this Court in Beserick, Wickham and AH.

Callinan J, at 64, rejected the notion that there was a "special category of background evidence that may be adduced by the prosecution in a criminal case (absent, that is, any forensic conduct by the defence that may make it admissible)". His Honour expressly disagreed with the observations of Deane J in B, but made no reference to the parallel observations of Brennan J in that case, or to the classic statements by the High Court as to relationship evidence in Wilson <case>; [(1970) 123 CLR 334], a decision which has stood unquestioned, and applied in innumerable trials since it was handed down. He may, however, be assumed to disagree at least with the observations of Brennan J, in B, in the light of his disagreement with Deane J in that case. His Honour concluded that if evidence of this kind was to be received, then "it must owe its admissibility to some quite specific, other purpose, including, for example, in an appropriate case, proof of a guilty passion, intention, or propensity, or opportunity, or motive". (at 64) 
In their joint minority judgment, McHugh and Hayne JJ, at 35-36, accepted the correctness of the admission of the evidence at first instance in the case under appeal, not as propensity (tendency) evidence but `for the limited purpose of making the circumstances of the specific offences more intelligible", ie so that the jury "could understand the context of the incidents that were the subject of the charges. Although their judgment makes no reference to the observations of Brennan and Deane JJ in B, it is entirely consistent with those observations, and with the approach which has been hitherto regarded as settled by this Court.

In the result, three members of the Court (albeit that two members were in the minority) accepted the admissibility of relationship evidence to set the offences alleged in their context, and to enable the jury to properly evaluate the evidence concerning them. In those circumstances, we are of the view that until the High Court decides otherwise, the law as laid down in AH,
Beserick and Wickham, and as declared by Brennan and Deane JJ in B, should continue to be applied in this State.

Ground 9 - the convictions were unsafe and unsatisfactory 
A number of matters were identified by Counsel for the appellant as supporting the conclusion that the verdicts in relation to Counts 1 to 7 were "unsafe and unsatisfactory". For the appellant to succeed on this ground (which was argued by reference to the question whether the verdict was unreasonable or not supportable on the evidence, and not by reference to the wider considerations discussed in Gipp) this Court must reach the view that the jury ought to have entertained a reasonable doubt as to his guilt: M [(1994) 181 CLR ]
and Jones (1997) 72 ALJR 78.

Although the test has been expressed in terms which recognise that if this
Court has, upon its assessment of the evidence, a reasonable doubt about the guilt of the appellant, then so should it attribute that doubt to the jury, it does not follow that the advantage which the jury possesses in seeing and hearing the witnesses is to be ignored. This was a case where the appellant did give evidence and that similarly needs to be recognised.

The matters relied upon by the appellant in support of this ground concern the following: the evidence as to the date on which WS began to work at the appellant's car yard and on which he was married - matters relevant to the complainant's evidence that at the time of the first offence in 1986, he was threatened that if he complained WS would lose his job. The evidence concerning the date on which WS began that job was equivocal, in the absence of employment records being tendered. There was in fact evidence from
WS that he had worked at the dealership for a year or so before being married. It was his own recollection that he commenced in 1986. By the time the complainant gave evidence, WS was his brother in law, and to so describe him did not necessarily carry the suggestion that he already had that status in 1986.
 the evidence that there were no single beds in the master bedroom until late 1989, the bed previously there having been a waterbed with no base which sat flat on the floor - a matter relevant to the complainant's evidence that in the period March 1986 to April 1987 he was assaulted upon a single bed in that room, and tied to the legs of that bed; [c] the evidence that the appellant had a pronounced appendectomy scar - yet the complainant noticed no such scar, whereas he might have been expected to have done so if he had been forced to engage in the conduct alleged; the evidence that other persons within the appellant's family had access to the house over the weekends, and that a number of people from the dealership had keys to the premises - circumstances said to render conduct of the kind alleged at these locations unlikely; the evidence that a number of persons had the use of the motor vehicles the appellant drove - a circumstance said to render it unlikely that the paraphernalia allegedly used in the assaults would have been carried around in those vehicles; the evidence that his family had not seen that paraphernalia around the house or any Polaroid camera; the length of time between the events and the first complaint; and the somewhat chaotic history of the complainant which had included the use by him of cannabis and heroin.

These were all matters placed before the jury. None except the second was of a kind which, if believed, closed out the conduct alleged. The production of a manufacturer's label did not of itself prove anything, since it could have come from any bed. It would seem that, by its verdict, the jury chose to disbelieve the appellant, and the other witnesses, as to the date of the change over of the beds.

The first matter would have been critical had the commencement date of WS's employment been properly established as occurring after 1986, but that was not done. All of the other matters were capable of being the fact without necessarily throwing doubt of any serious kind upon the complainant's account.

In these circumstances, and having regard to the advantage which the jury had of seeing and hearing the witnesses themselves, we do not think that this case meets the test in Jones. It is for these reasons that the Court made the order which it did on 29 April last, for a new trial rather than an acquittal.

Other Grounds 
A number of subsidiary grounds were contained in the Notice of Appeal but were not argued, in view of the orders which the Court considered appropriate. They will not be addressed here as they are of lesser moment and do not impact upon the last ground mentioned.
 * * * 
