

Citivale Pty Ltd versus Office of State Revenue; Citivale Pty Ltd versus Chief
Commissioner of State Revenue Matter Nos 3046/95 [1998] NSWSC 1040 (10
September 1998) 
Last Updated: 6 October 1998 
CITIVALE PTY LTD versus OFFICE OF STATE REVENUE /95 
CITIVALE PTY LIMITED versus CHIEF COMMISSIONER OF STATE REVENUE /97 September 1998 
Hodgson CJ in EQ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: Prior to 1986, Woollahra Council owned a parcel of land known as the Vernon Street car park, and that land was being used as a free public car park. This use continued until about 1st April 1993. 
By a contract dated 28th November 1986, the Council agreed to sell this land to Mirvac Projects Pty. Limited, and Mirvac subsequently agreed to sell it on to Citivale. These contracts were completed by transfer or conveyance of the land from the Council to Citivale on 13th February 1989.

Citivale paid land tax in respect of the amount for the years 1990, 1991 and , and was issued with an assessment for land tax in the year 1993. On 19th
April 1993, Citivale submitted to the Office of State Revenue that it was not liable for land tax in respect of these four years, on the ground that at the relevant times, namely midnight on 31st December of the year prior to each tax year, the land was under the management and control of the Council within the meaning of s.651(1) of the [Local Government
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/lga182/).

The Office of State Revenue at that stage acceded to that submission and issued land tax assessments amounting to nil, and it refunded the amounts which had been paid. Meanwhile, Citivale had assigned to the Council its rights to recover land tax and interest, and the Council sought payment of interest on the amounts refunded. In December 1995, the Office of State
Revenue reversed its decision, and issued further amended assessments claiming land tax as before from Citivale. Citivale objected to these assessments on th February 1996. The Chief Commissioner of State Revenue disallowed these objections on 16th December 1996.

I am dealing with two proceedings. Firstly, there are Administrative Law proceedings brought by Citivale appealing against the Chief Commissioner of
State Revenue's decision of 16th December 1996. Secondly, there are Equity
Division proceedings in which the Council seeks interest on amounts refunded.

The proceedings raised four issues. Firstly, there are three issues under s.651 of the [Local Government
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/lga182/), which is in the following terms: .(1) Unless the contrary is expressly provided by any Act passed after the commencement of this Act, taxes and stamp duties shall not be chargeable or payable under any Act now or hereafter in force upon - any land vested in or under the management and control of the council; any property or income of the council; any receipt or acquittance given by one servant of a council to another in the course of the internal administration of the council's business; and any receipt for any money, or for the return of any money deposited by any person with the council in relation to any contract entered into by him with the council, or in relation to any tender made by him for any contract with the council.

This section shall not be deemed to extend to any rate or assessment made or levied by - another council; the Metropolitan Water Sewerage and Drainage Board; the Board of Fire Commissioners of New South Wales.

There are two legal and one factual issue concerning this section. The first legal question is whether the contrary to s.651 is provided by the Land Tax
Management Act. The second legal question is the meaning of the words "under the management and control of the Council". Essentially, the question here is whether this is satisfied by de facto management and control, or whether there has to be shown some kind of right to manage and control, and in particular, whether such right must be a right arising from the commission of the land to the care of the Council under the [Local Government
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/lga182/). The third question under s.651 is a factual question, namely do the circumstances of this case bring it within the meaning of s.651 on its true construction. The fourth issue in the case is whether there is an entitlement to interest on refunded land tax.

Dealing first with the first legal issue which I identified in relation to s.651, Dr. Sorensen for the Chief Commissioner of State Revenue relied on s.21C of the Land Tax Management Act as it was in force at the relevant time.
That section is in the following terms: 
C(1) The Crown, a local council, a county council or a public authority is not liable for land tax in respect of land it owns (except as specifically provided by Part 3).

A lessee (other than a sub-lessee) of land or part of land owned by the Crown, a local council, a county council or a public authority is for land tax purposes to be considered the owner of a parcel of land ("the notional parcel") consisting of the land or part leased. The Crown, local council, county council or public authority is then not to be considered owner of the notional parcel.

If there are joint lessees, they are to be considered to be joint owners of the notional parcel.

For the purposes of determining the lessee's land tax liability when the notional parcel consists of a part of land, the land value of the notional parcel is: unless paragraph (b) applies, the land value calculated in accordance with the following formula: land value of the land value of the rental value of the notional parcel notional parcel = entire parcel x rental value of the entire parcel if the Chief Commissioner is not satisfied that the land value obtained in accordance with paragraph (b) is fair and reasonable, such proportion of the land value of the entire parcel as the Chief Commissioner considers fair and reasonable.

In this section, "part of land" includes a building on land and part of a building on land.

This section does not apply to the following leases: a lease or a lease of a class prescribed as exempt from this section; a lease to which section 21 applies; a lease of land from the Crown (other than the Crown in the capacity of a public authority) entered into or renewed before 1 January 1987 the terms of which relating to rental payable have not been varied since that date; a lease of land from a local council, a county council or a public authority entered into or renewed before 1 January 1991 the terms of which relating to rental payable have not been varied since that date; a lease of land owned by a public authority that is liable to land tax in respect of that land under Part 3; a lease the term of which (including any term available under an option) is less than 12 months; a lease in respect of which the lessee is the Crown, a local council, a county council or a public authority.

This section is taken to have applied on and from 31 December 1988 to land owned by the Crown other than land owned by a public authority.

Dr. Sorensen pointed out that when s.651 was enacted, there was no relevant exemption in respect of Council land provided under the State land tax legislation of the time, although there was an exemption in respect of
Commonwealth land tax in relation to land owned by a Council. Accordingly, there was no competing State legislation in the field when s.651 was passed.

In 1956, the present State Act was introduced, and by s.10(1)(a), it exempted land owned by a local Council. That provision was subsequently replaced by s.21C. When one has regard to that history, and to the circumstance that the
Land Tax Management Act, by s.21C, makes specific provision in relation to land tax as to what exemption should be given to a local Council, it can be seen, Dr. Sorensen submitted, that in terms of s.651 the contrary is expressly provided by an Act passed after the commencement of the Local Government Act .

Mr. McDougall QC submitted that s.21C could not be considered an express provision to the contrary of s.651. Section 21C provided not for exemption of identified property, but for exemption of certain specific legal persons in respects of property owned by those legal persons, so that it could not even be said that this was an implied provision to the contrary. A fortiori it was not an express provision to the contrary.

In my opinion, there is some force in the submission that a particular provision exempting a Council in respect of land tax in particular should prevail over a general exemption of Councils from taxes generally. However, I do not think s.21C does amount to an express provision to the contrary of s.651. At best, it could work by implication; and it does not in my opinion partially repeal s.651. Accordingly, in my opinion, it does become necessary to consider whether the amount in this case is exempted from land tax as being land under the management and control of the Council.

Turning to the next question, namely whether those words just require consideration of a de facto position, or whether they require some right in the Council, or maybe some particular class of right in the Council, Dr.
Sorensen pointed to various provisions of the Local Government Act providing for the placing of land in "the care, control and management" of local
Councils: in particular, s.344(1), s.345(1) and s.350. He submitted that it was clear that what was intended by s.651 was to cover the situation where land is placed in the care, control and management of a Council pursuant to provisions such as these. He also referred me to s.270J and s.270C of the
Local Government Act as indicating the circumstances in which it is contemplated by the Local Government Act that the Council will be operating parking areas.

Mr. McDougall submitted that management and control is not a term of art. The section should simply be applied in accordance with its terms; and if one could say that, as a matter of fact, land was under the management and control of the Council, then the requirements of that provision are satisfied. He submitted that the sections to which Dr. Sorensen referred were sections where it is contemplated that something would be done to charge the council with responsibility for property, and it was notable that in s.651, the word "care", which appeared in the other sections, was omitted.

In my opinion, the Act does not indicate an intention that s.651(1)(a) apply only when land has been placed under the care, control and management of the
Council pursuant to other sections of the Local Government Act. It is significant that the word "care" is omitted in s.651; so that the language is different from the other sections to which Dr. Sorensen referred me. In my opinion, the enquiry required by s.651 is essentially a factual one as to whether land is, as a matter of fact, under the management and control of the
Council.

Turning to the factual issue, I will first outline the relevant evidence.

First of all, there is an engineer's report to the Finance Committee of the
Council dated 20th June 1977 recommending, in relation to this piece of land, the definition of the area as free off-street parking. Among other matters, the report recommended the fixing of penalties of $20.00 in respect of a number of matters, such as parking for a period of time in excess of that resolved by the Council and specified in a notice, and parking or leaving a vehicle otherwise than in a marked parking space. The report also recommended exhibiting of appropriate notices in the area. That report was adopted by the
Finance Committee on 20th June 1977, and apparently adopted by the Council on th June 1977. There is in evidence a further engineer's report to the
Finance Committee of 17th June 1980, recommending the erection of log barriers to prevent entry of motor vehicles to this car parking area at a certain point.

Next, there is an affidavit of Gregory Radford who, between 1975 and 1990, was employed as an Ordinance Inspector with the Council. In that position, one of his functions included the inspection of Council-owned or Council-operated car parks. In that capacity, he inspected those car parks to identify vehicles illegally parked, or remaining in excess of permitted time, and issued penalty tickets to those vehicles. Between 1975 and mid-1993, he inspected the Vernon
Street car park daily. There is in evidence an infringement notice issued by him in relation to a vehicle illegally parked in 1981. He states out that this was typical of infringement notices issued when necessary during inspections of the Vernon Street car park between the late 1970s and mid-1993. He said that he has observed that the land has been used for the parking of cars since at least the late 1970s to mid-1993; and that he knew from those inspections, and generally from the performance of his job, that this use as a car park was managed, controlled and regulated by the Council.

Next, there is an application by Lend Lease Interiors dated 13th April 1989, to use the car park to locate a mobile crane to lift material to adjoining properties, for some time in April and May 1989. That application annexed photographs of the car park taken apparently in April 1989, showing a bitumen surface, marked car spaces and notices, although it is not possible to identify the wording on the notices.

Finally, there is in evidence a licence agreement dated 21st December 1992 between Citivale, Mirvac and the Council, whereby Mirvac and Citivale granted the Council a licence to occupy and manage the land for use of a public car park, and as a means of access for public pedestrian and motor traffic. One term of the licence is that it is deemed to have commenced on 13th February
The licence does refer to the use of the land as a public car park to s.270J of the Local Government Act. It appears that that section only applies in relation to parking stations as defined in s.270C of the Local Government
Act, that is involving payment of a fee. However, it seems to me that the circumstance that the licence refers to what may be an inappropriate section of the Local Government Act does not affect the situation.

The final piece of evidence is that in March 1993, Citivale gave the Council a notice to vacate the land on 1st April 1993.

Mr. McDougall submitted that plainly the land was under the management and control of the Council as a car park prior to 13th February 1989. On the evidence, Mr. McDougall submitted that any management and control of the piece of land continued unchanged after settlement on 13th February 1989, and indeed continued until April 1993. Although there was no evidence of any express arrangement made prior to the licence agreement of December 1992, it could readily be inferred that this occurred with the knowledge and consent of the owner. This was confirmed by the terms of the licence of 21st December 1992.
Mr. McDougall conceded that the Chief Commissioner of State Revenue would not be bound by the retrospective provisions of that licence, and in that regard referred me to the case of Hawley Partners v. Commissioner of Stamp Duties (1996) ATC 4847.

Dr. Sorensen submitted that the evidence did not show de facto control and management over the relevant period. He pointed out that the only evidence of an infringement ticket was one in 1981. He submitted that the evidence of the parking officer was of the utmost generality. The evidence did no more than show that this was a vacant block of land on which people parked cars.

There is force I think in the consideration that this is a case where all the relevant information is essentially in the hands of the Council, and the
Council has provided for the most part, evidence only of generalities. There is no evidence of precisely how the land was configured during the relevant period, what notices were in existence, and what management was undertaken by way of maintaining the area; and even the evidence concerning the issue of infringement notices is of the greatest generality. On the other hand, evidence such as that of Mr Radford, to which I have referred, was not objected to; so evidence has been admitted that Mr. Radford knew from his inspections and observations that use as a car park was managed, controlled and regulated by the Council.

When one has regard to that evidence, which has not been objected to, and the more particular evidence to which I have referred, I think it is appropriate for the Court to draw the inference, on the balance of probabilities, that the
Council did manage and control this piece of land as a car park over the relevant period. The photograph, to which I referred, confirms that car parking spaces, which were apparently set up in about 1977, were still in existence after settlement of the sale in February 1989; and it seems reasonable to infer that that continued throughout the period. I have no reason not to accept the evidence of Mr. Radford to the effect that, during the period 1989 to mid-1993, he was in fact policing this area and issuing infringement notices where appropriate. While there is no evidence going directly to what passed between the Council and Citivale in relation to the occupation of the property, I think it should be inferred that the occupation was with at least the acquiescence of Citivale and with their knowledge. In my opinion, this is confirmed by the terms of the licence of December 1992.

In those circumstances, in my opinion, this piece of land was, within the meaning of s.651, under the management and control of the Council at the relevant times. I should add that, if that finding was not justified because of insufficient evidence of entitlement prior to the granting of the licence, in my opinion, the licence makes it plain that the terms of s.651 were satisfied at least as at 31st December 1992, giving rise to an exemption for the year 1993. However, for the reasons I have given, in my opinion the requirements of the section were satisfied in respect of all years.

I come now to the question of interest.

Mr. McDougall referred me to relevant sections of the Land Tax Management Act, including s.16 concerning amendment of assessments; s.18 concerning the assessment as being conclusive evidence of the due making of the assessment, and that the amount specified was correct except in relation to appeals; s.35-38D concerning objections and appeals, and in particular s.38BB providing for interest when the Court orders a refund; and s.50A dealing with refund of overpayment otherwise than pursuant to Court orders, with no provision for interest. Mr. McDougall drew my attention to the case of Chippendale Printing v. Commissioner of Taxation [(1996) 62 FCR 437], in which the Full Federal Court ruled that there was no interest payable on the refund of overpaid sales tax, on the ground that the statutory regime in relation to such refunds was exhaustive. Mr. McDougall submitted that the land tax legislation could be distinguished, and that in any event, this decision should not be followed. He drew my attention to The Commonwealth v. SCI
Operations <case>; [(1998) 72 ALJR 687], in which the High Court held that no interest was payable on a refund of customs duty following a concession granted by the Controller
General. Mr. McDougall submitted that this decision could be distinguished, because that case proceeded on the assumption that the duty had been properly payable in the first place, and only became subject to refund by a later decision of the Controller General.

Dr. Sorensen emphasised the conclusive effect of s.18 to which I have referred; and he referred me also to s.39 of the Land Tax Management Act, which provides that land tax is due and payable as required by a Notice of
Assessment, and s.42, which provides that land tax is deemed when due and payable to be a debt due to Her Majesty. He submitted that those provisions confirmed that the land tax in this case was properly payable when paid, and that the statutory regime concerning refund was exhaustive.

In my opinion, the effect of s.18 is to make the assessments conclusive; and the effect of s.39 and s.42 is that, even if those assessments should not have been made, nevertheless they gave rise to debts properly payable. That consideration, in my opinion, does make it clear that, as in the Chippendale
Printing case, the statutory provisions for refund of land tax are exhaustive; and since there is no provision for interest in the provision applicable to this case, no interest is payable.

For those reasons, I propose to allow the appeal brought by Citivale in the
Administrative Law Division proceedings, and to dismiss the Council's claim in the Equity Division proceedings.
 [Discussion ensued regarding orders and costs] 
I have heard submissions as to costs.

The ordinary result as to cost would be that the Chief Commissioner of State
Revenue pay Citivale's costs of the Administrative Law Division proceedings, and that the Council pay the defendant's costs of the other proceedings. It appears that in 1996, and some time again in 1998, the plaintiffs in both proceedings offered to settle the matter with the result the same as the result I have decided, and on the basis that each party bear its own costs. It seems to me that the outcome is no less favourable to the plaintiff than that then offered, and that could be a basis on which the defendant in each case is ordered to pay all the costs after the date of the first of those offers, or a reasonable time after that offer.

Dr. Sorensen has submitted that it would not be reasonable to take that course, because it was reasonable for the defendant to contest the Citivale proceedings, since there was a really doubtful issue there; whereas it was unreasonable for the Council to pursue the interest, which was really a hopeless case in the light of the decisions to which I have referred.

In a sense, that submission is a little two-edged, because it does rather suggest that the preparation for hearing and the essential contest at the hearing was in relation to the Citivale case. On the whole, I think the appropriate course is as follows.

I order that, apart from the costs of preparation for the hearing and the costs of the hearing, the defendant pay Citivale's costs in the Administrative
Law Division proceedings, and the Council pay the defendant's costs in the
Equity Division proceedings. In relation to the costs of preparation and the costs of the hearing, in both cases I order that the defendant or defendants pay the plaintiff's costs, but on the basis that the two matters were heard together and should be treated essentially as the hearing of a single matter.

In the Administrative Law Division matter, I make Orders 2 and 4 in the
Summons.

I dismiss the Equity Division proceedings.

The exhibits may be returned after 28 days if there is no appeal.
 * * * 
