

Regina versus Truong Matter No Cca 60330/97 [1997] NSWSC 515 (27 October 1997) 
Regina versus Van Hung Truong /97 October 1997 
Gleeson CJ, McInerney J, Abadee J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal /97 REGINA versus Van Hung TRUONG 
JUDGMENT 
THE COURT: The respondent was sentenced by his Honour Judge Johnston in the District Court on 19 June 1997. The sentence involved a minimum term of 18 months and an additional term of two years. It was to commence on 8 May 1997, the date on which the respondent had been remanded in custody following the jury's verdict. 
On 2 July 1997 the Department of Public Prosecutions lodged a notice of appeal. The respondent was served personally with that notice of appeal on 3
July 1997. The appeal was listed for hearing this morning.

When the appeal was called on, the solicitor for the respondent informed the
Court that there had been delay in making the necessary arrangements for legal aid for the respondent and, on that ground, the solicitor applied for the matter to be adjourned and taken out of today's list.

The respondent, who was present in court, made it clear that he understood the nature of the application that is being made and that the application is being made with his approval and on his instructions. The application was opposed by the Crown.

The precise reasons for the delay in making the necessary arrangements concerning legal aid do not appear with any degree of clarity from what has been said to us. Nevertheless, in the circumstances we are minded to grant the adjournment, particularly because the solicitor for the respondent has indicated that in the event that an adjournment would be refused, the appeal would be conducted in circumstances where the respondent would be unrepresented.

It is of course important that Crown appeals against sentence be brought on for hearing as quickly as possible. However, there is no suggestion that the
Crown will be responsible for any delay in the ultimate hearing of this appeal and the full responsibility appears to lie with those who were involved in the making of the arrangements for legal aid for the respondent, possibly including the respondent himself.

At all events, there will be no prejudice to the Crown resulting from the adjournment and when the appeal is ultimately brought on for hearing, which one hopes will be without much additional delay, the Crown's appeal will be dealt with on its merits. We will stand the matter out of today's list for hearing on a date to be fixed. The matter can be put in today's call over.
 * * * 
