

McKenzie versus Harper and Ors T/as Allambie Pastoral Co Johnson versus Harper and
Ors T/as Allambie Pastoral Co Tiedemann versus Harper and Ors T/as Allambie
Pastoral Co Matter Nos R 400073/93; R 400074/93; R 400075/93 [1997] NSWSC 464 (8 October 1997) 
Craig McKenzie versus Harper & Ors t/as Allambie Pastoral Company 
R400073/93 
Robert Johnson versus Harper & Ors t/as Allambie Pastoral Company 
R400074/93 
Allan Tiedemann versus Harper & Ors t/as Allambie Pastoral Company 
R400075/93 October 1997 
Grove J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
R400073/93 - CRAIG McKENZIE versus HARPER & ORS t/as ALLAMBIE PASTORAL COMPANY 
R400074/93 - ROBERT JOHNSON versus HARPER & ORS t/as ALLAMBIE PASTORAL COMPANY 
R400075/93 - ALLAN TIEDEMANN versus HARPER & ORS t/as ALLAMBIE PASTORAL COMPANY 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: Three actions for negligence have been, by consent, heard together. The plaintiffs were members of a shearing team employed by the defendant partnership on their properties near Ariah Park known as Orana and Allambie. Each alleges that he is suffering from the effects of organophosphate poisoning sustained in the course of that employment. 
The leader of the shearing team was Bevan (Mick) McKenzie who is the plaintiff
Craig McKenzie's father. He also claimed similar injury and sued the partnership. His action was called on for hearing at the extension of the 1995 sittings of the Court at Wagga Wagga presided over by Master Malpass. The following circumstances can be ascertained from the Master's judgment delivered on 7 September 1995 which I treat, not as evidence in these cases, but as a record of the Court. Applications for adjournment made by the defendant were refused as were orders which would have enabled the reception into evidence of the views of Dr Russell, a scientist at the Division of Wool
Technology of the CSIRO. In 1995 a prosecution initiated by Workcover was pending and Kevin Harper (the managing partner of the defendant) declined to answer questions at the hearing of Bevan McKenzie's action on the grounds that his answers might incriminate him. I mention these matters at the outset for two reasons. First, to explain references to "the four shearers" in the context of hearing actions by three plaintiffs and second, to note the significant difference in the evidential content of the current proceedings from the earlier hearing. In this instance Dr Russell and Kevin Harper gave extensive testimony. These are naturally not the only distinctions but the reference is sufficient to make the point of discrimination.

The taking of oral evidence extended over fifteen sitting days. A mass of exquisite detail was examined but there are common threads leading to the nub of the plaintiffs' cases on liability. The shearers were scheduled to commence at the shed on Orana on 8 March 1993. Substantial work was delayed by rainfall which had rendered the sheep wet and therefore unsuitable for shearing. Described by a variety of adjectives, the plaintiffs noticed an offensive smell of a chemical nature emanating from the sheep. They began to notice symptoms adverse to their general wellbeing. Unsurprisingly they did not all describe identical feelings of identical intensity progressing to debilitate them at an identical rate but I accept that each of them was relevantly affected by illness.

Noxious emanation from the flock acquired enhanced intensity by reason of the particularly closed atmosphere at the Orana shed. To an extent it was an outbuilding typical of the Riverina shed of history but it was originally a two stand facility which had been adapted for use by four shearers without any apparent increase in the apertures through which ventilation could pass.

It was the practice at Orana and for a time at Allambie to tar the sheep "on the boards". The tar was a chemical solution prepared by the defendant which was dispensed from its storage drum into a saucepan from which it was applied by a paint brush for treatment of fly blown sheep. "On the boards" expresses the use within the shed rather than outdoors. At some stage tar may have been applied by shaking from a bottle which was fitted with a perforated lid thus being operated as a spray shaker. Whether by paint brush or shaker bottle the cumulative result was that the shearers' clothing became saturated with tar as they manhandled the sheep. In that manner their bodies came to be in extended saturate contact with the chemical virtually day after day.

In due course the team moved to the Allambie shed. It was more modern and I note that the plaintiff Craig McKenzie assessed its ventilation as quite good.
Nevertheless the offensive chemical-like smell continued to be detected and the shearers noticed their symptoms becoming acute.

Craig McKenzie suffered increasing headaches. He felt lethargic with general aches and pains. He had a sickness which he located in his stomach and he had diarrhoea and vomiting episodes. A rash erupted in his groin area.

Allan Tiedemann first noticed headaches and watering from his eyes while he was at Orana. His symptoms worsened as time passed. He noticed ill feeling in his stomach which he assessed as probably indigestion or heartburn and he took some antacid tablets. His symptoms were not relieved and he noticed that he was regurgitating bile. He noticed a nasty bitter taste in his mouth and itchiness on the arms, legs and head. A rash appeared on his skin.

Robert Johnson had joined the particular shearing gang in 1992. In the course of working at the defendant's properties he noticed a burning sensation on his skin surface about his hands, face and head. Headache developed and he self diagnosed the onset of influenza. He had stomach and diarrhoea symptoms. He denied vomiting but experienced a bile sensation in the throat which caused him to gasp and dry retch. He felt itches and what he described as more like little sores than a rash emerged.

It may be mentioned that "tarring on the boards" had continued at Allambie until something between a discussion and a confrontation about the presence of the pot of tar within the shed took place and Kevin Harper removed it.
Thereafter sheep were tarred when required in the pens external to the shed.

The plaintiffs' claim that exposure to toxin caused the acute illness above described and also caused chronic illness which has destroyed their respective capacities to work as shearers and in a practical sense destroyed their capacity to work in most forms of remunerative occupation.

The foregoing barely provides a hint at why seemingly conventional litigation by employees against employer should involve such extensive hearing. Including its breakdown products the plaintiffs sought to inculpate an organophosphate known as diazinon as the cause of their illness both as to acute and chronic symptoms. Diazinon is extremely widely used in stock and agricultural activity throughout the world. It was revealed in evidence that there is current debate among medical and scientific researchers about the potential for harm, the nature and longevity of consequential symptoms and the causative mechanisms arising from exposure to organophosphates.

That currency was highlighted by peripheral references to claims being made in the United States by veterans of the Desert Shield and Desert Storm engagements in the Persian Gulf several years ago. Many now claim chronic disability symptoms. They were apparently exposed to organophosphates (not specifically diazinon) which were used to suppress insect pests and it was even said that some troops wore pet collars containing organophosphates to combat lice and fleas which abounded in the area. Organophosphates represent the family of substances from which chemical weapons commonly called nerve gases derive. The operative effect is by acetylcholinesterase inhibition. As in the case of collateral damage to humans from the use of chemical defoliants in another conflict, it appears that claims and counterclaims by "experts" will inhibit any rapidity in reaching an accepted analysis of the situation.

I refer to these matters of debate because a considerable proportion of the hearing was devoted to the expression of and the cross examination upon contradictory views about the possible after effects of organophosphate exposure. I emphasize that it is neither my task, nor within my abilities, authoritatively to resolve an issue upon which learned medical practitioners, scientists and chemists are in disagreement. The issue before the Court is whether, on the balance of probabilities breach of duty of care owed by an employer to his employees caused damage of a kind in circumstances where it was reasonably foreseeable that breach might cause such damage. It is not required that the employees prove that the employer foresaw or ought to have foreseen the mechanism by which particular damage occurred. In the context of the present cases the matter comes down to investigating whether it has been proved that the defendant negligently exposed the plaintiffs to dangerous chemicals as a result of which they suffered relevant harm. I am conscious that that amounts to a deceptively simple expression of the complexities in the evidence.

For reasons for which the parties are not responsible the hearing had a somewhat chequered course and it became practical to receive submissions in writing rather than orally. The documentation submitted was lengthy as it canvassed contradictions both in expert and non-expert testimony. It will not be necessary to refer to all the ingredients explored and argued in those submissions particularly in connection with the quest for scientific determination as the common law is relevantly concerned with probability.

I prefer the evidence of the plaintiffs to that of the defendant in relation to the events and circumstances at the shearing sheds over the relevant period. I recognize that some of the records concerning balings of fleece tended to provide a basis to contradict the extent of some of the plaintiffs' complaints and I conclude that their estimates of the number of maggots on affected sheep and the numbers of those sheep are likely to have been exaggerated but I am satisfied that the numbers of both maggots and affected sheep were substantial.

The credibility of the defendants was not assisted by events shortly after the shearers manifested acute symptoms. Kevin Harper gave Bevan McKenzie an empty container labelled Jetcon which he said was "what was on the sheep". Diazinon is not an active ingredient in Jetcon. Later on 21 July 1993 Daryl Harper (Kevin Harper's son) signed accident reports for Workcover in which he referred to claimed illnesses of poisoning (although this was omitted in the particular form relating to Allan Tiedemann) and in a section of it relating to "chemical involved" he repeated that the sheep had been jetted with Jetcon but added that some had been treated with Topclip (diazinon). A sample of the tar being used in the shed had been taken by the plaintiffs and subsequent analysis revealed that it contained diazinon.

I find that Daryl Harper was the authorized agent of the defendant partnership for the purpose of filling out the Workcover form. A record of conversation between Inspector Lancaster of the occupational health and safety bureaucracy and Kevin Harper on 23 August 1993 is of interest. Kevin Harper said that he usually mixed the tar and used diazinon and vetrazin. Later in the conversation he said that he did not jet sheep with a mixture of chemicals but still later he agreed that "some weaners" were jetted with a mixture of Jetcon and Topclip. His final remark was that the reason for mixing the chemicals was the vigour of the fly wave at that time of the year.

The then current label on a retail container of Topclip had bold print safety directions cautioning the user, inter alia, to avoid contact with skin; recommending the wearing of gloves and the washing of gloves and contaminated clothing after each day's use.

An employer intending to use the product would also have had access to a safety data sheet. The sheet current at January 1993 under a headline HEALTH
HAZARD INFORMATION commenced: "Health Effects. Note: Diazinon can be rapidly absorbed through the skin.
Poisoning may occur due to cholinesterase inhibition" 
Further in the document under PRECAUTIONS there is information about exposure potential that whilst swallowing and inhalation are unlikely under normal conditions of usage: "Skin uptake is the main route of exposure. Harmful qualities of diazinon may be absorbed through the skin that is in direct contact with the product.
Repeated minor exposure may have a cumulative poisoning effect".

Under ENGINEERING CONTROLS it is stated: "No special requirement. Product is used outdoors".

I would not regard within a shearing shed (particularly the one at Orana) as being outdoors. Finally there are elaborate instructions expanding upon the advice endorsed upon the retail product label.

I am satisfied that Kevin Harper produced the Jetcon container (a non-diazinon chemical) in the circumstances that I have mentioned because he was well aware of the notified risks of exposure to diazinon, that he knew a substantial part at least of the flock mustered for shearing had been treated with Topclip which contained diazinon and he suspected that the illnesses of the plaintiffs were probably caused by exposure to it. The defendants ought to have foreseen that the use of tar containing that chemical ingredient in the circumstances described would create a risk of poisoning which is in fact what fell due upon the plaintiffs.

Absent matters of scientific debate to which I will turn, my findings in relation to the exposure of employees by the employer to a substance advertised as harmful without warning and without instituting the taking of the recommended precautions would upon demonstration of resultant harm, constitute a very straightforward case of entitlement to damages for negligence.

Causation of damage was denied by the defendants and in particular in the context that if there was some exposure to deleterious chemical it was insufficient to provoke permanent damage and alternatively, even if there had been some provocation of symptoms they could not progress into long term effects. In short, I understood the defendants' case to assert not only that there was no causative link between any exposure of the plaintiffs to chemical and their illnesses but to raise the question at what level exposure to diazinon can be inspirational of chronic symptoms.

The evidence is well nigh overwhelming that a sufferer of acute symptoms from organophosphate poisoning can develop chronicity of symptoms. I am persuaded that the preponderance of acceptable evidence leads to the further conclusion that acute exposure can cause the development of chronic symptoms without necessarily passing through a stage of acute symptoms. As Dr Jamal summarized, the focus of genuine debate is whether long term low level exposure to organophosphates can of itself precipitate chronic symptoms.

I should in deference to the time spent adducing the evidence and the continued debate in the counter submissions make some reference to the scientific literature. I observe that the focus of a lot of attention has been just what Dr Jamal described exemplified by Californian market crop workers who labour in the fields where the chemical is used for insect control. By the very nature of their occupation they are outdoors and perceptibly breathing spray or having some handling contact. The plaintiffs were not in this situation which I understand the investigators to refer to when they write of long term low level exposure. The shearers became saturated with the compound and continued to work in chemically immersed clothes. The precautionary advice on the Topclip safety sheet could not have been more directly defied in its warnings about direct skin contact and absorption by that route.

Once it is accepted, as I do, that the plaintiffs' descriptions of symptoms are generally reliable then it follows that they all suffered an acute phase of symptoms and much of the opinion as to queried development of chronic symptoms without passing through that phase becomes academic. I do not accept that any incompleteness in the records of Dr Mead undermines that finding, nor is it corrupted by seeking to analyse discrepancies between the detail of the respective plaintiffs' testimony and histories given to medical examiners.
What is clear is that these shearers had worked consistently at their calling over substantial periods of time and they all detected something noticeably wrong with the conditions and the occurrences when they were operating upon the defendants' flock on this occasion. Their perception was confirmed by the actions of Kevin Harper which I have described. I would not have expected the plaintiffs to be as pernickety about recounting detail as scientists (or lawyers) but their actions impressed me as those of honest working men initially mystified by what had befallen them and, as events turned out, correct in their suspicions as to the source of their troubles being allied to the foul chemical smells which they had sensed.

I digress to deal with a particular matter. The defendants invited a conclusion that the matters complained of should be held to be unlikely to have been caused by organophosphate poisoning and it was sought to inculpate their admitted various, but in each instance substantial prior frequent ingestions of intoxicating liquor as causative of their symptoms. The results of liver function tests were adverted to. To this was added exploration of angiomata/spider naevi seen at examination particularly of Robert Johnson. Dr
Milder (with some support from Dr Howes) seems to represent the high point of the defendants' case in this regard. I find it improbable that the plaintiffs' conditions are the result of alcohol abuse. If the defendants' contention is correct then four shearers almost simultaneously succumbed to their respective levels of alleged alcohol abuse by manifesting broadly similar patterns of symptoms. I do not accept that coincidence particularly when there is another more probable explanation, namely organophosphate poisoning. And on the evidence they were certainly contemporaneously exposed to the deleterious chemical. It is convenient also to mention that the experiences of Dr Howes and Dr Harvey concerning diazinon seemed principally involved in the consequences of ingestion by mouth (by accident or intended self harm) and their views about absorption through the skin lack a background of experience.
I regard it as unlikely that the clear and definite statements in the Topclip data sheet derive from imagination.

One of the known attributes of diazinon is that it is chemically unstable and in decomposition it forms so-called breakdown products which are frequently more toxic than the initial chemical. As the hearing progressed and large volumes of scientific evidence were being adduced I formed an impression that breakdown product was a likely culprit in this instance but in the nature of things that cannot now be scientifically demonstrated nor do I need to make such a finding before the plaintiffs are entitled to succeed in their actions.
In regard to the chemical properties of diazinon I accept Professor Crank's evidence as I do his other opinions generally.

I also express a preference for the evidence of Drs. Whyte and Dawson. As well as the appropriate formal qualifications they are clinicians practising in toxicology and they have had direct contact with the plaintiffs who were referred to them. Their evidence (more extensively that of Dr Whyte) not only dealt with their immediate consultations but with learning that was available from medical and scientific literature. A primary source for many of the witnesses seems to have been the publications of Professor Ecobichon and it is notable that his integrity is discernible in changes of view as the frontiers of knowledge broadened by research and discovery. Professor Ecobichon was an important member of world health bodies investigating the effects of exposure to cholinesterase inhibitors amongst other things. As a result of his research he came to recognize subtle changes which could in fact be wrought by toxic assault which had apparently been overlooked in former times.

Dr Whyte's evidence was directly in point and he testified that the shearers showed clear and unequivocal signs of acute organophosphate poisoning. The advantage of that contact was not shared by Dr Harvey or Dr Howes. Dr Jamal provided an impressive thesis in support of the consequence of permanent deficit in the plaintiffs as a result of the poisoning and I accept his evidence. It is important to reiterate that I am not embarked upon a commission of inquiry to assess preference for a selected scientific view but upon a determination of whether on the probabilities there has been breach of duty of care by employer towards employee and probable consequential damage. I conclude the plaintiffs have discharged the requisite onus of proof. On the issues of causation described above the defendants' case was heavily dependent upon the expressed views of Dr Russell. A critical analysis of those views was undertaken by Dr Jamal. And vice versa. No point will be served by my attempting to epitomize those contradictions nor by my recitation of testimony which can, if necessary, be read in the transcript.

Ultimately my findings are that the defendants treated the sheep with a chemical mix containing diazinon which was made available for employees to use contrary to safety directions of which the defendants knew or ought to have been aware thereby exposing those employees to risks of injury which were unnecessary as they could have been avoided by compliance with safety directions. And, as stated, I am satisfied that that breach of duty was causative of injury.

Each of the plaintiffs should recover damages and I deal with those issues individually.

CRAIG McKENZIE 
Craig McKenzie was born on 26 September 1964. He left school at aged sixteen and was employed in rural activity working as a shearer between 1981 and 1993.
During that time he did some casual work with the Grain Handling Authority when he was not shearing.

I have mentioned the immediate symptoms which he experienced when working at the defendants' sheds. At the time of hearing he complained of a considerable constellation of symptoms including headache, stinging in the eyes, upset stomach, eruption of bile and dry retch, pain in the ribs, itch, loss of smell and taste, a bloated internal feeling, bowel and urinary dysfunction, skin rashes, transient ear pain and memory confusion.

In support of the plaintiff's claim there was tendered a bundle of some twenty odd reports. Subject to qualification I accept the general thrust in those reports. In May 1995 Dr Mead a general practitioner who had seen all of the plaintiffs reported that it was certain that the shearers had suffered chronic organophosphate poisoning. She said that their physical and psychological symptoms showed no signs of improving and she was treating only in order to alleviate the symptoms. She thought they were totally unfit to work at their former type of work. I interpolate that she did not say that they were unfit for any form of work.

Mr Rawlings a psychologist opined that test results revealed a pattern of deficits consistent with the known complications of organophosphate poisoning.
He thought these could be categorized as fixed and included impaired memory and learning, reduced attention span and slowed rate of information processing. The plaintiff was seen by Dr Shand a psychiatrist on several occasions who mentioned the plaintiff's "never ending string of complaints" all of which he attributed to the poisoning because "he was as fit as possible beforehand". Urine testing arranged by Dr Shand in April 1996 was consistent with the history which the plaintiff gave to the doctor of consumption of palliative drugs to deal with some of his symptoms. Dr Shand thought that the physical component and secondary psychiatric disorders made it unlikely that the plaintiff would be employed in future. Dr Middleton a rehabilitation specialist took a gloomy view initially but conceded that if the plaintiff improved his fitness he would increase his prospects of being able to engage in, at least, light to moderate work.

I am satisfied that the plaintiff does suffer from a range of symptoms as described although I agree with the defendants' submission that he has engaged in some exaggeration thereof. The litany of complaints in evidence, to Dr
Shand and to others seems to show an obsessive trait and some gauge of accuracy is available from the acknowledgment by Dr Whyte that for example the plaintiff's neuropathy was non dermatomal.

I note the essential failure of a computer course arranged by Miss Gooden of the Commonwealth Rehabilitation Service. She thought the plaintiff would be best suited in self employment or some part time occupation. She did not regard him as totally unemployable. The plaintiff has had and continues to have a significant interest in horses and he and his wife have taken some steps towards establishing a life away from Ariah Park in Victoria, which amongst other things would enable the interest in horses to flourish. I am satisfied that the plaintiff is unfit to work as a shearer and will not regain that ability but despite his symptoms he has residual capacity for making some earnings to sustain his livelihood if he chooses to exercise it.

Out of pocket expenses are agreed at $5,867 as is a figure of $11,804 to be included in damages to avoid the detriment identified by the High Court in
Fox versus Wood <case>; [1981 148 CLR 438.] 
On behalf of the plaintiff the claim for economic loss was presented thus. It was acknowledged that in the income years ending June 1992 and June 1993 a primary production loss was claimed. The plaintiff lived on a small holding and engaged in some (loss producing) rural pursuits. It was submitted that the
Court should not simply extrapolate from financial history records an evaluation of lost earning capacity reflecting nett income figures after taxation. Subject to lost capacity being likely to be productive of loss, I agree with the proposition: 
Graham versus Baker <case>; [1961 106 CLR 340.] 
I am invited to observe that in the income years ending 1991, 1992, and 1993 the plaintiff had taxable incomes of $19,836, $11,432 and $26,056 respectively reducible to $16,949, $10,226 and $20,960 after tax. It was put that using these figures would undercompensate the plaintiff as they had been affected by his primary production losses from small farm and horse operations and that his capacity should be measured against the ingredients of income related to shearing only. The plaintiff seeks to establish a nett loss to be projected from a capacity valued thereby at $329 per week. The above after tax figures average $309 per week.

The next step proposed by the plaintiff was to observe that $329 nett represented at the time approximately two-thirds of the average weekly earnings of all males in New South Wales. Therefore it was contended that future loss should be estimated against two-thirds of present average weekly earnings which is $370 per week nett on the statistics.

The plaintiff's submission of course is premised upon a total loss of earning capacity which is contrary to my finding. It is also to be remembered that I am required to exercise judgment and not purely arithmetical skills.
Nevertheless the performance of calculations is a desirable exercise to provide guidance and to test conclusions.

The plaintiff's submitted calculation was to approach the matter in this fashion: $329 x 216 weeks = $71,064 $370 x 855.7 (the multiplier for 33 years to take the plaintiff to age 65 at the authorized rate of discount on the 5 percent tables) less 15 percent for vicissitudes = $169,117 
The defendants raised the issue of the plaintiff's likely retirement. It was contended that retirement from shearing would have been more likely at 55 years than 65 years. Having regard to the plaintiff's lifestyle I think it probable that he would have ceased his energetic work as a shearer if the tort had not intervened at about the age of 60 when I expect he would have devoted himself to his horse and rural activities which to date have been productive of advantageous tax loss but which were focuses of the plaintiff's stated ambitions. On that hypothesis I do not think there is demonstrated a probable tort-induced economic loss in the plaintiff's years between 60 and 65.

The elapsed time since the tort is now approximately 230 weeks. I accept that the plaintiff did not have a residual capacity of assessable value between the date of tort and for about two years thereafter but later than that I consider that he ought to have exercised a residual capacity which would have developed by then and which I would evaluate from that point and for the future as a representative figure of about one third of his uninjured earning capacity.

Subject to variations to take account of my findings the approach suggested on behalf of the plaintiff for the establishment of a weekly guide figure seems to me to be reasonable for the purpose.

I would award the plaintiff $61,810 for loss to date and $167,217 for future loss derived from the following guide calculations: $329 x 104 (total loss in first 2 years) = $34,216 $219 x 126 (loss of two-thirds capacity from that point to date) = $27,594 $247 (two-thirds of $370 per week) x 796.7 (5 percent discount factor for 28 years) less 15 percent for vicissitudes = $167,217 
A further item was claimed for future medical treatment. It is described in submissions as a "small buffer" of $20 per week. On indications to date the expenditure by the plaintiff is likely to be nearer to $100 per year than $20 per week. On the authorized tables the claim of $20 per week over the plaintiff's statistical life expectancy of 44 years capitalizes at $18,890. In my view $1,889 is appropriate.

The final ingredient of damage is non economic loss. The applicable figure for a most extreme case is $159,562. The defendants submit that the statutory threshold established by [s
H](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s151h.html) of the [Workers Compensation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) will not be met. As is implicit in my assessment of damages for economic loss I reject that submission. It was submitted that the amount should not exceed a proportion of 30 percent of a most extreme case. The plaintiff contended that a proper proportion is 75 percent. Allowing for the plaintiff's comparatively young age and the total effect of all of his symptoms I conclude that an appropriate proportion is 60 percent.

The ingredients of the plaintiff's damages then will be: 
Out of pocket expenses  $5,867  
Fox versus Wood  $11,804  
Economic loss to date  $61,810  
Future economic loss  $167,217  
Future medical expenses  $1,889  
Non economic loss  $95,737  
Total:  $344,324  
It is agreed that the plaintiff has received worker's compensation benefits to the extent of $67,097 and the submissions on his behalf acknowledge deductibility of that figure. The plaintiff should therefore recover judgment for $277,227.

ALLAN TIEDEMANN 
Allan Tiedemann was born on 5 April 1946. He left school at aged fourteen and worked as a rabbit trapper and woodcutter and commenced shearing in 1966 which calling he followed until the events presently under consideration. He supplemented his shearing with some continuing woodcutting activity. The evidence showed that he had been a man of considerable physical strength.

The plaintiff's immediate complaints of symptoms in 1993 have already been mentioned. At the hearing he complained of headache two or three times per week, sensations of burning and watering in the eyes, syncope, itch, bowel dysfunction, biliousness, taste disturbance, lack of energy and memory loss. I accept that the plaintiff has these symptoms from time to time and that the situation is likely to continue in the future. I also find that there was an element of exaggeration in his descriptions which is confirmed by admissions in cross examination that he had been more active than his initial evidence portrayed. I am persuaded that some selectivity was also likely to have intruded itself into the histories given to examining medical practitioners.
However, subject to qualifications, I generally accept the thrust of medical evidence tendered on his behalf. This consisted of a bundle of some seventeen reports. Mr Rawlings the psychologist reported test results which demonstrated attentional deficit which he presumed to be the result of organophosphate poisoning as well as low average range intelligence and low executive functioning. He thought the plaintiff should be considered unemployable on the open labour market. In relation to that and like opinions I have concluded that upon an informed appraisal of the plaintiff's activities particularly, that although he has suffered loss, he does have a residual capacity of value which he could exercise if he chose. Dr Shand thought that the continuing complaints of the plaintiff (listed in his report of 9 April 1996) both physical and cognitive were attributable to organophosphate poisoning. Dr
Middleton was gloomy in her prognostications. Although I have concluded that the plaintiff has residual capacity of value, having regard to his extreme reliance on physical prowess and the attrition upon it by his symptoms I assess that residual capacity as only 20 percent of his uninjured earning capacity. I consider he would have reached the point of that residual capacity being exercisable two years after the tort.

Establishing a basis for the award of economic loss is complicated by the history that the plaintiff was prone to periods of unemployment before the events with which this case is concerned. In the income years ended 1992 and he received unemployment benefits to the extent of $7,098 and $5,669.
During part of 1992 the plaintiff was recuperating from a hernia operation.

It is submitted by the plaintiff that 1992 should be ignored and that by a method not dissimilar from that adopted in relation to the claim by Craig
McKenzie guide figures should be established. By that method a factorial loss of $307 per week for the past is presented which proportions as three-fifths of all male average weekly earnings at the relevant time. Applying that proportion to current statistics produces a figure of $350 per week nett.

In this case I am persuaded that there is rather more force in a submission on behalf of the defendant. It is observed that if the plaintiff's methodology was adopted (without discarding 1992) the plaintiff's earnings from shearing would, on a weekly nett basis be in the years 1990, 1991 and 1992 $310, $162 and $165 producing an average of $212. If one took the year which ended with the tort in April 1993 the plaintiff's average can be calculated at about $225 per week nett. The point of the submission was to invalidate the basis upon the plaintiff proposed a factor of $307 per week. Some account should be taken of the disruption caused by the hernia operation. I consider a fair figure as a guide would be $225 per week derived between July 1992 and April 1993. In appearance Allan Tiedemann presented overall as what I think many people would describe as a gentle giant. I have less confidence in the defendants' proposition that he may not have continued as a shearer for longer than Craig
McKenzie in the sense that he may not have retired at 60 because his once powerful body suggested persistence at heavy work, but on the other hand he had manifested gaps in employment all of which was not consequent upon the need to recuperate from one particular operation. Doing the best I can I would set his notional retiring age at age 62.

Out of pocket expenses are agreed at $887. The Fox versus Wood requirement is also agreed at $8,109.

I would award the plaintiff $46,080 for economic loss to date arrived at from the following calculations which I have performed for guidance.

For the first two years after the tort: $225 x 104 = $23,400 
Thereupon to date allowing for residual capacity of 20 percent $180 x 126 = $22,680.

The average weekly earnings of all males in New South Wales since the time at which the guide figure of $225 was established have increased by approximately percent and I have therefore enhanced that figure accordingly and then reduced the result by 20 percent representing residual capacity in order to establish a factor for continuing loss at $205 per week.
 $205 x 444.2 (the authorized 5 percent discount factor taking the plaintiff to age 62) less 15 percent for vicissitudes = $77,402.

I would award the plaintiff that sum.

Claim is also made for a small buffer for medical expenses. The agreed out of pockets give some oblique indication of the frequency with which the plaintiff seeks and is likely to seek the assistance of health professionals. It is proposed that I should award $20 per week for 27 years (his statistical life expectancy) which capitalizes at $15,660. Expenditure to that extent is unlikely and what expenditure the plaintiff may incur is closer to a tenth of that sum. I would award $1,566.

Finally I consider the ingredient of non economic loss. The plaintiff's condition is similar to but not identical with that of Craig McKenzie but he is somewhat older and the span of time during which he must tolerate his afflictions and handicaps is predictably less. The prescribed figure for a most extreme case remains set at $159,562. The defendants submitted that I should hold that the plaintiff has not suffered sufficient damage to fulfil the threshold requirement but as would be apparent from the foregoing I reject that submission. It was submitted that I should not set his proportion at greater than 20 percent of a most extreme case. The plaintiff submitted 65 percent was the appropriate proportion. I assess 50 percent. There will therefore be an ingredient of damage for this item of $79,781.

The ingredients of damage are: 
Out of pocket expenses  $887  
Fox versus Wood  $8,109  
Economic loss to date  $46,080  
Future economic loss  $77,402  
Future medicals  $1,566  
Non economic loss  $79,781  
Total:  $213,825  
Subvention received by way of worker's compensation amounts to $51,751 and I am invited to make the necessary adjustments. The plaintiff should therefore recover judgment for $162,074.

ROBERT JOHNSON 
Robert Johnson was born on 26 July 1945. He left school at aged 15 and after working as a stationhand for about three years took up and continued shearing until 1971. He was himself a shearing contractor for a time. He had purchased and worked a farm and also worked as a real estate salesman and a truckdriver on occasions. He returned to shearing in about 1989 and testified that he would have continued until retirement at about 65 or 66 years of age.

His immediate complaint of symptoms in 1993 have been recorded. At the hearing he claimed to suffer headaches, aching and watering of the eyes, shortness of breath, stomach pains, biliousness, bowel dysfunction, leg pains, syncope, deterioration in memory and concentration, low energy level, itch, transient taste disturbance, insomnia and adverse reaction to heat.

A bundle of seventeen reports was tendered on his behalf and subject to qualification I generally accept the content of those reports. I consider however that the plaintiff overstated his symptoms to an extent and the opinions reflect that exaggeration.

Examination and testing of the plaintiff revealed signs suggestive of liquor overindulgence, angiomata, clubbing of fingers and liver function abnormality which in the light of his own testimony as to alcohol intake gave a basis for fair prognostication that the plaintiff was unlikely to achieve uninterrupted employment life as a shearer to aged 65 or 66. I would select age 60 as a more probable terminus of working life. He had also begun to suffer back symptoms before the occurrences which are the subject of this litigation and there must be some doubt as to whether in any event he would have long remained fit enough to work as a shearer. However, unlike Craig McKenzie and especially
Allan Tiedemann he had a broader range of experience and ability to fall back on, the question being whether his capacity so to do has not also been adversely affected or destroyed.

The psychometric testing by Mr Rawlings was interpreted to show maintenance of basic intellectual function at average level but impairment of ability to learn and recall new material either verbal or non verbal. Concentration deficit was also detected as was a defect in memory function. Dr Shand thought that the plaintiff's complaints accumulated to make him unemployable. He noted that the plaintiff was receiving a disability pension. Dr Middleton opined that physically the plaintiff could handle no more than very light sedentary work which would need to be performed without deadline or other stress precipitant. It is hard to conceive of employment within those parameters.

Realistically I do not think the plaintiff has any valuable residual ability as he was, even if principally as a result of long term alcohol abuse, extremely vulnerable when he was afflicted by the organophosphate poisoning.

The plaintiff's evidence disclosed his itinerant work habits and I accept the defendants' submission that the projected figures advanced on behalf of the plaintiff are tainted with improbability. In the financial year ended 1992 the plaintiff's nett average weekly earnings were approximately $125 which compare relatively unfavourably with social security benefits. For the financial year ending in June 1993 - recognizing the practical termination in April - an average of $235 can be established. The suggested figure advanced on behalf of the plaintiff of $335 per week has no acceptable derivation.

I would use $235 per week as the more reliable guide and using the growth of percent already noted as the climb in average weekly earnings of all males in New South Wales, use $268 per week as a guide figure for the future.

The out of pocket expenses are agreed at $1,447. The Fox versus Wood ingredient is agreed at $14,763.

Applying the above findings I award $54,050 for economic loss to date being $235 for 230 weeks.

For future economic loss I award $74,097 guided from calculation as follows: $268 x 345.6 (the authorized 5 percent discount figure taking the plaintiff to age 60) less 20 percent for adverse vicissitudes = $74,097 
I have selected a 20 percent discount for vicissitudes because in addition to rejecting the probability of the plaintiff remaining in employment beyond aged I believe regard should be paid by reason of the factors adumbrated above to a real potential that the plaintiff's remunerative activity would be interrupted even before then.

A small buffer claim for medical treatment at $20 per week is also made. The plaintiff's life expectancy is statistically 26 years. For reasons coordinate with those which I gave in relation to the other plaintiffs the capitalized sum of $15,375 is rejected and I would award the plaintiff $1,538 for this ingredient.

Finally I turn to non economic loss. I explicitly do not suggest that the situation of the plaintiff and Allan Tiedemann are identical but in all the circumstances I consider the proportion against a most extreme case appropriate to this plaintiff is also 50 percent. Again the defendants submitted that the threshold had not been fulfilled and submitted that the proportion should not exceed 20 percent. The plaintiff submitted that the appropriate proportion was 65 percent.

The ingredients of damage therefore are as follows: 
Out of pocket expenses  $1,447  
Fox versus Wood  $14,763  
Past economic loss  $54,050  
Future economic loss  $74,097  
Future medicals  $1,538  
Non economic loss  $79,781  
Total  $225,666  
As in the other cases I am invited to adjust the subvention received by way of worker's compensation payments in an agreed sum, which in this instance is $51,823. There will therefore be judgment for the plaintiff for $173,843.

I direct entry of judgment against the defendants for each plaintiff as follows: 
Craig McKenzie - $277,227 
Allan Tiedemann - $162,074 
Robert Johnson - $173,843 
Subject to application, I order the defendants to pay each of the plaintiff's costs of the actions. The hearing raised matters of particular complexity, that complexity being magnified by the evidential content which the defendants sought to include and did present and, irrespective of my view as to the strict relevance of all of it, preparation of response on behalf of the plaintiffs was compelled. It was appropriate to brief two counsel and the costs are to include fees for two counsel accordingly.
 * * * 
