

Regina versus Withers [1996] NSWSC 397 (2 September 1996) 
REGINA versus WITHERS /95 
MONDAY 2 SEPTEMBER 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
McINERNEY J, SULLY J 
JUDGMENT 
McINERNEY J: Mr Justice Sully will deliver the judgment in this matter.

SULLY J: Mr Bradley James Withers seeks leave to appeal against a sentence of imprisonment imposed upon him by his Honour Judge Johnston QC at the Parramatta District Court on 4 December 1995.

Mr Withers was sentenced on that occasion to be imprisoned for a minimum term of two years, with an additional term of eighteen months. Mr Withers had pleaded guilty before his Honour to three charges, two of them being charges of break, enter and steal; and the third a charge of attempted break and enter with intent to steal.

The relevant facts can be taken briefly, and as follows, from his Honour's remarks on sentence. On 20 March 1995 the applicant broke in to some particular premises, stole property apparently from the master bedroom, but left behind fingerprints from which eventually he was identified. He appears to have been arrested fairly promptly and to have made full and frank admissions to the investigating police.

On 31 January 1995, in company with a co-offender, Mr Withers had gone to a house in Glenfield. He entered the premises through a bedroom window at the front of the house and, in company with his co-offender, removed a television and a VCR. The applicant apparently disposed of the property to a particular recipient.

On that same day the applicant, in company with the same co-offender, had gone to another house in a different part of Glenfield and had there broken a glass window in an attempt to enter those premises for the purpose of stealing property from them. It happened that a local resident saw them and interrupted them and they decamped. Once again the applicant and his co-offender were arrested fairly promptly and, once again, the applicant appears to have cooperated with the investigating police.

The applicant was born on 11 July 1968. He was therefore aged twenty-seven years or thereabouts when he stood for sentence. He stood for sentence with a very unhelpful criminal background. The antecedents, as summarised in the particulars of trial, run to some thirty-one particular entries, many of them multi-itemed entries. It is a very disheartening antecedent background for a comparatively young man.

So far as concerns the particular offences of which I have spoken, it is to be noted that one of them was committed at a time when the applicant was at liberty on bail; and all three of them were committed at a time when he was on parole, having been sentenced in December 1992 to a term of eighteen months imprisonment, which expired in the middle of June 1994, and having been released thereupon to parole for a term of two years and six months, that is to say, for a term expiring in the middle of December of this year.

Those penalties imposed in 1992 were imposed, also, in respect of an offence of break, enter and steal and the penalties, as I have noted them, were accompanied by concurrent penalties of one kind or another related to a large number of cognate offences of break, enter and steal, and of dishonesty in the matter of making and using false instruments.

The essence of the arguments put forward on the present application is caught by the contents of a letter written by the applicant in support of his present application. It is brief and deserving of particular note. It reads as follows: "I feel that my sentence is too severe because all property was recovered and these offences were brought about by the fact that I have a history of manic depression supported by Dr Lewin's report and had I been on medication it wouldn't have happened." 
Mr Withers is disadvantaged for present purposes by the fact that he appears unrepresented. He has not therefore sought to canvass in detail the remarks on sentence of the learned primary Judge; and, of course, he should not be expected to have undertaken such an exercise.

I have myself looked with some care at the remarks on sentence of his Honour
Judge Johnston, and with respect to his Honour, I cannot see that his Honour has fallen into any manifest error, either in connection with his understanding of the relevant objective facts; or in connection with what seems to me, with respect, to have been a very considered and sympathetic analysis by his Honour of the personal matters particular to the applicant.

There are a great many such personal matters and they are troubling. They show a personal background and a psychological profile, both of which are deeply disturbing in the case of a comparatively young man.

Nonetheless, this Court sits basically to correct error; and, as I have said,
I am not able to see any manifest error in the process of reasoning exposed in the remarks on sentence made by his Honour. I think that, having regard to the nature of the offences in question, as I have described them; having regard to the antecedents of the applicant as I have described those; and having regard not least of all to the aggravating circumstances represented by the breach of parole and the breach of bail; that it was entirely open to the learned primary Judge to fix upon the sentence that his Honour did in fact impose.

I think that this is one of those cases in which it would be timely for the
Court, through its own registry, to ensure that Dr Lewin's report dated 20
October 1995 is brought to the urgent and particular attention of the
Commissioner of Corrective Services, to the end of its being placed with the applicant's file within the Corrective Services establishment, thereby ensuring that those who are responsible for the custody and proper treatment and rehabilitation of the applicant will have the advantage of Dr Lewin's very clear and explicit analysis of the applicant's needs while he is in his present custody.

All proper arrangements should be put in hand to enable the applicant to have the continuing assistance of Dr Lewin or some other practitioner of Dr Lewin's nomination, should that be what the applicant wishes.

It might very well be that if those opportunities are made properly available to him, then as Judge Johnston recognised and plainly hoped, something might yet be done to break the vicious cycle of offence and incarceration which has characterised the applicant's adult life to date.

So far as concerns the present application, therefore, I would grant leave to appeal but I would dismiss the substantive appeal, appending a direction that the Registrar of this Court bring to the urgent attention of the Commissioner of Corrective Services the report of Dr R D Lewin dated 20 October 1995, to the intent that that report will be kept with the relevant correctional file of the applicant and that the applicant will be afforded all proper care and treatment consistently with the diagnosis and recommendations in that report.
I propose orders accordingly.

McINERNEY J: I agree. The orders of the court will therefore be those proposed by Sully J.
 * * * 
