

Botros and Anor versus Aliperti and Ors [1996] NSWSC 254 (4 July 1996) 
BOTROS & ANOR versus ALIPERTI & ORS /96 
THURSDAY 6 JUNE 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: Unfortunately, the court has a large number of cases where restaurateurs are locked out of their restaurants by landlords who claim that the rent has not been paid and these cases are occupying a disproportionate amount of judicial time.

Despite efforts to try and deal with these matters in a commercial way if possible, and despite the government's attempt to have these cases dealt with by the Commercial Tribunal, the cases flow through this Court unabated.

The present is one where any commercial solution has proved impossible so it is necessary to deal with it according to law.

The defendants let to the plaintiffs for three years, from 11 March 1996 with options to renew, a three level building which the plaintiffs have used as a restaurant . They have their bar area on the lowest level, their main restaurant on the first floor level and a pool table and cafeteria on the second level.

The plaintiffs used the time from 11 March 1996 to 30 April 1996 in fitting out the premises and opened the restaurant on 30 April 1996. I should say that when making this finding of fact and any others I am merely indicating situations where there is an arguable case that that is the fact. I am certainly not making any final determination as to the truth or otherwise.

On 4 May 1996 there was a heavy rainstorm. It would appear that the roof was defective and water flooded in the premises. The plaintiffs secured the services of Mr Mawer and he did work on the roof on that day and charged the tenants $780. The restaurant was closed until about 13 May 1996, a period of about nine days.

The rent due under the lease was $3,466.67 per calendar month, which was probably payable on the eleventh day of each month. The payment due on 11 May was not made. The plaintiffs say that they were entitled to deduct from the amount payable the amount that they had to pay to Mr Mawer. The defendants dispute this, saying that as far as they are aware the plaintiffs were insured against this loss and will recover from their insurance company and that in any event there is no covenant in the lease requiring the lessors to maintain the premises.

At about 9 am on 4 June 1996 the lessors purported to re-enter. By 10:30 am when the male plaintiff attended at the restaurant the locks had been changed and the front courtyard gate was closed preventing access. After some debate, on 5 June 1996 the plaintiffs asked this Court to let them back into possession. I indicated the terms on which I might be prepared to let the tenants back into occupation and that debate continued through to about 12:30 today when it became clear that there could be no agreement between the parties.

The lease in cl 11.01 provides that the landlords might re-enter should the rent remain unpaid for fourteen days after any of the days on which the same ought to have been paid. Accordingly, by 4 June 1996, if, as I have assumed for present purposes, an instalment of rent was due on 11 May 1996, a right of entry would have arisen.

However, the plaintiffs say that there are two reasons why the rent was not so due. The first is that they were entitled to set off the amount which they had to pay Mr Mawer, plus additional amounts they say they have become liable to pay to Mr Mawer and, secondly, that the rent had abated under cl. 3.08 of the lease, which I will set out shortly.

The first point does not appear to me to provide an arguable case as to why the rent was not due. Although it is a matter of looking at the lease in each particular case, the general rule is that at law the landlord's obligations and the tenant's covenant as to rent are not dependent on each other and, generally speaking, the tenant cannot set off a claim for damages against his obligation to pay rent.

Furthermore, this is reinforced by the general rule that one cannot set off at law an unliquidated claim against a liquidated demand; see for instance
McDonnell & East Ltd versus McGregor <case>; <case>; [[1963] VR 445.] 
The only set off that there can be is a set off in Equity and that will only take place if certain preconditions are satisfied. I am not at this stage satisfied that there would be a set off in Equity, but I do not think that matters when one is looking at the question as to whether at Common Law the rent was due and payable.

Under the second head one must look at cl 3.08 of the lease. This reads, as far as relevant, as follows: "If during the term the whole or any part of the building shall be ... damaged by ... storm tempest or other disabling cause so as to render the premises or any part thereof substantially unfit for the use and occupation of the Lessee or so as to deprive the Lessee of substantial use of the same ... then ...
 ... the total yearly rent hereinbefore reserved or a proportionate part thereof according to the nature and extent of the damage sustained shall abate and all or any remedies for the recovery of such rent or such proportionate part thereof shall be suspended ... " 
Clauses of this nature have been the subject of judicial consideration over many years. I looked at them in connection with the Newcastle earthquake in
Dalla Costa versus Beydoun (1990) 5 BPR 11379. That case, together with the
High Court decision in Georgeson versus Palmos <case>; [(1962) 106 CLR 578], and the Canadian cases that are referred to in Dalla
Costa, together with old cases such as Bennett versus Ireland (1858) Ell, Bl & El 326; <case>; [120
ER 530] show that the tenant bears the onus of proof that the premises are unfit; (b) the premises must be unfit for the purposes contemplated by the lease; (c) even if the tenant can carry on some business in the premises they may still be unfit; and (d) there is an element of proportionality so that one must proportion the rent if the premises are able to be partly used.

In the instant case, the nine days on a daily basis would mean that the rent between 4 and 13 May 1996 would abate in the sum of approximately $1,006.

As rent abated until 13 May 1996, the first day on which the landlords could take any action to re-enter would be 28 May 1996.

Normally, if one is seeking to re-enter one has to comply strictly with the terms of the re-entry. Clause 11.01 talks about any rent which remains unpaid for fourteen days after any of the days on which the same ought to have been paid. As 11 May 1996 was a date on which the rent and the remedies were suspended, no rent was due on 11 May 1996, and accordingly, there was no right of re-entry under cl 11.01 until the next rent day, 11 June. Thus the landlords' re-entry on 4 June 1996 must have been illegal.

It may be that one does not construe this lease as I have by saying that the eleventh day of each month is the day for payment of rent. If that were so, (and I do not think it is, but it may be arguable that it is) then come 14 May there became again a liability to pay rent. However, the tenants had overpaid for the previous month and were entitled to not pay rent for a further seven days, so that the time on which the rent would have become in default would be 21 May 1996 and one has then got to look at the position to see whether there were fourteen days after 21 May 1996 when the rent was unpaid. The fourteenth day would have been 4 June 1996, so that the re-entry would have been approximately fifteen hours premature, so that again the landlords' re-entry would have been illegal.

It follows that the plaintiffs have an arguable case that the landlords are currently trespassing on the premises and would have a claim for ordinary and exemplary damages. The premises are special premises so that it is appropriate that Equity give the relief restoring the tenants to possession.

There have been various offers made by the tenants during the course of the day and, as I have said, I have put some pressure on the parties to settle the matter commercially. Those offers have been resisted, so that it is necessary to decide the matter legally.

As often happens with landlord and tenant cases they depend on very small technicalities, which can affect one party or the other by $50,000 or $100,000. That is why one tries to stop doing that. Every now and again one's hand is forced.

The plaintiffs are, however, only entitled to go back into possession so long as they pay the rent. Forgetting about any claim there may be for damages because of the water, and forgetting about any claim for trespass which may sound in damages, with the abatement the current rent due is $2,460.67 and there will then be further rent payable on 11 June 1996.

Upon the plaintiffs paying to the defendants the sum of $2,460.67 I make orders 1 and 2 in the summons adding at the end of order 2 "in respect of any non payment of rent prior to 6 June 1996". Costs of the interlocutory proceedings are to be costs in the cause. I stand the matter over to the
Registrar's list on 4 July 1996 at 9:30 am.
 * * * 
