

K W Wentworth versus G J Rogers and Anor [1996] NSWSC 421 (10 September 1996) 
K W Wentworth versus G J Rogers & Anor /82 
Tuesday, 10 September 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
SPERLING J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
On 26 July 1985, Mr Rogers was acquitted on his trial for offences against Ms Wentworth. The offences charged were buggery and assault occasioning actual bodily harm, alleged to have occurred on 27 January 1977.

By statement of claim, filed on 13 December 1982 (almost six years after the alleged events), Ms Wentworth sued Mr Gordon Rogers, claiming damages for assault.

Mr Rogers filed a defence to the statement of claim and a cross-claim for damages for malicious prosecution.

The civil claim and cross-claim went to trial. On 20 December 1985, there was verdict for the defendant on Ms Wentworth's claim and a verdict for Mr Rogers on the cross-claim in the sum of $571,000.

On 6 March 1987, the Court of Appeal set aside the verdicts and ordered a new trial.

The new trial was fixed for 26 April 1994. The evidence before me does not disclose why it took seven years to bring the civil claim on for re-trial.

By notice of motion filed on 23 March 1994, Ms Wentworth sought an order that the cross-claim be permanently stayed or, alternatively, that the hearing of the cross-claim be deferred.

On 8 April 1994, Sully J dismissed the application for a permanent stay of the cross-claim, but ordered that the cross-claim be heard separately and be deferred. He also ordered that the cross-claim not be relisted for hearing without the leave of the court. The hearing date for Ms Wentworth's claim was postponed to 14 June 1994, now something over seventeen years since the alleged events.

On 22 June 1994, a jury found a verdict in favour of Ms Wentworth in the sum of $2,000 (to which interest in the sum of $680 was added by the trial judge).

On 11 October 1994, Ms Wentworth filed a notice of motion seeking an order (so far as is presently relevant) that the cross-claim be dismissed.

On 17 October 1994, Ms Wentworth's notice of motion came before Bruce J, then the Common Law Division duty judge. He made certain interlocutory orders, not presently relevant. As to the application for an order dismissing the cross- claim, Bruce J made the following orders: "3. The further hearing of this matter be stood over to the Duty Judge's List on Monday 24 October 1994.
The Plaintiff is granted leave to approach the List Judge to obtain a hearing date, if possible during the week commencing 24 October 1994." 
On 24 October 1994, the notice of motion came before Loveday AJ. Mr Rogers was absent. Loveday AJ ordered (so far as is presently relevant) that the cross- claim be dismissed with costs. His reasons, which I quote in full were as follows: "I am satisfied on the material before me that the defendant/cross claimant,
Gordon John Rogers, has now no interest in pursuing his cross-claim alleging malicious prosecution by the plaintiff/cross respondent. In any event, I am satisfied that he has been served with, and has had due notice of, the application made before me to dismiss his cross-claim. There is nothing to indicate that he has anything that he wishes to put before me in opposition to the application.

Accordingly, I am prepared to grant the application dismissing the cross-claim for want of prosecution. The evidentiary material on which I base that dismissal is the material contained in the Court file and the oral evidence given by the plaintiff/cross-respondent before me. Accordingly, I formally make an order dismissing the cross-claim with costs." 
By notice of motion, filed on 12 December 1994, Mr Rogers sought an order setting aside the ex parte dismissal of the cross-claim.

By notice of motion, filed on 13 December 1994, Ms Wentworth sought (for a second time) an order for a permanent stay of the cross-claim.

The two notices of motion were heard together before me.

Other orders were also sought, including orders sought in other notices of motion. These are not presently relevant.

Result 
For the reasons which follow, there will be an order setting aside the ex parte order of Loveday AJ of 24 October 1994 dismissing the cross-claim, and the plaintiff's notice of motion seeking a permanent stay of the cross-claim will be dismissed.

The scheme of this judgment 
It is convenient, to resolve certain discrete questions of fact and law before coming to the ultimate issues.

DISCRETE QUESTIONS OF FACT AND LAW 
The credibility of Mr Rogers and Mr MacLean 
The solicitor who had been acting for Mr Rogers was Mr D MacLean of Messrs
Khan & MacLean of Tamworth. Both gave evidence in the proceedings before me.

An extensive attack was made on the credibility of these witnesses, in cross- examination and in submissions. I attended to the cross-examination, I have read the transcript of evidence and other materials relied upon, and I have given consideration to the submissions made by Ms Wentworth. My assessment is that Mr MacLean and Mr Rogers each gave their evidence to the best of their ability and recollection. Some inconsistencies and errors of recollection were inevitable, particularly in relation to events occurring a long time ago. In substance, I believe their evidence to have been truthful and reliable.

The reason for Mr Rogers' absence on 24 October 1994 
A decision was taken, in September 1994, that Mr MacLean would not be acting further for Mr Rogers in relation to the cross-claim, although the formalities of ceasing to act were not implemented immediately. As at 21 October 1994, Mr
MacLean and Mr Rogers each had a copy of Ms Wentworth's notice of motion filed on 11 October 1994 and a copy of the orders made by Bruce J on 17 October
I find that, on that date, Mr MacLean told Mr Rogers that Ms Wentworth's motion for dismissal of the cross-claim would not be heard on 24 October 1994, and that the matter would be in the list on that date for the purpose only of being given a date for hearing. Mr MacLean and Mr Rogers have each given evidence of a conversation to that effect. I believe them.

I have to say that the orders of 17 October 1994 were, in my respectful opinion, potentially unclear, particularly to a country solicitor (Mr MacLean) or a lay person (Mr Rogers) not thoroughly familiar with the day to day procedures of the Court. It is understandable that Mr MacLean construed the second of the orders quoted above as meaning that, on 24 October 1994, the application would be given a date for hearing, of which Mr Rogers would be notified, perhaps during that week or perhaps later, unless a date for hearing had meanwhile been obtained from the List Judge by Ms Wentworth, and that Mr
Rogers accepted Mr MacLean's interpretation of the orders as being correct.

Mr Rogers has given evidence that he intended, in due course, to represent himself on the hearing of the application. I am satisfied that this was Mr
Rogers' intention. I quote the following evidence: "Q. Mr Rogers, did you try to get some representation in Court on 17 October or 24 October? 
A. No, I was going to act for myself if I possibly could." 
Mr Rogers' intentions in relation to the cross-claim are relevant to what he would have done but for his conversation with Mr MacLean. I quote the following evidence by Mr Rogers in examination-in-chief: "Q. In relation to that, what do you say about Ms Wentworth, the plaintiff, telling his Honour Mr Justice Loveday that you did not intend to prosecute the malicious prosecution? 
A. It is untrue.

Q. Have you ever advised your solicitor, as he was then, Mr McLean or anyone, that you would not be prosecuting your claim? 
A. No,. . ." 
Then, in cross-examination: "A. . . .I think probably the only time that I would have put my foot down with Duncan (Mr MacLean) was when he was equivocating as to whether the mal pros was alive or dead and I said, `It is very much alive and I will go when I have the means'. That would have been the only time when I could possibly have put my foot down and given firm instructions.
 . . . 
Q. And cost? 
A. I wasn't and neither were Khan & Maclean the least worried about losing the damages claim. We were all very very confident about getting the malicious prosecution.
 . . . 
A. We were totally confident of winning our malicious prosecution, as we still are." 
On the evidence before me, Mr Rogers' financial resources are thin and have been for some time. Legal aid has been refused and Mr MacLean has declined to act further in relation to the cross-claim. But hope springs eternal. On the evidence adduced by Ms Wentworth there is at least a possibility that Mr
Rogers' farm property will become valuable as a subdivision proposition. There are other possibilities. He might, for example, secure pro bono representation for the hearing of the cross-claim, as he has done for the proceedings before me.

At all events, I do not, because of Mr Rogers' financial situation, disbelieve him when he says he has intended to proceed with the cross-claim when he can.

I find that Mr Rogers has not abandoned the cross-claim, that he intends to prosecute it when he can, and that this was his state of mind in October 1994.

I should state how the evidence of the conversation between Mr MacLean and Mr
Rogers came out. Mr MacLean's affidavit of 1 March 1995 annexed correspondence. Mr MacLean also said in that affidavit that at no time did Mr
Rogers give him instructions that he would not pursue his cross-claim, and that he (Mr MacLean) had not conveyed to Ms Wentworth or her legal representatives instructions from Mr Rogers that he would not pursue his cross-claim.

As to the conversation on 21 October 1994, Mr MacLean said in his affidavit sworn on 23 March 1995: "On Friday, 21 October 1994 I spoke on the telephone to Mr Gordon Rogers and advised him that on the following Monday a hearing date for the Plaintiff's
Application would be fixed and he would be notified." 
In oral evidence-in-chief, Mr MacLean was asked further about that conversation with Mr Rogers. He said he had spoken to Mr Rogers to the following effect: "There is going to be a hearing date allocated, you will be told".

In cross-examination, Mr MacLean insisted that it was his understanding of the orders made on 17 October 1994 that the matter would be listed for mention only on 24 October, that the application would not proceed, that there was no need for Mr Rogers to appear, and that he had so advised Mr Rogers.

Ms Wentworth submits that Mr MacLean later resiled from that evidence. I do not read the cross-examination that way. The passage on which she relies is as follows: "Q. You did not intend, did you, to appear on 11 October on behalf of Mr
Rogers? I am sorry - 17 October? 
A. I do not know what date that actually is or what occurred that day, but, no.

Q. You had no intention of appearing for Mr Rogers? 
A. Again I do not know specific -- 
Q. Both of those were the dismissal applications, Mr MacLean? 
A. Is that the date on which the cross claim was in fact dismissed? 
Q. Yes? 
A. No, I had no intention of appearing that day.

Q. Absolutely no intention? 
A. Absolutely no intention.

Q. That is the right -- 
A. I spoke to Rogers J (sic) the previous Friday.

Q. Rogers J (sic) knew you were not coming? 
A. Yes.

Q. You knew the matters was (sic) to be listed and dismissed that day? 
A. No, certainly not. I knew it was to be listed for hearing.

Q. And it was to be listed for hearing on 24th? 
A. 24th?.

Q. It has all been directed to the effect you had no intention of appearing that day? 
A. I had no intention of appearing." 
Mr Rogers' evidence of the conversation of 21 October 1994 with Mr MacLean came out in the following way. Mr Rogers moved to set aside the ex parte order dismissing the cross-claim in his affidavit of 9 December 1994. After parts of the affidavit were disallowed, the only evidence left in that affidavit potentially relevant to his non-appearance on 24 October 1994 was that on 8
September 1994 his wife had undergone surgery for removal of muscle from her leg, which had been followed by a course of radiotherapy and physiotherapy, and that he was completely overwhelmed when he received the notice of motion (a reference to the notice of motion and the orders of 17 October 1994) on what was, according to his evidence, barely two days notice.

In his oral evidence-in-chief, he was asked whether he was able to appear in court on 24 October 1994. He said he was not. Asked why not, he said there were several reasons. One was financial, he had insufficient money to go. The second one was that they were pumping water on the farm, they were in the middle of a drought, the cattle had to be watered, stock had to be fed and he could not get a neighbour on short notice to look after the farm and do those jobs. He was then asked about his wife's medical condition. He said he was very much emotionally affected by that. (Other evidence that the marriage was in trouble does not seem to me to be inconsistent with that.) Asked about the statement in his affidavit that he was completely overwhelmed when he received the notice of motion on what, according to him, was two days notice, he said: "WITNESS:I was totally confused. It was a Friday, as I recall. I received it late and I came home late and received it and rang Duncan MacLean.

A. He said, `Don't worry about it, they are only looking for a date.'" 
Ms Wentworth has submitted that the reasons first given by Mr Rogers for not coming to Sydney were untrue. I accept that Mr Rogers had a problem about leaving the farm at short notice and that he was concerned about his wife's health. But the main point of the attack on this aspect of his case is that he first gave these matters as reasons for not attending court on 24 October 1994 and, only later, said he believed there was no need to go because of what Mr
MacLean had told him. Ms Wentworth submits that, in these circumstances, I should not accept that Mr Rogers did not attend court on 24 October 1994 because of anything said by Mr MacLean.

I think one has to have regard to what Mr Rogers was asked and the order in which he was asked it. Assuming Mr MacLean had told him there was no need to attend court on 24 October 1994 and that he would be advised of the date for hearing in due course, Mr Rogers would have taken the question he was asked, as to whether he could have attended court on that occasion, in that context.
The reasons he gave are then to be seen as reasons for not attending court on an occasion when there was no real need to do so and when all that would happen would be that a hearing date would be allocated. The reasons he gave (the demands of the farm and concern about his wife) were plausible reasons for not attending court on such an occasion. If he had been asked, in the first instance, why he did not attend court on 24 October 1994, I think his answer would have been that Mr MacLean told him that nothing more than the allocation of a hearing date would occur. I believe that, if Mr Rogers had thought the application to dismiss the cross-claim would be or might be heard on 24 October, he would have gone to Sydney, despite his problems with the farm and despite being distracted by his wife's illness, rather than allow the cross-claim to be dismissed unopposed.

Mr Rogers' evidence is internally consistent when it is analysed in this way.

At all events, I accept his evidence that he did not attend because of what Mr
MacLean told him, notwithstanding the other evidence he gave on this topic.

I infer that, if Mr Rogers had believed the application would or might be heard on 24 October 1994, he would have attended court in person on that date and contested the application.

Whether the cross-claim cannot succeed 
Ms Wentworth submits that setting aside the order dismissing the cross-claim would be futile because it cannot succeed. The point has other potential implications as well. I, therefore, deal with it as a discrete question.

The subsidiary arguments are that Mr Rogers would be precluded by estoppel from establishing a necessary element in his cause of action for malicious prosecution, that available evidence of admissions by Mr Rogers and of complaints by Ms Wentworth make the cross-claim hopeless, and that the cross- claim is amenable to be permanently stayed if reinstated. I will deal with these in turn.

Estoppel 
As to estoppel, Ms Wentworth relies on the result in her claim for damages for assault.

The necessary elements in the cause of action for malicious prosecution include acquittal, absence of reasonable and probable cause and malice.

I assume, for the purpose of these proceedings (without deciding) that, in order to establish absence of reasonable and probable cause, and in order to establish malice, Mr Rogers would, in the circumstances of this case, need to establish affirmatively, on the civil onus, by evidence other than the acquittal, that he did not commit the offences with which he was charged; it would then be argued on his behalf that, because the prosecutrix was also the alleged victim, Ms Wentworth must have known the charges were false and, accordingly, cannot have had reasonable and probable cause for proffering the charges; and that she must also have been motivated by malice.

Ms Wentworth says that the result in the civil trial for damages for assault precludes proof by Mr Rogers on a hearing of the cross-claim that he did not commit the offences of buggery and assault occasioning actual bodily harm.

A judicial determination of an issue of fact concludes that issue as between the same parties for the purposes of any later proceedings between the same parties. For this purpose, the party invoking the estoppel must demonstrate that what is raised in the later proceedings was decided in earlier proceedings. It may be possible to infer from the result of the earlier proceedings that a subsidiary issue of fact has been decided in a certain way.
But the inference must be secure. The method of reasoning for this purpose has been stated in the following terms: "(N)othing but what is legally indispensable for the conclusion is thus finally closed or precluded": Blair v Curran [(1939) 62 CLR 425 (Dixon] J at 532); see also Macdougall versus Knight [(1890) 25 QBD 1]; Ord versus Ord [[1923] All ER 206]; Carl Ziess Stiftung versus Rayner & Keeler Ltd (No 2) [[1967] AC 853]; Rogers versus The Queen [(1994) 123 ALR 417]; and
Murphy versus Abi-Saab (Court of Appeal , 20 July 1995, unreported).

In her statement of claim filed on 13 December 1982, Ms Wentworth alleged that, on 27 January 1977, at the former matrimonial home in Bellevue Hill, the defendant "wrongfully assaulted and beat [her] by throwing her to the ground and kicking her, pushing her down, procuring the family dog to attack her, inserting a large rubber dildo in her vagina, inserting his penis in her anus and then inserting his penis in her vagina while the dildo was still inserted therein." 
In his summing-up, Sully J summarised Ms Wentworth's claim as follows: "You will see that in paragraph 1 the plaintiff sets up a claim that the defendant wrongfully assaulted and beat her in ways she, the plaintiff, there particularises. You will see that there are six of them. The defendant, it is said, wrongfully assaulted and beat the plaintiff, first by throwing her to the ground and kicking her; secondly by pushing her down; thirdly by procuring the family dog to attack her; fourthly by inserting a large rubber dildo in her vagina; fifthly by inserting his penis in her anus; sixthly by then inserting his penis in her vagina while the dildo was still inserted therein.

She sets out, of course, to prove all six. She insists, of course, in her claim that all happened but it would be sufficient to...get her a verdict if she proved any of those six incidents." (Emphasis added.) 
Later, in the summing-up, Sully J said: "The plaintiff's case remains from the first to the last not that there is, here and there, some trivial assault for which she might get 5 cents. Her case is and has always been that she was subjected to a series of horrific assaults in respect of which she is entitled to a great deal of money...

The question for you, as we shall see, is: do you accept or do you not that the plaintiff was subjected by the defendant to some one or more of those six particular assaults which she alleges. Is that clear ladies and gentlemen?" (Emphasis added) 
No special verdicts were taken. A general verdict was returned in favour of the plaintiff in the sum of $2,000.

Ms Wentworth submits that the jury must have found that Mr Rogers did all the things which she alleged he had done by way of assault. That is not correct.
All that can be inferred from the jury's verdict is that Mr Rogers did one or more of the things alleged by her. Indeed, it is consistent with the result that the jury found no more than that Mr Rogers pushed the plaintiff to the ground and that the jury awarded the $2,000 by way of compensatory and exemplary damages for that assault.

Indeed, the amount awarded strongly suggests that the jury did not find that
Mr Rogers was guilty of buggery or of assault occasioning actual bodily harm.
But it is unnecessary to pursue that line of thought further. The only relevant point is that Ms Wentworth cannot establish, from the result, that the jury found Mr Rogers had committed buggery and/or assault occasioning actual bodily harm.

Conviction for a lesser offence does not preclude a claim for malicious prosecution for a more serious offence arising out of the same facts: Boaler v Holder [(1887) 3 TLR 546]; Dent versus Standard Life Association <case>; [(1904) 4 SR 560];
Lebbo versus D Buckman Ltd [(1952) 2 All ER 1057]; and
Birchmeier versus The Council of the Municipality of Rockdale [(1934) 51 WN .] 
Evidence of admissions and complaints 
As to the submission that the cross-claim cannot succeed because of available evidence of admissions by Mr Rogers and complaints by Ms Wentworth, Ms Wentworth relies on a body of material tending to establish that certain admissions were made by Mr Rogers to various persons concerning the events of the day and concerning prior conduct (which is said to be relevant), and that Ms Wentworth gave an account of what she alleges occurred, by way of complaint, to various persons shortly after the event.

The evidence relied upon by Ms Wentworth is not conclusive. It is known that witnesses sometimes resile from previous statements, giving rise to an issue of fact as to what they truly saw or heard. That has occurred in several instances in the present case, where witnesses have failed to give evidence of admissions and/or complaints allegedly made to them at an earlier time. It is also known that documentary evidence, thought to be contemporaneous with events and thought to support a certain state of affairs may prove not to be contemporaneous and to relate to other events. That is an issue in the present case in relation to documentary material said to support Ms Wentworth's case.
It is also known that admissions may be made in the emotionally charged wake of events, for all sorts of psychological reasons, which may later be found to have been incorrect. That admissions have been made is not necessarily proof positive.

Most pertinently, admissions and complaints are no more than evidence. They are not conclusive. At the criminal trial and at the two civil trials, Mr
Rogers has denied the conduct which is alleged to constitute the offences.
Presumably, at a further trial of his cross-claim, Mr Rogers would, if called upon to do so, give evidence on oath that he did not do those things. (For the reasons I have given, he is not estopped from doing so.) The evidence of admissions and complaint, such as it is, would be weighed in the balance along with other evidence. It would be an issue of fact for the tribunal of fact as to where the truth lay.

Ms Wentworth has not demonstrated to my satisfaction, that, because of available evidence of admissions and complaints, Mr Rogers' claim for malicious prosecution is false, hopeless or even unlikely to succeed.
 "Tainted" acquittal 
Substantially the same materials are relied upon by Ms Wentworth as establishing that the acquittal was "tainted" by illegality and, accordingly, could not be relied upon. Apart from the legal problems confronting this approach, for the same reasons as I have given in relation to admissions and complaints, it is not made out factually that it would unavoidably be established that the acquittal was secured improperly or irregularly.

Cross-claim amenable to permanent stay 
As to Ms Wentworth's submission that the cross-claim would, in any event, be permanently stayed, I will deal with that submission when I come to Ms
Wentworth's substantive application that the cross-claim should be permanently stayed. My conclusion, it will be seen, is to the contrary.

For these reasons, Ms Wentworth has failed to establish that the cross-claim would not succeed.

MR ROGERS' APPLICATION TO SET ASIDE THE ORDER OF 24 OCTOBER 1994, DISMISSING THE CROSS CLAIM 
Part 40 r 9 of the [Supreme Court Rules ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/scr1970232/) provides that the court has a discretion to set aside a judgment or order. A judgment, entered after judgment has been given in the absence of a party, whether or not the absent party had notice of the trial or of any motion for the judgment, may be set aside: r 9(2)(b). An order, made in the absence of a party, whether or not the absent party is in default of appearance or otherwise in default, and whether or not the absent party had notice of motion for the order, may be set aside: r 9(3)(a).

The rule does not oust the inherent jurisdiction of the Court. The authorities under the rule and under the Court's inherent jurisdiction show ways in which the Court may legitimately exercise its jurisdiction to set aside an order made in the absence of a party.

Generally, it is said, the Court will need to be satisfied that there is a reasonable explanation for the default, for any delay in moving to set aside the judgment or order and a bona fide defence. There are, however two classes of case where the courts have taken a more robust approach: first, where the order was obtained irregularly; and, secondly, where common justice requires it. For the reasons which follow, the order of 24 October 1994, should, in my view, be set aside on the more common grounds and on each of the special grounds I have mentioned. In the present case, any one of these approaches is, in my view, sufficient to require that the ex parte order be set aside.

The ordinary approach 
The usual requirement of an explanation for the default and for any delay, and of proof of the existence of a bona fide defence is to be found in such cases as Rienehr Industrial Lease & Finance Pty Ltd versus Jordan (Court of Appeal , 4 June 1974, unreported); Stollznow versus Calvert [[1980] 2 NSWLR ]; and Adams versus Kennick Trading (International) Ltd [(1986) 4 NSWLR 503.] 
In the present case, my finding as to the reason for Mr Rogers' non-attendance on 24 October 1994 excuses his absence.

There was no serious delay in moving to set aside the ex parte order.

Historically, the concept of a "bona fide defence" was developed in relation to applications to set aside default judgments. The claim as to which the applicant was called upon the demonstrate a bona fide defence was, in that context, the plaintiff's claim in the principal proceedings. However, where the ex parte determination is an order dismissing proceedings for want of prosecution, the relevant claim by the plaintiff is the application for that order.

I find that Mr Rogers had a bona fide answer to the application to dismiss the cross-claim for want of prosecution. His answer would have been that, until
April 1994 the linking of the cross-claim to Ms Wentworth's claim was consensual and that any delay in bringing those proceedings on for trial was consensual; that, between April and June 1994, he was precluded from bringing the cross-claim on for hearing by the order made by Sully J for postponement of the hearing of the cross-claim; and that his delay of four months between
June 1994 and October 1994 was not sufficient to justify dismissing the cross- claim for want of prosecution.

Loveday AJ dismissed the cross-claim for want of prosecution on the ground that Mr Rogers had no further interest in the cross-claim and that he had abandoned prosecution of it. Mr Rogers had an answer to that argument. I find that this was not his state of mind, that since June 1994 he had been unable to prosecute the cross-claim for lack of funds, and he intended to prosecute the cross-claim if and when he could find a way of doing so. Assuming that the truthfulness of his evidence in that regard would have been challenged by cross-examination, the result would have been a preview of what has happened in the proceedings before me. The cross-examination of Mr Rogers by Ms
Wentworth has not led me to doubt Mr Rogers' intention to prosecute the cross- claim at such time as he is able to do so.

For the reasons I have given, I doubt that Mr Rogers' application to set aside the ex parte order calls for an examination of the viability of the cross- claim itself. However, because Ms Wentworth's submissions include the argument that to set aside the ex parte order would be futile, I take her submission into account. The argument fails because I find that the cross-claim is not shown to be futile. For the reasons given earlier in this judgment I reject each of the subsidiary arguments advanced by Ms Wentworth, being the arguments based on estoppel, evidence of admissions and complaints, "tainted" acquittal and that the cross-claim would be amenable to permanent stay.

Irregularity 
A party, who applies ex parte for an order in the exercise of a judicial power is required to meet a high standard of candour and responsibility, in bringing to the notice of the tribunal all facts material to the determination of the application, including facts which the absent party would presumably rely upon in defence of the application: Garrard versus Email Furniture Pty Ltd [(1993) 32
NSWLR 662] (per Mahoney AP at 676-7, with whom Clarke JA agreed). An order obtained in breach of that duty will almost invariably be set aside even if, on a fresh application following full disclosure, the applicant would be entitled to an order in similar terms: ibid (at 678). It has been said that an order obtained in breach of good faith is to be set aside ex debito justitiae, and that there is no discretion to refuse to set aside such an order: Analby versus Praetorius [(1888) 20 QBD 764.] 
Loveday AJ recorded in the reasons for his decision that he was satisfied, on the material before the Court, that Mr Rogers now had no interest in pursuing the cross-claim. His Honour also said that there was nothing in the material before the Court to indicate that Mr Rogers had anything he wished to put before the Court in opposition to the application. In those respects, his
Honour was misled.

I have found, on the evidence before me, that Mr Rogers had not abandoned the cross-claim and that, if he had thought the application would or might be heard on 24 October 1994, he would have attended court and contested it in person.

I need, however, to go back a little in the story. As at 12 September 1994, proceedings were pending in the Court of Appeal in relation to a question of costs arising out of the civil trial in June 1994. On that date, Mr Russo wrote to Messrs Khan & MacLean concerning those proceedings and added, in relation to the cross-claim: "Further, on the last occasion when you were in Sydney, we discussed the question of you obtaining instructions from your client for the consent to our
Notice of Motion seeking a withdrawal or alternatively dismissal of your client's cross-claim from malicious prosecution. In this respect, we have not received a reply and would ask that you immediately obtain your client's instructions and should consent not be forthcoming then we must place the matter in the List to be dealt with on 5 October 1994." 
A conversation is then said to have occurred, on 22 September 1994, between Mr
Russo and Mr MacLean. In his affidavit sworn on 12 October 1994, Mr Russo said: "On 22 September 1994, I had a conversation with the solicitor for the
Defendant, Mr Duncan Maclean of Tamworth and I said to him with words to the effect: `Will your client consent to his malicious prosecution claim being dismissed.' 
He replied with words to the effect: `You only prosecute a matter if you are going to get money. Your client has no money, our client will not pursue it but will give you no consent, so when you have all the figures about costs, you can send them up to us and we will pass them onto him.'" 
Further correspondence ensued. Then, having received a copy of Mr Russo's affidavit of 12 October 1994, Mr MacLean wrote to Mr Russo on 13 October 1994 concerning the account given by Mr Russo in his affidavit of the conversation of 22 September 1994. As to that conversation, Mr MacLean said: "The writer would not purport to put his recollection in direct speech however there are two aspects in which he thinks your recollection is in error.

Firstly the conversation you recall was certainly preceded by some remarks by the writer to the effect that one can validly defend a claim on behalf of such a person as Mr Rogers without prospect of being paid but the conversation went on then to say something to the effect of that which you quote where the writer's aversion to prosecute a claim for no money was put as the antithesis.

Secondly the writer's recollection is the reflection of Mr Roger's intention that he would not prosecute the Cross Claim until he had the money to do so and that important aspect is not reflected in your
Affidavit." (Emphasis added.) 
That was a statement by Mr MacLean of his recollection of what he had told Mr
Russo on 22 September 1994. It was significantly different from Mr Russo's account, as recorded in Mr Russo's affidavit.

On 24 October 1994, the plaintiff appeared in person before Loveday AJ. There is a full transcript of what transpired on that occasion. One of the things that happened was that Ms Wentworth handed up to his Honour a copy of Mr
Russo's affidavit which contained Mr Russo's account of the conversation of 22
September 1994. Following a short discussion of what had occurred before Bruce
J, the following exchange took place between Loveday AJ and Ms Wentworth: "HIS HONOUR: Ordinarily when you seek to dismiss a cross-claim for want of prosecution, an affidavit is filed setting out that nothing has been done for a long period of time.

WENTWORTH: Nothing has been done since the hearing of the trial.

HIS HONOUR: When was that? 
WENTWORTH: June and he has made no attempt since March 1987 and now to have this malicious prosecution matter -- 
HIS HONOUR: I think we had better get this on the record." 
Ms Wentworth was then sworn. Her evidence included the following (page 9): "A. Mr Rogers has not made any attempt to prosecute his malicious prosecution claim and, as well, I am told by my solicitor, Mr Salvatore Russo, that he had a conversation with the solicitors for Mr Rogers and they have said to him, effectively, `Mr Rogers will not prosecute the malicious prosecution claim.
There is no point, she doesn't have money.' . . .

Q. And you have not heard personally from Mr Rogers any matter which suggests that he has any interest or inclination to pursue the malicious prosecution action? 
A. I have not heard from Mr Rogers at all and my solicitors have not had any response from him at all." 
This was a representation to his Honour that nothing had been heard since Mr
Russo's conversation with Mr MacLean on 22 September 1994, tending to indicate any interest on Mr Rogers' part in the cross-claim or any intention on Mr
Rogers' part to prosecute the cross-claim. In view of what was contained in the letter of 13 October 1994, to which I have referred, the representation was incorrect.

The incorrect answer to his Honour's question is important. This was not a motion for summary judgment, where the primary question would have been whether Mr Rogers had an arguable case. This was a motion to dismiss for want of prosecution. At least, that is the way it developed and that was the basis for the order that was made. The cross-claim had been filed a long time ago, but the proceedings had been conducted on both sides at what could only be described as a leisurely pace. (Mr Rogers gave evidence of trying to get the cross-claim on at one stage, but the fact is that it was not brought on, any more than Ms Wentworth's claim was brought on at that stage.) Mr Rogers was ready to litigate his cross-claim whenever Ms Wentworth brought her claim on for hearing. That was the situation in 1985 and again in 1994. It was only as a consequence of Ms Wentworth's application for severance, that the cross- claim did not come on for hearing in 1994. Following resolution of Ms
Wentworth's claim in 1994, Mr Rogers had then taken no steps to bring the cross-claim on for hearing for some four months when Ms Wentworth filed her notice of motion, in October 1994, seeking an order for dismissal.

The earlier delay had been consensual, putting the position at its highest against Mr Rogers. A non-consensual delay of four months is a short time to sustain an application to discuss for want of prosecution. To dismiss for that order of delay because of the mere passage of time would be unprecedented in modern times. The sting in the application was Ms Wentworth's case that Mr
Rogers had decided to abandon the cross-claim.

Mr Russo's account of his conversation with Mr MacLean on 22 September 1994 was powerful evidence in support of that case. There was other evidence from which such an inference was open. But Loveday AJ made it clear that he wanted to know unequivocally whether anything had been heard tending to indicate any interest on Mr Rogers' part in the cross-claim or any inclination to prosecute it. After a mere four months of non-consensual delay, it would only be if his
Honour were satisfied that Mr Rogers had abandoned the cross-claim that he would dismiss the cross-claim for want of prosecution. That was the message.

When Ms Wentworth told his Honour, incorrectly, that neither she nor her solicitor had heard anything further, that was to conceal the statement by Mr
Rogers' solicitor in the letter of 13 October 1994 that he had told Mr Russo on 22 September 1994 that Mr Rogers intended to pursue the cross-claim when he had the funds and the statement that Mr Russo's account of the conversation of September 1994, as recorded in Mr Russo's affidavit, was incorrect in that regard.

It is conjectural as to whether his Honour would have been sufficiently satisfied on the whole of the material, including the letter of 13 October, that Mr Rogers had in truth abandoned the cross-claim or that Mr Rogers would never be in a position to prosecute it and that the cross-claim should be dismissed on that account. It is, however, entirely possible that the motion would have been dismissed or adjourned if the letter of 13 October 1994 had been revealed, as it should have been.

There was, accordingly, a miscarriage of justice which cannot be allowed to stand uncorrected. That there was an irregularity is an under-statement. It was not just a matter of failure to reveal that which should have been revealed. It was a case of informing the Court that that which had occurred had not occurred.

Ms Wentworth has sought to explain why the letter of 13 October was not brought to the attention of Loveday AJ. First, she says that she had a policy of handing up all correspondence to the Court and that, as far as she is aware, the letter of 13 October was before the judge. I reject that submission. There is a transcript of the proceedings before Loveday AJ on 24
October 1994. There is no record of the letter of 13 October 1994 being handed up. Further, before me, Ms Wentworth was cross-examined about the letter of 13
October not having been brought to the attention of Loveday AJ. She gave no evidence that it had been handed up or from which it could be inferred that it had or might have been handed up. I think that the suggestion that the letter was or was likely to have been handed up is an unconvincing afterthought.

Secondly, Ms Wentworth says that the letter would not have made any difference because it was clear beyond question from other evidence that Mr Rogers had decided to abandon the cross-claim. I do not think this was clear beyond question on the other evidence to which she refers. But that is not the point.
The position was far from clear beyond question, taking into account the letter of 13 October.

Thirdly, Ms Wentworth said, in her written submissions, that Mr MacLean's account of the conversation of 22 September 1994, as given in his letter of 13
October 1994, was incorrect. That was not a question for Ms Wentworth. The fact that Mr Rogers' solicitor had stated, in a letter, that he had, in effect, told Ms Wentworth's solicitor that Mr Rogers' had not abandoned the cross-claim was a material matter to be brought to the Court's attention. More importantly, when asked if anything further had been heard, it was no excuse for withholding a letter, saying something further, that in Ms Wentworth's judgment what was said in the letter was untrue.

These are not satisfactory explanations for having failed to produce the letter of 13 October to the Court.

Common justice 
In Taylor versus Taylor <case>; [(1978-1979) 143 CLR 1], Mason J said (at 16): "In my opinion the jurisdiction extends not only to the setting aside of judgments which have been obtained without service or notice to a party, but to the setting aside of a default or ex parte judgment obtained when the absence of the party is due to no fault on his part." 
In that same case, Gibbs CJ referred to the judgment of Rich J in Cameron v
Cole <case>; [(1944) 68 CLR 571] at 589 and cited with approval the following: "It is a fundamental principle of natural justice applicable, to all courts whether superior or inferior, that a person against whom a claim or charge is made must be given a reasonable opportunity of appearing and presenting his case." 
Take, for example, the case of a litigant who is involved in a car accident on the way to court and judgment passes in his absence. Or the case of a barrister who overlooks the fixture in his diary, and does not turn up. A court, in such circumstances, will not be much troubled about anything else.
The setting aside of the ex parte decision would be virtually automatic.

On the findings I have made, the present case is no different. Mr Rogers was not at court because his solicitor told him all that would happen is that the date for the hearing of the application would be allocated and, accordingly, there was no need for him to be there. That was a mistake - an excusable mistake in my view - but a mistake nonetheless. It was an accidental occurrence which resulted in a litigant not being at court or represented at court on an occasion when proceedings were listed for hearing.

In the circumstances of the present case, the ex parte order of 24 October should be set aside in the interests of common justice.

The outcome of the application to set aside the order of 24 October 1994 
Under the approaches followed above - that is, on the principles ordinarily applicable, on the principles applicable to irregularity, and on the principles applicable to common justice - severally and cumulatively - the ex parte order of 24 October 1994 dismissing the cross-claim should be set aside.
 
MS WENTWORTH'S APPLICATION FOR A PERMANENT STAY OF THE CROSS-CLAIM 
The first point to be made is that this is the second application by Ms
Wentworth for a permanent stay of the cross-claim. The first application was made to Sully J in April 1994 and dismissed.

Unless something relevant has happened in the meantime, the present application should be dismissed on that account: see my judgment in these proceedings given on 12 April 1995.

The only possibly relevant development has been the verdict for Ms Wentworth in her claim for damages. For the reasons I have given, that verdict does not affect the cross-claim.

I would confine myself to the following observations concerning the merits of the application, in these circumstances.

In Williams versus Spautz <case>; [(1992) 174 CLR 509] a lecturer, Spautz, commenced an action against a university for wrongful dismissal. He later brought criminal proceedings against various officers of the university for offences, including criminal conspiracy to defame and conspiracy to injure him without justification and by illegal means. At first instance, it was found that Spautz's predominant purpose in instituting and maintaining the criminal proceedings was to exert pressure on the university to reinstate him and/or to agree to a favourable settlement of the suit for wrongful dismissal. An order staying the criminal proceedings permanently was made.

On appeal to the High Court, the result was upheld. The main point of principle decided on appeal was that proceedings could be stayed even if the moving party had or was to be assumed to have a prima facie case. In the joint judgment of Mason CJ, Dawson, Toohey, Gaudron and McHugh JJ (at 526-7, 529) it was said that it would constitute an abuse of process if the proceedings were brought for an improper purpose such as to use them as a means of obtaining an advantage for which the proceedings were not designed or a collateral advantage beyond what the law offered rather than to prosecute the proceedings to a conclusion; the improper purpose need not be the sole purpose, so long as it is the predominant purpose. Brennan J said (at 537) that there is an abuse of process when the only substantial intention is to obtain an advantage or other benefit, to impose a burden or to create a situation that is not reasonably related to the judgment or order which might be obtained in the proceedings.

It was also stated in the joint judgment that, unless the interests of justice demanded, courts should exercise their jurisdiction, rather than refrain from doing so (at 519), and that the power to grant a stay should only be exercised in the most exceptional circumstances (at 529).

I am not satisfied that Mr Rogers has in mind something other than the prosecution of the cross-claim to a conclusion, as his predominant purpose or as his only substantial intention, within the meaning of these principles.

Mr Rogers was cross-examined at length with a view to showing that he had no belief in the merits of the cross-claim and that, for this and other reasons, he had no intention of prosecuting it. His evidence was to the contrary. I am not satisfied that the cross-claim is without merit or that Mr Rogers believes it to be without merit or that, for this or any other reason, he does not intend to prosecute it to a conclusion: see earlier in this judgment for my reasons.

Ms Wentworth did not, in the very extensive cross-examination of Mr Rogers or in the very lengthy written submissions which she has lodged, articulate with precision the ulterior purpose which she asserted was the predominant or substantial motivation for Mr Rogers' application to rescue the cross-claim from the ex parte order for dismissal, for defending it against the application for a permanent stay, and for wanting to maintain it on foot.

As best I can glean the argument from what has been presented, it is asserted that Mr Rogers has, in the history of proceedings between these parties and in relation to other proceedings involving Ms Wentworth, had as his exclusive or primary or substantial motivation, to persecute Ms Wentworth and to injure her in her reputation, her family relationships and her financial interests. I think it is sufficient to say that I have attended to the oral evidence, I have read the documentary material tendered and I have read the submissions lodged by Ms Wentworth. Given that I am not satisfied that Mr Rogers' cross- claim is without merit, I do not infer from the evidence that has been adduced that his primary, predominant or substantial purpose in bringing, prosecuting and seeking to maintain the cross-claim has been other than to recover a verdict for malicious prosecution. I quote the following evidence, which I find to be truthful evidence: "Q. Did you want to get it up and running because you thought it might bring you some money? 
A. Pardon? 
Q. Did you want to get it up and running because you thought it might bring you some money? 
A. I thought I wanted to get it up and running so we could at last finish this interminable litigation.

Q. You wanted to get it up and running to finish litigation? 
A. That most certainly would have been one of my reasons.

Q. To get some money? 
A. It would have been nice to recoup some of my costs and the money my wife had paid. No, I don't believe we were ever looking at making money out of it; we were looking at getting money back that we had paid out in legal costs.

Q. $45,000? 
A. I don't know what the $45,000 is.

Q. Isn't that your evidence that that is what you put out in legal fees? 
A. No.

Q. No? 
A. No. That is the money that my wife has paid on my behalf. There is 131,7000 and something or other dollars to Legal Aid. There is also considerable more money that I have paid out prior to the stage when my wife started paying my bills.

Q. Let me get this straight: you wanted to get back, firstly, the $131,000 to
Legal Aid? 
A. No. There was no firstly or anything.

Q. I am just asking you in order a number of questions. When I say "firstly," you wanted to get back the money you owed to Legal Aid; is that right? 
A. No, no, no, I didn't say that at all. I said that I hoped - I wasn't intending to make money. I hoped to recoup my legal costs.

Q. You weren't intending to make money - now, weren't you claiming damages? 
A. Yes.

Q. You wanted to get some damages, did you? 
A. I may be wrong, but I understood the only basis on which malicious prosecution could be run was damages.

Q. So you wanted to get some money for damages, did you? 
LOVAS: I object.

HIS HONOUR: I allow it.

THE WITNESS: Possibly some, but the main objective was to finish the whole thing.

WENTWORTH: Q. To finish the whole thing? 
A. To finish the interminable litigation.

Q. How was the malicious prosecution going to finish the whole thing? 
A. Hopefully it would have been the end of the 160 and something cases or separate court appearances.

Q. And, you expected to get money for it? You expected to get money for it, did you? 
LYDIARD: He has been asked this question several times already. He has given an answer.

HIS HONOUR: I will allow it.

THE WITNESS: I think the money was an end not an objective.

WENTWORTH: Q. And how did you think the money was an end not an objective? 
A. I think that was my attitude at the time.

Q. I see. And what was the end result that you expected then, this end, the money was an end? 
A. An end to the litigation.

Q. An end to the litigation? The money would be an end to the litigation; is that right? 
A. No.

Q. Well, what would be tend (sic) of the litigation? 
A. Hopefully success in malicious prosecution.

Q. Why? 
A. I mistakenly believed that you would no longer be able to pursue me.

Q. Pursue you. Why not? 
LOVAS: I object.

HIS HONOUR: I will allow it.

THE WITNESS: Because I hoped that you hadn't anything further to assail me with.

WENTWORTH: Q. No money perhaps? 
A. Pardon? 
Q. No money perhaps? 
A. No. I don't think that a lack of money would stop you." 
It may be that, if Ms Wentworth had failed at the second trial of her civil claim for damages, Mr Rogers would then have let the cross-claim go. It may be that his reason for prosecuting the cross-claim is the prospect of arming himself with an answer to Ms Wentworth's large claim for costs relating to the earlier proceedings. Assuming this to be so, I would not regard that as being an improper purpose within the ambit of the principles laid down in Williams v Spautz (supra).

The evidence does not reveal that Mr Rogers has an improper purpose in any other respect.

Another case to which the parties have referred is Walton versus Gardiner <case>; [(1992-1993) 177 CLR 378.] The
High Court upheld orders staying complaints against certain medical practitioners, referred to the Medical Tribunal, pursuant to The Medical
Practitioners Act 1938 . The substantial basis for the stays was delay in bringing and prosecuting the complaints.

The main point in Walton versus Gardiner was that the categories of abuse of proceedings are not closed and that the power to grant a permanent stay can be exercised whenever processes are employed in a manner which gives rise to unfairness (at 393); in particular, the jurisdiction is not confined to cases where there is either an improper purpose or no possibility of a fair hearing (at 395).

It was further held in Walton versus Gardiner that proceedings could be permanently stayed as an abuse of process if they were clearly foredoomed to fail (at 393), as, for example, by reason of estoppel (at 393).

As I have indicated, I am not satisfied that the cross-claim is doomed to fail, by reason of estoppel or for any other reason. And the evidence does not disclose any unfairness in permitting the cross-claim to proceed.

Having regard to these considerations, apart from the fatal point that an application for a permanent stay has previously been dismissed and that there has been no relevant further development, I would, in any event, dismiss the application on the evidence before me.

ORDERS 
I make no formal orders at this stage.

The matter will be listed for mention.

I direct Mr Rogers' counsel to bring in short minutes of order, at that time, disposing of all relevant notices of motion, to the extent that this judgment relates to them.

I will hear argument on that occasion concerning the costs of the proceedings
I have decided.

I will also give directions in relation to the balance of the proceedings before me. I direct counsel for Mr and Mrs Rogers and Ms Wentworth to bring in short minutes of order reflecting the directions they say I should make in relation to the balance of the proceedings before me. I invite Mr Rogers and
Mrs Rogers to submit to the continuance of the injunction and of the undertaking until disposal of the cross-claim, and to apply for adjournment of notices of motion relating to what I have called the "property claims" to the hearing of the cross-claim.

I offer to receive, on that occasion, a notice of motion to be filed in court for an order for leave to proceed with the cross-claim (in view of the order by Sully J that the cross-claim should not be listed for hearing without leave). At that time, I will give such directions as may be necessary for the hearing of any such application, if it is opposed.
 * * * 
