

NSW Crime Commission versus R Alkhair and N Alkhair [1997] NSWSC 114 (7 April )

NSW CRIME COMMISSION versus RADWAN ALKHAIR & NATASHA ALKHAIR /92 
TUESDAY 10 DECEMBER 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES CRIMINAL DIVISION 
SMART J 
DIRECTION 
HIS HONOUR: When this matter came on for hearing today there was some discussion as to the course which should be taken. Having regard to the terms of the motion of 30 October 1996 and the discussion which took place in court on 31 October 1996 I limited today's proceedings to the continuation of the stay of the forfeiture orders and the granting to Mr and Mrs Alkhair of leave to file their application for an exclusion order.

On 31 October 1996 I was concerned at the extensive delay which had taken place on the part of Mr and Mrs Alkhair. The Commission contended that having regard to the extensive delay no further stay should be granted. Mr Ward showed me some documents which indicated that Mr and Mrs Alkhair may have an arguable case for an exclusion order under ss 25 and 26 of the Drug
Trafficking (Civil Proceedings) Act 1990.

I decided that, having regard to the documentary material, Mr and Mrs
Alkhair should be given one last chance to put evidence before the Court in support of their application for continuation of a stay and exclusion orders.

At today's hearing I have, in addition to the affidavit of Mr G A Ward of 28
October 1996, the affidavits of Radwan Alkhair of 10 December 1996, Bruno
Kheir of 4 December 1996, and Natasha Alkhair of 4 December 1996. That material shows that Mr and Mrs Alkhair have an arguable case for an exclusion order. Their case does not depend solely on their word. There is substantial supporting documentary material.

I am satisfied that the stay should be extended and that Mr and Mrs Alkhair should be given leave to make an application for exclusion orders under ss 25 and 26 of the Act.

I propose to grant a stay which will be conditional on Mr and Mrs Alkhair filing the requisite application by 17 December 1996. That is perhaps a slightly unusual course, but it is warranted by the delay which has taken place so far.

The Commission will be seeking to have Mr and Mrs Alkhair examined orally prior to the commencement of the substantive hearing of the exclusion application. Arrangements should be made by the Commission for those oral examinations to take place expeditiously.

The Commission has indicated that in view of the application for exclusion orders it will be seeking to proceed with its application for proceeds assessment orders. The Commission will have to recover the files relating to these matters. The sentences were imposed on 17 December 1992, and it will take sometime for the materials to be collated and assessed.

It appears that the Court is dealing with a residential cottage at Punchbowl.
The Commission may wish to cast its net more widely. However, on the basis of present information it is useful to try and keep the legal costs within moderate bounds.

I direct that the Commission file and serve the affidavits on which it proposes to rely on or before Friday 21 March 1997. This will become clause 8A in the Short Minutes. The matter will be listed for mention on 7 April 1997.
If it should prove impossible for the Commission to file its affidavit it should notify the Applicant by that date.

I grant leave to the Defendants to rely on the affidavits presently filed on their behalf.

Mr Owen for the Commission has reminded me that following upon the oral examination of Mr and Mrs Alkhair the Commission may wish to file further affidavits. The Commission has advised that on 29 January 1997 it has an appointment before a registrar to fix a date for the oral examinations, and the date so fixed by the Registrar may be towards the middle of the year.
Consequent upon what emerges from those examinations the Commission may wish to file further affidavits.

At some stage it may be useful for everybody momentarily to step back from the task of preparation and to make an overall assessment of the costs, and what is ultimately likely to be achieved, if anything. It would be a pity if the costs of the litigation started to approach the value of any remaining assets.
I do not express any view on the merits but it is a case in which the end result should be kept in mind.

I make orders in accordance with the Short Minutes as amended and signed by me.
 * * * 
