

Alemite Lubrequip P/L and Ors versus Brian Elliston Adams and Ors [1997] NSWSC (20 February 1997) 
ALEMITE LUBREQUIP P/L & ORS versus BRIAN ELLISTON ADAMS & ORS (trading as 
Price Waterhouse) /96; CL 12376/88 
Thursday 20 February 1997 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
Gleeson CJ, Handley JA, Sheller JA 
CATCHWORDS: EQUITY - equitable interest - appropriate rate - whether gross negligence of trustee relevant 
TRUSTEES - breach of trust - rate of interest 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Ex tempore 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed with costs 
Trustees having been found liable for breach of trust were ordered to pay equitable compensation. The trial Judge ordered the trustees to pay simple interest on the compensation awarded at the trustee rate of 8%. The plaintiffs appealed contending that interest should have been awarded at the higher mercantile rate. 
HELD, dismissing the appeal: (1) The principles which govern the award of interest against trustees ordered to compensate the trust estate for breach of trust were those stated in Re Dawson (1966) 84 WN Pt 1 399 and Hagan versus Waterhouse [(1991) 34 NSWLR 308.] (2) There was no principle that trustees guilty of gross negligence in the management of the trust were liable to pay interest at the higher mercantile rate.

ORDERS 
Appeal dismissed with costs.
 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: In this matter I will ask Handley JA to give the first judgment.

HANDLEY JA: This is an appeal by investors who lost their money in schemes established by a Mrs Roche in the latter part of the 1982 financial year. The appeal is from a decision of Smart J assessing their entitlements to equitable compensation.

The Judge had earlier found that the respondents, the partners in Price
Waterhouse, were liable for breach of trust in failing to correctly handle moneys paid into the firm's trust account. An appeal to this Court by leave was dismissed on 30 September 1994 and the matter was remitted to Smart J for assessment of compensation. The High Court of Australia refused special leave to appeal.

Following the return of the proceedings to Smart J, his Honour conducted the relevant enquiry, and on 11 March 1996 he entered judgment for the plaintiffs for amounts in a schedule which totalled $2,522,013.96. There is now no dispute as to the principal amounts included in the judgment entered by Smart
J, but the amounts that should be ordered for interest remain in contention.

There were two issues before his Honour. Firstly, the rate of interest which should be awarded and secondly, whether interest should be computed on a simple or compound basis. His Honour held that the lower so-called trustee rate of 8 percent should be awarded rather than the higher so-called mercantile rate, and that interest should be computed on a simple, rather than a compounding, basis. The appellants have challenged his Honour's decision as to the rate of interest, but not his decision that compound interest should not be awarded.

The judge summarised the principles which he distilled from the authorities as follows: "Where the situation is more analogous to trustee responsibility than a commercial one and the trustees have acted honestly and in good faith but have made a mistake or an error of judgment or been negligent (but not grossly so) and have not: profited from the breach of trust; or used the moneys for their own purposes; or been guilty of fraud, serious misconduct or gross negligence; or received compound interest on the moneys in question; simple interest at the trustee rate is usually selected".

Mr Grieve QC's principal submission in support of the appeal was that the respondents had been guilty of gross negligence and, on the principles referred to by the trial judge, interest at the higher mercantile rate should have been awarded. He relied upon the reasons of the Chief Justice in the earlier appeal for upholding the Judge's decision to refuse the defendants relief under <case> of the [Trustee
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ta122/). His Honour said: " ... I see no error in his Honour's reasoning in this respect.

He pointed out that this was a case where a trustee paid money, other than to the beneficiaries, under the erroneous belief that the payee was entitled to the money. This was an honest, but mistaken, misapplication of trust funds.
Furthermore, his Honour found that Price Waterhouse failed to act reasonably.
In particular, they failed to check on whether the ANZ Bank's consent had been given, and the steps they took about enquiring as to whether the notice of rental acceleration had been given were inadequate. Those steps, for example, fell far short of the steps they would have been required to take in their capacity as auditors. Indeed, it seems to have been steps which they later took as auditors which brought to light the failure to give the acceleration notice. In my view, his Honour was correct in his refusal to excuse the breach of trust".

In his judgment on the enquiry, Smart J held that the defendants had acted honestly and in good faith. They had been prevailed upon by Mrs Roche, the fraudulent promoter, to pay the moneys to the wrong person. Until she absconded they had no reason to distrust her. Accordingly, he considered that their failures were not gross. They had obtained no profit or personal advantage from the erroneous payment, and had not used the money for their own benefit.

Mr Grieve QC submitted that these findings were inconsistent with the conclusion of the Chief Justice referred to, that the steps taken by the defendants to ensure that moneys were not paid out of their trust account in breach of trust "fell far short of the steps they would have been required to take in their capacity as auditors".

Mr Grieve QC submitted that, properly understood, this finding, concurred in by the other members of the Court, was a finding that the defendants had been guilty of gross negligence.

In my opinion, there is no such conflict between the findings of Smart J in the judgment under appeal, and the earlier reasons of the Chief Justice. With respect, in my opinion, the Chief Justice did not decide that the defendants were guilty of gross negligence and had no occasion to do so. The finding under challenge was well supported by evidence and in my opinion, cannot be disturbed.

In any event, Mr Jucovic QC submitted, and Mr Grieve QC in reply acknowledged, that the statement by the judge that trustees are liable for the higher mercantile rate of interest where they have been guilty of gross negligence is not supported by the authorities.

The liability of trustees for interest was carefully considered by Street J in
Re Dawson (1966) 84 WN [PT ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ta122/index.html#p1) [399](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ta122/index.html#p399), and by Kearney J in Hagan versus Waterhouse [(1991) 34 NSWLR 308.] In my opinion, the statements by those Judges of the principles which are applied in determining the rate at which trustees should be ordered to pay interest on moneys they are bound to recoup to the trust estate are correct and should be followed by this Court.

Those principles do not support the view that trustees who have been guilty of gross negligence are for that reason liable to pay interest at the higher mercantile rate.

For those reasons, I would propose that the appeal should be dismissed with costs.

GLEESON CJ: I agree.

SHELLER JA: I also agree.

GLEESON CJ: The orders of the Court will be as proposed by Handley JA.
 * * * 
