

Hart versus Herron and Anor [1996] NSWSC 176 (6 June 1996) 
HART versus HERRON & ANOR /80 378/80 CL 12781/79 JUNE 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
PRIESTLEY JA, CLARKE JA, SHELLER JA 
CATCHWORDS: APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL - PSYCHIATRIC TREATMENT IN HOSPITAL - WRONGFUL IMPRISONMENT - ASSAULT - NEGLIGENTMEDICAL TREATMENT - WHETHER EXEMPLARY DAMAGES AVAILABLE - WHETHER FURTHER EVIDENCE JUSTIFIED NEW TRIAL 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL - PSYCHIATRIC TREATMENT IN HOSPITAL - WRONGFUL
IMPRISONMENT - ASSAULT - NEGLIGENT MEDICAL TREATMENT - WHETHER EXEMPLARY
DAMAGES AVAILABLE - WHETHER FURTHER EVIDENCE JUSTIFIED NEW TRIAL .

At jury trial (1980) the plaintiff was awarded compensatory and aggravated damages against the defendant doctor for wrongful imprisonment, assault and negligence and against the defendant hospital for wrongful imprisonment. The plaintiff sought a new trial on damages against the doctor, on the ground of misdirection of the jury, the inadequacy of damages, the availability of further evidence, and the trial judge's refusal to allow the jury to consider exemplary damages. Points were also taken about interest and costs.

On Appeal - Held: 1. For exemplary damages to be left to the jury there needed to be some evidence on which the jury could find that the doctor knew the plaintiff had not consented to the treatment or was recklessly indifferent to whether there was consent: Lamb versus Cotogno <case>; [(1987) 164 CLR 1] relied on. At trial there was no evidence permitting either finding. Had the further material been before the jury, there was no real possibility of the position being any different. The arguments relating to the further material were not strong enough to justify the granting of a new trial for the sake of allowing a jury to consider the question of exemplary damages.
On the question of inadequacy of damages and the summing-up, the case as left to the jury in the summing-up left it properly open to the jury to assess damages within a wide range. An appellate court could only come to the conclusion that a new trial should be directed on damages, if there were something significantly questionable in the trial judge's summing-up. The appellant had not shown any material error in the summing-up.
Interest. The trial judge had shown no misunderstanding of principle or relevant facts and there was no basis for interfering with his exercise of discretion.
Costs. The trial judge's costs orders were based on well founded facts and well within the boundaries of an appropriate exercise of discretion.

ORDERS 
Appeal dismissed with costs.

JUDGMENT 
PRIESTLEY JA: 
Introduction.

Mr Hart as plaintiff brought a case against two defendants which was tried in the Supreme Court in 1980 by judge (Fisher J) and jury. One defendant was Dr
Herron, a psychiatrist, the other a company which carried on business as
Chelmsford Private Hospital (Chelmsford). Mr Hart sued Dr Herron and
Chelmsford separately on three causes of action. The jury returned verdicts and assessed damages on all three in Mr Hart's favour against Dr Herron and on one against Chelmsford.

Mr Hart appealed on the ground the damages were inadequate. He sought a a new trial on damages, and also reversal or alteration of rulings Fisher J had made on interest and costs.

The events on which Mr Hart based his claims occurred in February and March
He commenced his proceedings by statement of claim in the District
Court in November 1976. They were transferred to the Supreme Court in 1979.

The jury trial began on 3 March 1980. It continued on most court days from then until 14 July 1980, when the jury's verdicts were returned. There was much legal argument at which the jury were not present.

The history of the delay leading up to the hearing of the appeal was set out in the reasons given by this court when it refused Dr Herron's application for dismissal of the appeal for want of prosecution: Hart versus Herron (3 June ).

Mr Hart's case was that he had gone to Chelmsford in February 1973, and that while he was there, Dr Herron and Chelmsford, without his consent, treated him by what became known as Deep Sleep Therapy. This involved narcosis and electro convulsive therapy (ECT). He alleged this treatment was negligently administered. Translated into legal terms, his claims became three alleged causes of action against each defendant, namely that: 1. he was wrongfully imprisoned at Chelmsford; 2. the defendants had assaulted him; and 3. the defendants' medical treatment had been negligent. He further claimed that as a result he had suffered severe personal injury.

During the trial, on 12 June 1980, by agreement, judgment was entered against
Mr Hart on the negligence claim against Chelmsford.

Also during the trial, one of the twelve member jury was excused from further duty, so that the verdicts were returned by a jury of eleven.

The jury's verdicts against Dr Herron were, as to wrongful imprisonment, unanimous, and as to the other two claims, by a majority of nine to two.

The jury's verdict for Mr Hart against Chelmsford was on his claim for wrongful imprisonment, by a majority of nine to two.

The jury's verdict for Chelmsford and against Mr Hart was on the claim against
Chelmsford for assault and battery and was unanimous.

The jury assessed compensatory damages against both defendants at $36,000, by a majority of ten to one.

The jury assessed aggravated damages for assault and battery, against Dr
Herron, separately from the other damages, at $18,000, by a majority of ten to one.

The jury assessed aggravated damages for wrongful imprisonment against both defendants, separately from the other damages, at $6,000, by a majority of ten to one.

Judgment was entered in accordance with the jury's verdicts and Fisher J's allowance for interest.

As to costs, after lengthy argument, Fisher J made orders to the effect that: the defendants were to pay the plaintiff's costs of evidence and argument as of a hearing of thirty days; there was to be no order as to costs of the remaining 34 days of evidence and argument; and that, subject to those orders, the defendants were to pay the plaintiff the general costs of the proceedings.

In his appeal Mr Hart asked for a new trial limited to damages, including exemplary damages. He had sought exemplary damages in respect of the wrongful imprisonment and assault claims at the trial, but Fisher J had not allowed that head of damage to be considered by the jury.

Mr Hart also sought to appeal against Fisher J's costs orders, and the amount of interest he had allowed.

Dr Herron also lodged an appeal but did not pursue it when the appeal came on for hearing.

The grounds of appeal 
The grounds in Mr Hart's notice of appeal were grouped under the heads of (i) inadequacy of damages, (ii) exemplary damages, (iii) limitations on evidence in reply, (iv) the summing-up, (v) interest, and (vi) costs.

Head (iii) was abandoned in the course of the hearing of the appeal.

Additionally, Mr Hart sought to rely on evidence, not before the jury at the trial, as a ground for a new trial. This ground is closely connected with the exemplary damages ground. I will deal with these two grounds first.

The further evidence and exemplary damages grounds.

Background. Mr Hart was born on 20 August 1935. In 1959 he became the proprietor of a gymnasium at Rockdale and in 1960 the proprietor of another gymnasium, the Coogee Health Studio. In 1963 he was seeking modelling work. In he did a twelve month acting course at the Arts Council. He afterwards obtained further acting training and some acting experience.

In March 1972 he had plastic surgery on his eyelids at Mosman District
Hospital. He showed concern about his appearance after this surgery. He was experiencing various anxiety symptoms. He mentioned his problems to a gymnasium friend, Dr Frank Smith, who wrote a letter on his behalf to Dr
Herron, in about October 1972. As a result Mr Hart consulted Dr Herron a number of times up to February 1973. On 28 February 1973 he entered
Chelmsford. He there had the treatment earlier described. While in Chelmsford he developed pneumonia and on 20 March 1973 was taken to Hornsby Hospital for treatment. He was discharged on 3 April 1973.

Mr Hart gave evidence at the trial that he had never consented either to the
ECT or the narcosis therapy. He said that after going in to Chelmsford he had been asked to sign a form consenting to such treatment but had refused. He said that a short time later a nurse asked him to take a tablet, which he did, after which everything went black; his next recollection was waking up and eventually discovering that he had been treated by ECT and narcosis therapy.
This evidence was the basis of his claims for wrongful imprisonment and assault.

His claim for damages for negligence was based on the assertion that the way in which his treatment was carried out by the defendants was negligent.

The defendants denied all Mr Hart's claims. They answered the wrongful imprisonment and assault claims by saying that he had consented to the treatment he received. The consent was said to be oral. The defendants did not say at the trial that Mr Hart had signed any written consent form.

Mr Dillworth, a nurse employed by Chelmsford, gave evidence of a conversation in which Mr Hart consented to the treatment. Dr Herron's evidence was that at the time of administering treatment to Mr Hart he had been told that Mr Hart had consented to it.

The jury's verdicts show that they accepted Mr Hart's evidence that he had not consented to the treatment and did not accept Mr Dillworth's evidence that he had.

The further evidence sought to be relied on. The further evidence upon which
Mr Hart wished to rely as a ground for a new trial related to the question of consent.

The material was said to have become available in consequence of an enquiry by a Royal Commissioner commissioned in August 1988 to enquire into Deep Sleep
Therapy. He delivered his report in December 1990. Considerable publicity was given to the proceedings in the enquiry and also to the report. As a result there was much public discussion of the procedures practised in Chelmsford at and around the time the appellant went there in February 1973. The report was critical of Deep Sleep Therapy because of the dangers involved in its use.

More importantly for the further evidence application, Mr Hart's case was one of those whose facts were enquired into by the Commissioner. The
Commissioner's report dealt with the way Dr Herron responded to Mr Hart's enquiries which preceded his bringing his proceedings against Dr Herron. It also dealt with evidence given by Dr Herron at the 1980 jury trial the subject of the present appeal. The Commissioner expressed the opinion that some of Dr
Herron's evidence at that trial had been deliberately untruthful. The
Commissioner also said that Dr Herron had been one of a number of people who set out, in 1977, to conceal the fact there was no written consent given by Mr
Hart to his treatment, and, for this purpose, brought a deliberately misleading document into existence.

At one stage of the further evidence application it seemed the appellant wished to rely on these conclusions of the Commissioner as if they were themselves evidence. However, after discussion of a number of difficulties in this approach, the appellant's counsel proceeded, correctly, on the following footing: in the appeal the court would be confined to considering the evidence before the jury, what happened in the course of the jury trial, and such further evidence, if any, as the appellant might be permitted to put before this court in the appeal; so far as concerned the Commissioner's findings and the materials before him, what might be relevant would be the materials on which the Commissioner based his findings, not those findings themselves.

The rules concerning further evidence. There are at least three different categories of case to which the rules governing whether or not further evidence may be used are applicable.

One category is where the evidence concerns matters occurring after a trial.
Subsections (7) and (9) of [s
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s75a.html) of the [Supreme Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) give the court a general discretion to receive such evidence. The appellant did not contend that the further evidence relied on in the present case was in this category.

The other two categories relate to evidence concerning matters occurring before the trial. Cases in one category have happened sufficiently often for it to have become known as the ordinary category. Cases in the other category happen more rarely. These two categories are treated differently in some respects, but are both subject to the same primary rule: this court is not to receive such evidence in either category except on special grounds: see [s
A(8).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s75a.html) 
The High Court has recently explained the difference between these two categories: Commonwealth Bank of Australia versus Quade [(1991) 178 CLR 134.
(The] court published one opinion, in which Mason CJ and Deane, Dawson, Toohey and
Gaudron JJ joined.) 
The court described the category more frequently encountered as that of "the ordinary case where all that is involved is that relevant fresh evidence has come to the notice of the unsuccessful party after the trial." (at 140) 
In that category, the court said, a "stringent rule" operates which "is supported by considerations of both justice and public interest" (at 141).
That stringent rule represents the reconciliation of the demands of justice and the general desirability that there be an end to litigation (see at 141).
The rule is that "the successful party should be deprived of the verdict in his favour only if the unsuccessful party persuades the appellate court that there was no lack of reasonable diligence on his part and that it is reasonably clear that the fresh evidence would have produced an opposite verdict." (at 141) 
In following pages the court described the other category of case. This category is where more is involved than the coming to the notice of the unsuccessful party of relevant fresh evidence after the trial; additionally to the discovery of the fresh evidence there has been some misdirection, misreception of evidence, wrongful rejection of evidence, surprise, malpractice, fraud or misconduct on the part of the successful party (see at -141).

The particular example of relevant misconduct given by the court was failure to comply with the requirements of the trial court's order for discovery of documents, (which was what had happened in that case).

The court pointed out that the stringent rule appropriate in the ordinary case was not applicable to cases in the less usual category. To apply it in such cases would "serve neither the demands of justice in the individual case nor the public interest in the administration of justice generally." (at 142) 
A little earlier, (at 141), the court had approved of the statement in McCann v Parsons <case>; [(1954) 93 CLR 418], at 430-431, that the grounds on which an appellate court would grant a new trial had been settled by practice but had never become completely stereotyped, always being governed by the overriding purpose of reconciling the demands of justice with the policy in the public interest of bringing litigation to finality.

The court in Quade now proceeded to make it clear that it was not possible to formulate any precise rule to give effect to the "overriding purpose" in cases of the non-ordinary category. They said: "It is neither practicable nor desirable to seek to enunciate a general rule which can be mechanically applied by an appellate court to determine whether a new trial should be ordered in a case where misconduct on the part of the successful party has had the result that relevant evidence in his possession has remained undisclosed until after the verdict. The most that can be said is that the answer to that question in such a case must depend upon the appellate court's assessment of what will best serve the interests of justice, 'either particularly in relation to the parties or generally in relation to the administration of justice' (cf, eg, McDonald versus McDonald (1965), 113 CLR at ,542). In determining whether the matter should be tried afresh, it will be necessary for the appellate court to take account of a variety of possibly competing factors, including, in addition to general considerations relating to the administration of justice, the degree of culpability of the successful party, (cf Southern Cross Exploration NL versus Fire & All Risks Insurance Co
Ltd [(1985) 2 NSWLR 340] at 357), any lack of diligence on the part of the unsuccessful party and the extent of any likelihood that the result would have been different if the order had been complied with and the non-disclosed material had been made available. While it is not necessary that the appellate court be persuaded in such a case that it is 'almost certain' or 'reasonably clear' that an opposite result would have been produced, the question whether the verdict should be set aside will almost inevitably be answered in the negative if it does not appear that there is at least a real possibility that that would have been so." (at 142-143) 
The category appropriate in the present case. In each of the three categories of case, the party seeking the admission of further evidence has usually been unsuccessful at first instance and is seeking a new trial. In the present case, the appellant had judgment in his favour at the trial, where he was, in most senses, successful.

The appellant's complaint in the appeal is based on the following assertions: there was misconduct on the part of Dr Herron, first in administering deep sleep therapy when the appellant had not consented to such treatment, which issue was litigated at the trial, second in wrongly maintaining at the trial that there had been oral consent, which issue was also litigated at the trial, and third, in Dr Herron's having taken part, in 1977, in a fraudulent attempt to conceal the absence of written consent by the appellant to the administering of the treatment, which issue it is said he had no opportunity to litigate at the trial; had the evidence of the third matter, concealed from him by the actions of Dr Herron, been available at the trial, it would have supported (i) his case for the consideration by the jury of exemplary damages as a head of damages, and (ii), the awarding of a significant amount by way of exemplary damages.

The appellant is thus asserting that although successful overall in the proceedings, he was unsuccessful in one area of some significance in his case, and so should be treated in regard to his new trial application in the same way as unsuccessful parties generally. For the purposes of the two grounds of appeal presently being considered, this seems to me to be correct.

It also seems to me correct to approach the further evidence application as falling in the third category of case I have mentioned, of which Quade is an example.

From the last passage cited above from that case, (see pp 8 and 9 above) it appears that one major consideration for a court deciding a new trial application in that category of case is whether there is a real possibility that an opposite result (in the present case in regard to exemplary damages) would have been reached if the further evidence had been before the jury.

To decide whether there was such a real possibility in the present case, it is first necessary to consider the relevant rules concerning exemplary damages.

Exemplary damages. There has been a long history of cases in which juries have awarded exemplary damages. The guidance given by the cases on what justifies an award of exemplary damages has been expressed in different ways.

The argument in the present case turned on the answer to a question either discussed or implicit in all the cases: the nature and degree of a tortfeasor's consciousness of wrongdoing necessary to attract exemplary as well as compensatory damages.

For its consideration of this issue the court was assisted by having many authorities drawn to its attention, particularly English, Australian and
United States cases. Having considered those, and having considered also the decision of the High Court in Lamb versus Cotogno <case>; [(1987) 164 CLR 1], it seems to me that the High Court decision is directly in point on the critical issue in the present case, and that this court is bound by it. It therefore seems to me that on the point in question here, this court's primary focus must be on the rules concerning exemplary damages apparent in Lamb.

The High Court's reasons in Lamb were delivered jointly by Mason CJ and
Brennan, Deane, Dawson and Gaudron JJ. I extract what seem to me to be the relevant statements: "... in actions for tort exemplary damages may be awarded for conduct of a sufficiently reprehensible kind." (at 7) "They" [exemplary damages] "can apply only where the conduct of the defendant merits punishment, which is only considered to be so where his conduct is wanton, as where it discloses fraud, malice, violence, cruelty, insolence or the like, or as it is sometimes put, where he acts in contumelious disregard of the plaintiff's right." (at 8, citing with approval a passage from Mayne & McGregor on Damages, 12th edn.) "... an award of exemplary damages is intended to punish the defendant for conduct showing a conscious and contumelious disregard for the plaintiff's rights and to deter him from committing like conduct again ..." (at 9, citing with apparent approval Brennan J in XL Petroleum Pty Ltd versus Caltex Oil
Pty Ltd (1985) 155 CLR at 471.) 
To this point the extracted citations appear clearly to support the view that exemplary damages can only be obtained when the tortfeasor's conduct shows a conscious disregard for the plaintiff's rights. In a later part of the court's reasons this position was discussed more closely.

This further discussion was in response to a submission that on the facts in
Lamb there was an absence of malice or reckless indifference in what the defendant did and that therefore there should be no exemplary damages (at 12).

In dealing with this submission the High Court at one point noted that it had been expressly found by the Master who decided the case at first instance, that the actions of the defendant were without malice. The High Court continued that it was not clear whether that finding extended to the abandonment of the plaintiff, which had occurred immediately after the commission of the tort, and which the Master had described as callous. The
High Court saw the use of the word callous as being "sufficient in its context to indicate that the Master saw the defendant as having behaved in a humiliating manner and in wanton disregard of the plaintiff's welfare. Elsewhere in his reasons he described the whole incident as 'horrendous'. In those circumstances, the absence of actual malice did not disentitle the plaintiff to exemplary damages. Whilst there can be no malice without intent, the intent or recklessness necessary to justify an award of exemplary damages may be found in contumelious behaviour which falls short of being malicious or is not aptly described by the use of that word: Street, op cit, pp 30-31." 
The reference to Street in the passage just cited was to Street, Principles of the Law of Damages (1962). The paragraph referred to, which throws further light on what the High Court meant in the passage cited, is as follows: "To sustain an award of exemplary damages the defendant must have intended to annoy, abuse or insult the plaintiff or have behaved in an insolent or arrogant manner so that it is desirable to punish or make an example of him.
Reckless disregard amounting to insult is enough, but probably not mere recklessness." 
The questions in the appeal. Two questions arise in relation to the exemplary damages aspect of the appeal. The first question: on the material before him, was Fisher J right in not leaving the question of exemplary damages to the jury? The second question: on the material before Fisher J and the further material now sought to be relied on, had it been before the jury, would it have been right to withhold the question of exemplary damages from the jury? 
Both questions must be considered by reference to the view of the evidence most favourable to Mr Hart's case that the jury could have taken, and on the basis that the jury accepted nothing in dispute which was favourable to Dr
Herron.

This means considering the questions on the basis that Mr Hart had not consented to the treatment and had made staff of Chelmsford aware of his refusal to consent. It also means that the questions must be considered on the basis that the jury did not accept Dr Herron's assertions of his belief (although not based on direct communication from Mr Hart) that Mr Hart had consented to the treatment.

In my opinion the law as stated by the High Court in Lamb makes the following issue the critical one in dealing with both questions: did the fact of non-consent, taken with the rejection by the jury of Dr Herron's asserted belief in consent, taken together with any other evidence there may be on the point, provide evidence on which it was open to the jury to conclude that Dr
Herron either knew there was no consent or was recklessly indifferent to whether there was consent? 
The apparently strong point of the appellant's case in this part of the appeal is that the jury's verdicts in favour of Mr Hart against Dr Herron show that the jury accepted that Mr Hart did not in fact consent to the treatment he received. That of course is not enough to show that exemplary damages should have been left to the jury. For that to happen, there had to be, in addition to material upon which the fact of non-consent could be found, material upon which either Dr Hart's knowledge of the fact of non-consent, or at the least his reckless indifference to the existence of that fact, could be found.

Counsel for the appellant specified every passage in the evidence which in his submission supported the contention that there was material before the jury upon which one of the above findings was open. So that the basis of the submission may be fully understood I will summarise every specified passage, identifying each one by the appeal book number, page and line reference.
 /667G-Z. This passage is part of Dr Herron's evidence in chief. He said he received a telephone call towards the end of February 1973 from a caller who did not identify himself but who spoke about Mr Hart in a way indicating close acquaintance. The caller said Mr Hart had been very disturbed and depressed in the preceding few days and his friends were very worried about him. He was apparently talking about killing himself. Dr Herron said that he told the caller the only thing he could do to protect Mr Hart was to take him to the
Rozelle Psychiatric Centre. The caller said this would be too much of a strain on Mr Hart's mother. Dr Herron then said the only other alternative depended on the agreement of Mr Hart and that was for hospitalisation at Chelmsford. He told the caller the preferable treatment there would be to sedate him heavily and then treat him with electrotherapy. The caller said he would discuss this with Mr Hart /668E-Y. Dr Herron said that a few days after the call from the unnamed caller he was rung by Mr Hart. Dr Herron mentioned to him the call from the unnamed caller. Mr Hart confirmed some of the details given by the unnamed caller. He had discussed this and now agreed it would be best for him to go to hospital. Dr Herron said he explained to Mr Hart the treatment with the prolonged sedation and the electrotherapy. He told Mr Hart he wanted him to come for treatment but if Mr Hart did not agree there was nothing he could do over the telephone but he should come into hospital as soon as possible and let Dr Herron know if he arrived there.
 /670E-I. Dr Herron, still in examination-in-chief, said that a couple of days after the telephone conversation with Mr Hart he received a call from the sister in charge at Chelmsford. He was told that Mr Hart had arrived for treatment, was extremely agitated, and had refused to sign the permission for
ECT. Dr Herron said he asked the sister to welcome him into Chelmsford, to talk to him, discuss his treatment programme "and then if he was to agree to have the treatment programme to institute it.
I discussed with her that I planned to sedate him and give him electrotherapy." /675U-676F. It appears that the date of Mr Hart's arrival at Chelmsford as mentioned in the evidence summarised in the preceding paragraph was 28
February 1973. It was on that night that the first ECT treatment was administered to Mr Hart. Dr Herron's relevant evidence, still in examination- in-chief, was as follows: "Q. Do you have any recollection one way or the other of any further communication from the hospital that evening about the patient? A. (Hesitated)
I believe I got a phone call to say that he had been sedated and everything was going okay.

Q. Did you, your self, attend at the hospital that night? A. Yes. I attended later that night.

Q. And on that occasion did you administer the first ECT treatment to this patient? A. I did.

Q. Before administering ECT treatment on that occasion did you take any steps, yourself, to either examine the notes or examine the patient? A. I checked on the vital signs or the examination that had been made of the patient, and then the patient's chest looking at heart and lungs and did a general examination of his body to see that he was, in actual fact, healthy.

Q. With what opinion? A. The opinion that he was healthy.

Q. Was he conscious or unconscious when you examined him on that occasion? A.
He was asleep." /698M-699Y. The passage here relied on by the appellant was near the end of
Dr Herron's examination-in-chief. His counsel recounted Mr Hart's evidence of the events leading up to his losing consciousness in Chelmsford and asked Dr
Herron, on the assumption that Mr Hart honestly believed that that account was correct, what comment Dr Herron would make on that situation. Dr Herron's answer that one of the complications of both electrotherapy and heavy sedation was that there was a disturbance of memory after the treatment. It was consistent with some degree of recall that there might be patches of total memory loss for some of the events occurring immediately before the institution of such treatment. For that reason the memory difficulty was referred to as a "patchy memory loss" or "a lacuna memory loss".
 /706S-707X; 4/965P. In cross-examination it was suggested to Dr Herron that his explanation of Mr Hart's version of events concerning consent being different from Dr Herron's as being due to "lacuna memory loss" was not genuine and was simply being put forward as a convenient alibi. Dr Herron did not agree with this suggestion.
 /713-716. In this part of his cross-examination, Dr Herron was asked a series of questions concerning the telephone conversation with the unnamed caller designed to show that either the call did not happen or if some version of it did then Dr Herron would have not been justified in placing any reliance upon any information he obtained from it.
 /719-720. In this part of his cross-examination Dr Herron was asked whether he appreciated that through his solicitors he had alleged that a male nurse,
Mr Dillworth had told Mr Hart that he was going to have sleep treatment and
ECT. Dr Herron said that he knew of that allegation. He also said he had never discussed the matter with Mr Dillworth, nor seen a copy of his statement and had first become aware that Mr Dillworth might be able to give such evidence during discussions about the case.

There was then the following passage: "Q. Your understanding from what you tell us until just before this case anyhow was that you had obtained consent? A. That is correct.

Q. In the telephone conversation? A. Yes.

Q. Both to ECT and sleep treatment? A. That is right.

Q. But that subsequently the plaintiff had withdrawn that consent. Said he did not want to go on with it? A. That is right.

Q. That is the last you knew? A. No it is not.

Q. What else did you know? A. I believe that I did mention in my evidence that there was a second conversation from the hospital saying that the patient agreed to be sedated." (3/720, N-T) /721N-722Q. In this part of his cross-examination, Dr Herron was asked about the document reproduced (after March 1973) in a misleading form which became the subject of the finding earlier referred to by the Royal
Commissioner that Dr Herron along with other persons had in 1977 brought it into existence in its misleading form to conceal the fact that there had been no written consent by Mr Hart to the ECT treatment. The appellant attaches considerable significance to this evidence in connection with the application to place further evidence before this court. It was as follows: "Q. Perhaps you would be good enough to look at exhibit D now. Do you recognise the handwriting on the first page of the nurse's notes? A. No.

Q. Can you express any view as to whether you have ever seen it before? A. I have actually seen this document.

Q. Apart from this document is that handwriting which, looking at nurse's records, you have become familiar with? A. It is handwriting that appears familiar to me.

Q. Would you agree there appears to be a change in the handwriting at the foot of the first page of the nurse's records? A. Yes.

Q. Do you tell us that you never made any attempt to find out who were the persons who made those entries? A. That is right.

Q. And you did not appreciate that that could be of vital importance in the case? A. I did not think of it.

Q. Or the evidence of such people. Never occurred to you, did it? A. It did not.

Q. Just have a look at the identification sheet. Is that sheet a complete identification sheet as you knew identification sheets at Chelmsford? A. No, it is not complete.

Q. Why is that? A. It has had the bottom torn off or out off.

Q. How did that happen? A. Someone has cut it off.

Q. Why did they? (Objected to) 
Q. Do you know why it was cut off? A. No.

Q. You would regard that as a serious matter, wouldn't you? A. I certainly would regard it as a serious matter.

Q. These are important documents in the case? A. They are.

Q. If anyone tampered with them you would regard that as a very serious matter, wouldn't you? A. I would.

Q. Don't you know that the practice was as at February 1973 to put on a rubber stamp providing for consent to electroconvulsive therapy? A. It was.

Q. And you know of course that from your enquiries the plaintiff in this case never signed such a form? A. That is right.

Q. Do you think that might be the reason why the bottom was cut off, that there was a rubber stamp form there which had not been signed by Barry Hart?
A. Whether that was the reason I do not know.

Q. When did you first notice that the bottom had been cut off? A. I first found out that the bottom - I first noticed - I first saw that the bottom had been cut off when I saw these documents in my barrister's rooms within a few days of the trial starting.

Q. Had you not been given a copy of the documents long beforehand? A.. A photocopy.

Q. Was it not apparent from the photocopy? A. Only that there was no stamp or signature there.

Q. Actually they did omit one further line which is normally there which was for remarks or some such thing? A. I do not remember that particular line.

Q. You did not become conscious of it until your barrister drew your attention to it? A. That is correct.

Q. Did you express concern? A. I certainly did.

Q. Did you make any attempt to find out how it had happened or did anyone on your behalf? A. I don't - I expressed concern about it to my barrister. What action he took about that I do not know." /924V-929. In this passage of cross-examination, Dr Herron was asked a number of questions relating to the consent issue. He agreed that people should only be treated when consent is given. He agreed that sometimes after treatment had begun physical means of restraint were used. He said verbal authority for treatment was as appropriate as written authority. He agreed that if a person had refused to sign the written authority for ECT and there was no other comment or interchange the conclusion must be that the person did not want ECT. He agreed it would have been wiser and better to have seen Mr
Hart before embarking on the course of treatment after he had declined to sign the form, but did not agree it was improper. It was suggested that he had authorised the giving of a particular drug to Mr Hart to make it easier to get his consent. He denied that.
 /963R. Still under cross-examination, Dr Herron was asked whether there was an accepted practice at Chelmsford as to what to do in the case of patients who did not sign the (ECT consent) form. He said he could only refer to what he would have expected them to do, and was then asked whether he would agree that once a patient had actually refused to sign the form a doctor would have to be more careful than ever to see that the patient knew what was being done and freely consent to it. He said yes he thought that in that case there should be some care taken that they understand what it's all about.
 /1087W. In an answer in re-examination, with reference to the phone call from the unnamed caller, Dr Herron said it appeared to be from a reasonable and concerned person who said Mr Hart did not want to be involved with the public psychiatric system.
 /1132K. Mr Dillworth in examination-in-chief identified hospital notes he had made about Mr Hart and said he had had a conversation with him in which he told Mr Hart he was being admitted for treatment under Dr Herron and would be receiving sedation therapy which was a type of deep sedation sleep treatment; that he would be asleep for between ten to fourteen days and would be receiving ECT if and when the doctor considered it necessary. He said that Mr
Hart's reply "was something like 'okay', or 'All right', something like that".
 /1135-1138. This was the opening part of the cross-examination of Mr
Dillworth, designed to show the unreliability of his memory.
 /1145, 1150, 1154. At 1145 further questions were directed to show the unreliability of Mr Dillworth's memory.

At 1150M, Mr Dillworth said Mr Hart had shown little reaction when he had explained to him that he was to have sleep treatment and ECT. He then corrected the questioner by reminding him that he had told Mr Hart not that he was going to receive ECT but that ECT would be given if and when the doctor considered it necessary.

At 1154N Mr Dillworth was shown Exhibit D. He identified the handwriting on it which he said was not his.
 /1159T. In cross-examination Mr Dillworth was asked whether he had any knowledge of any conversation between Dr Herron and Mr Hart on 27 February. He answered no, and also answered no to the question whether anyone had told him anything about any such conversation.

The first question in the exemplary damages aspect of the appeal. The first of the two questions which I earlier said arose in relation to the exemplary damages aspect of the appeal was whether, on the material before him, Fisher J was right in not leaving the question of exemplary damages to the jury. I have now set out all the material which, the appellant contends, supports the submission that the answer to the question is yes. For that submission to be acceptable, the material relied upon must, in accordance with the law as stated by the High Court in Lamb, have been such as to make it open to the jury to conclude that Dr Herron either knew there had been no consent by the appellant to the sedation and ECT treatment that he received or that Dr Herron had been recklessly indifferent to their having been any consent.

To be able to reach a conclusion about knowledge or reckless indifference requires material upon which conclusions could be drawn about Dr Herron's state of mind. The only material in the present case directly relating to Dr
Herron's state of mind in relevant respects, or from which his state of mind could be inferred, came from Dr Herron himself, and was to the effect that he had not known of the fact of non consent and was not recklessly indifferent to the possibility that there had been no consent.

For the purpose of considering the appellant's present appeal point, it must be assumed that Dr Herron's evidence in his own favour on these issues was rejected by the jury.

In the circumstances of the trial, the rejection of Dr Herron's evidence on these matters would not, in my opinion, have furnished evidence from which any positive inference could be drawn to the opposite effect, that is of knowledge or reckless indifference. Rejection of Dr Herron's evidence on the topics simply meant that there was nothing available from his evidence, one way or the other, upon which an inference of knowledge or reckless indifference could be based.

In the course of the argument in this court, counsel for Mr Hart sought to overcome this difficulty by reliance on what was said by Gibbs J in Steinberg v Federal Commissioner of Taxation <case>; [(1975) 134 CLR 640] at 694: "The fact that the witness is disbelieved does not prove the opposite of what asserted: Scott Fell versus LLoyd <case>; [(1911) 13 CLR 230] at 241; Hobbs versus Tinling (CT) & Co Ltd [[1929] 2 KB ] at 21.
It has sometimes been said that where the story of a witness is disbelieved, the result is simply that there is no evidence on the subject (Jack v
Smail <case>; [(1906) 2 CLR 684] at 698; Malzy versus Eichholz [[1916] 2 KB 308] at 321; Ex parte Bear; Re Jones <case>; [(1945) 46 SR 126] at 128, but although this is no doubt true in many cases it is not correct as a universal proposition. There may be circumstances in which an inference can be drawn from the fact that the witness has told a false story, for example, that the truth would be harmful to him; and it is no doubt for this reason that false statements by an accused person may sometimes be regarded as corroboration of other evidence given in a criminal case: Eade versus The King <case>; [(1924) 34 CLR 154] at 158; Tripodi versus The Queen <case>; [(1961) 104 CLR 1.] Moreover, if the truth must lie between two alternative states of fact, disbelief in evidence that one of the state of facts exists may support the existence of the alternative state of facts: Lee versus Russell [[1961] WAR 103] at 109." 
The present case seems to me to have been one where Fisher J was entitled to act on the simple approach set out in the first sentence quoted above. As
Gibbs J said, this position obtains in many cases. The circumstances in the present case do not seem to me to fall into any of the types of case referred to by Gibbs J which permit a contrary inference. Further, it seems that Dr
Herron was never directly asked in cross-examination whether he had positively known there was no consent. Counsel for the appellant did not refer us to any such question, and I have not been able to find one for myself. The closest to it is the passage from 3/720 N-T set out at pp 17 above, which I do not think amounts to putting to Dr Herron that he either knew there was no consent or did not care, or to putting to him that in asserting the contrary he was deliberately lying. When Mr Hart's counsel wanted to make a direct challenge of this kind, he did so quite directly: see for example 4/952 L-N, where he put to Dr Herron, on another issue, that he was deliberately fabricating.

Further again, the situation was not one where the truth had to lie between the two alternative states of fact, belief in consent or knowledge (or even suspicion) of non-consent; a third possible position was, if Dr Herron's evidence was accepted to the point where he had heard by phone that Mr Hart was not consenting, and was thereafter disbelieved, that in the void of evidence thus left Dr Herron, finding Mr Hart sedated, may have proceeded with the treatment on the assumption that consent must have been given after the phone call.

The second exemplary damages question. As earlier stated, this question is whether on the material before Fisher J and the further material now sought to be relied on, had it been before the jury, would it have been right to withhold the question of exemplary damages from the jury? Putting the question in this way assumes that the further material relied on by the appellant otherwise passes the tests relating to further evidence in the third category of case I earlier described under the heading "The rules concerning further evidence".

It does not seem to me that the further material relied on by the appellant could have taken the matter any further than the materials actually available at the trial.

The further material relates to Dr Herron's state of mind in 1977. In my view, it shows, at the most, that at that time Dr Herron was aware no written consent had been given in 1973 by the appellant for the treatment he then received. The material does not seem to me to furnish any basis for an inference that in 1973 Dr Herron then knew both that no written consent had been given and also knew or had reason to know that no other consent had been given.

The further material supports a conclusion that Dr Herron in 1977 acted badly, in concert with others, when dealing with the situation that no written consent to the appellant's treatment was available at a time when questions were being raised about that treatment. Nevertheless, evidence of concealment of the lack of written consent and of conduct designed to create the impression of written consent having been given in the regular way does not seem to me to be evidence warranting an inference of consciousness by Dr
Herron of no consent at all having been given but, at most, consciousness of written consent not having been given and of the difficulties that might flow from the unavailability of that best and readiest means of proof of consent.

I therefore am not persuaded that had the material been available when Fisher
J was considering whether to allow the question of exemplary damages to go before the jury, there would have been a real possibility that his decision would have been any different.

Further, however, the High Court in Quade made it clear that the factor I have just dealt with was not the only one to be considered by an appellate court when dealing with cases of the third category. Lack of diligence on the part of the unsuccessful party, that is, in the present context, lack of diligence on the part of the appellant, had also to be taken into account.

The central point concerning the 1977 misconduct by Dr Herron was known to the appellant's legal representatives, and used by them, in the course of the trial. The central point was the fact that the document which had been brought into existence in 1977 was deliberately misleading. This was known to the appellant's legal representatives.

This knowledge of the legal representatives not only appears from the cross- examination of Dr Herron at the trial but also from evidence given in the application before this court to rely on the further evidence. Mr Hart, in cross-examination before this court, said he remembered showing the concocted document to Mr St John QC and one of his juniors before the trial and then later seeing the original document in Mr St John's chambers, (from which the concocted nature of the spurious document was demonstrable) and continued: "I remember Mr St John saying words to the effect 'We will have some fun with this in court'".

One of Mr St John's juniors also gave evidence before this court in the course of the application concerning the further evidence. He agreed that it was decided at the time of the trial that if Dr Herron and Chelmsford failed to call evidence to explain what had happened to the consent form then that could be the subject of adverse comment.

Dr Herron was cross-examined upon it at the trial, seemingly effectively, and in some detail.

The further material which subsequently came to light before the Royal
Commissioner was all in existence at the time of the trial. It would have been possible for enquiries to be made, in preparation for, or even during the trial, from the persons at Chelmsford in 1977 who might reasonably be supposed to have had anything to do with the misleading document. Obviously, there may have been practical difficulties in following up these enquiries, because from the appellant's point of view the persons to be enquired from might be expected to be partisans of at least Chelmsford and possibly Dr Herron.
Nevertheless, the possibilities of such enquiries were not pursued.

The appellant's legal advisers were content to go to trial with what they perceived to be the advantages of knowledge of the misleading nature of the document, and the opportunity of cross-examining Dr Herron on it, and the prospect of being able to comment, in final address, on Dr Herron's credit, in a potentially damaging way.

Conclusion on fresh evidence and exemplary damages. The "possibly competing factors" referred to in Quade presently relevant are, "... general considerations relating to the administration of justice, the degree of culpability of the successful party, ..., any lack of diligence on the part of the unsuccessful party and the extent of any likelihood that the result would have been different if ... the ... material had been ...
available." (at 143) 
Taking these into account against the circumstances I have described, the conclusion seems to me to be clear that the arguments relating to the further material are not strong enough to justify the granting of a new trial for the sake of allowing a jury to consider the question of exemplary damages.

Inadequacy of damages; the summing-up.

Heads (i) and (iv) of the appellant's grounds of appeal were inadequacy of damages and the summing-up. The summing-up was necessarily lengthy and in my opinion an attentive jury listening to the summing-up after hearing the evidence and addresses of counsel could reasonably have arrived at the damages figures which they returned in their verdicts. That is, the case as left to the jury in the summing-up was one which left it open to them properly to assess damages within quite a wide range. In my opinion the figures they arrived at fell well within the range. An appellate court on a new trial application could only come to the conclusion that a new trial should be directed on damages if it held that there was something so questionable in the trial judge's summing-up to the jury as to make it necessary that there should be a new trial of his damages case.

In the circumstances of the present appeal therefore, the real question under the two heads now being considered is whether the appellant has shown unfairness or misdirection on the part of the trial judge in his summing-up of a kind to require a new trial. There were both written and oral submissions directed to this question.

Before the appeal came on for hearing the court had received a written outline of the appellant's submissions, part of which was directed to what were submitted to be the inadequacies and misdirections of the summing-up. This part of the written outline was in rather general terms, to the effect principally that the judge's summing-up had been unfairly favourable to the defendant, that the amount of damages was so low as clearly to warrant a new trial, and that factual conclusions of the Royal Commissioner were favourable to the appellant in ways relevant to damages, and were likely to be arrived at by a jury at a new trial.

The appellant's ten points. In the course of oral argument, further written submissions were put before the court. One set of these made explicit the earlier more general submission. Ten points of complaint about Fisher J's summing-up were listed. He had: 1. criticised the appellant's counsel, but not the respondent's; 2. failed to comment upon the absence of independent medical experts in the respondent's case; 3. misdirected the jury about pneumonia; 4.
not adequately directed the jury on aspects of the appellant's symptoms; 5.
including brain damage; 6. and hypoxia; 7. referred to the verdict being payable from Dr Herron's resources; 8. misdirected the jury about "the battle of the psychologists'; 9. wrongly indicated to the jury that they should not consider certain figures put before them by the appellant's counsel, this being compounded by mathematical errors; and 10. omitted to refer to relevant evidence of the witness Mr Syron.

The next written submission to some extent elaborated some of the ten points in the previous one.

Also, at the request of the court two further written submissions were put in by the appellant. The first was in the course of the hearing. The court wanted to know the particular passages in the summing-up which were being criticised.

I reproduce it below, with my own additions in brackets identifying the points to which they refer.
 "Principal passages from the summing-up referred to by the appellant.
 /2543-4 [discussion of calling and non calling of doctors] /2610-1 [judge says any brain damage very moderate] /2662-73 [economic loss] /2582, 2595 [whether treatment caused pneumonia] /2534, 2671 [Dr Herron will pay damages from his own resources] /2644-5 [Mr Syron's evidence] 
Also referred to: /2532 [judge says appellant relied on irrelevant evidence] /2612, 2613 [discussion of evidence/arguments on brain damage] /2653-6 [brain damage - before/after comparison] /2661 [before/after; Mr Syron; inaccurate tax returns] /2673 [brain damage - before/after] /2674" [not sure] 
When asked whether "referred to" in the heading meant "criticised" counsel replied "All the top ones, yes, some of the bottom ones, yes".

The other written submission requested by the court dealt in detail with the alleged misdirection on brain damage.

The subjects of these written submissions were dealt with orally at some length. Both in the written and oral submission passages in the summing-up additional to those listed above were referred to, mainly however, as I understood it, for purposes of explanation, not as further passages for criticism.

Before stating my opinion on the points raised by the appellant I will mention a difficulty caused by the amount of material involved in this appeal.

Frequently, and preferably, it is possible for an appeal court to decide the issues raised in an appeal simply by reference to the argument of counsel and the parts of the materials in the appeal papers the subject of explicit argument. In the present case however, this was impossible, as the trial took approximately seventy-five days, and the transcript, including counsels' addresses and the judge's summing-up, reached about 2,600 pages. The only practical course for counsel to take was to state their objections to or defences of the summing-up, take the court to the passages they thought particularly important, summarise the effect of other passages, give the court references to yet other passages they wished the court to look at and then leave it to the court to consider their arguments in the light of subsequent reading of the appeal materials.

Although, after the court had reserved its decision, I became confirmed in the opinion that the foregoing method had indeed been the only practical one in the case, I also realised that it meant that in order to deal satisfactorily with all the various submissions of the parties, it would be necessary to look through the whole of the transcript of the trial. This seemed to me to be particularly needful to try to understand why the trial judge formed the views that he did about the conduct of the case by the appellant's counsel, the way the medical evidence developed and was treated in the summing-up, the importance or otherwise (from a new trial point of view) of the evidence before the Royal Commission concerning the concocted document and the alleged unfairness of the trial judge in his summing-up.

My overall understanding of what happened at the trial is relevant to the views I have formed concerning the appellant's ten numbered points of complaint about the judge's summing-up. As the trial progressed the presentation of Mr Hart's case broadened into a partial investigation of issues relating to deep sleep treatment and its conduct at Chelmsford, which although they were matters of general public interest and of sufficient importance to be, some years later, the subject of inquiry by the Royal
Commissioner earlier mentioned, had little directly to do with the issues raised in the civil proceedings in which Mr Hart was seeking to establish the particular treatment he had received at Chelmsford as Dr Herron's patient and the consequences to him of that treatment. Counsel for the appellant had persisted, at the trial, in seeking to broaden the area of factual investigation, principally through the cross-examination of witnesses called in Dr Herron's case (mainly Dr Herron himself) about events relating to other persons who had been treated at Chelmsford on the ground that this very extensive cross-examination had a bearing on Dr Herron's credit. Fisher J on a number of occasions made it clear to Mr Hart's counsel that the cross- examination was on the margins of legitimacy so far as credit was concerned, that he did not feel he could stop the cross-examination but warned that it might be prejudicial and of little use to the particular issues in Mr Hart's case.

At the end of the evidence counsel for the defendants made the first address to the jury, then counsel for Mr Hart. These addresses ended on Monday, 7 July , recorded by the court transcript as the trial's seventy-second day. It was then adjourned to the following day.

The next day counsel for the defendants submitted that in the address for Mr
Hart there had been a total of fifty-nine matters as to which he would submit there had been an incorrect statement either of the law or of the evidence or of the law as applied to the evidence. He submitted that for the trial to be a fair one the trial judge should give the jury particular direction in respect of each of the matters complained of.

This led to some debate about procedure. Counsel for the defendants then came to the view that the appropriate way to protect his clients in the circumstances was to move for the discharge of the jury, and made such an application.

Counsel for Mr Hart then indicated that he too had complaints about his opponent's address, which would have based an application for discharge of the jury, but that he had not done so in light of the length of the trial.

The trial judge indicated that he did not propose to discharge the jury at that stage of the trial, but would treat the complaints of the defendants (which had been put in writing) as a submission, on which he would like to hear the other side.

The subject matter of the submission was then debated at some length, covering a good deal of the same ground that has been argued again in this branch of the appellant's appeal.

Point 1. It was against the foregoing background that the trial judge in his summing-up made the criticisms of the way the appellant's case had been conducted which are the subject of the first of the appellant's ten points.

After Fisher J had finished his summing-up, counsel for Mr Hart handed up a list of matters in respect of which he asked for further directions or withdrawal of directions to the jury. One of these was headed "Criticism of plaintiff's counsel". The gist of this submission was that although there had been quite significant criticism of Mr Hart's counsel by the judge in his summing-up there had been hardly any of counsel for the other side. His Honour declined to add anything to his summing-up to the jury in this respect. He said: "I take the view that there was room for some criticism of defendants' counsel along the lines of some of the particulars which you have given, Mr St
John. I thought that you dealt with it repeatedly and at length and I thought that there was unfairness, implied in the use of the language such as 'mad', the implication of public disgrace and the like. I thought, in fact, the mileage, if I may put it that way, that was available to you and the correction that was available to you was, in fact obtained.
 
MR ST. JOHN: I am submitting that your Honour's summing up was one-sided in that it criticised me only.
 
HIS HONOUR: The point is that I take the view that although there might have been things in the defendant's address that were open to criticism they, in fact, had been criticised by yourself. In respect to your address, the volume of matters that were open to criticism were very wide, indeed. None of it had been criticised and I took the opportunity to draw attention to it." 
In my opinion this answer to counsel's criticism was fair. The judge acknowledged, in regard to the particular criticism, that he had not, in his remarks to the jury, treated the opposing barristers in exactly the same way.
He was not bound to do so. Indeed, if it was necessary to treat them differently in order for the jury to be left with a reasonably clear view of what they had to decide, then he was bound to treat them differently. Bearing in mind everything that had happened in the trial, Fisher J was in a better position than this court to judge how the balance should be struck in his summing-up. The reasons he gave for the position he adopted seem to me to be appropriately based on what had happened in the trial and to support the view that what he did was not unfair, but fair.

Points 2, 4, 5, 6 and 8. These all relate to what was the central topic of the appellant's damages case, the claimed brain damage, and will be dealt with together.

The brain damage question was central to the appellant's damages. If the appellant succeeded on his causes of action but did not establish brain damage, then for practical purposes his heads of damage would be confined to compensation for the wrongful imprisonment, the assaults constituted by the treatment and such financial losses as were related to the period which ended with his recovery from the treatment and the pneumonia. He would not be entitled to compensation for any further economic loss or for loss of enjoyment of the amenities of life after the end of that period.

The appellant's submissions concerning the various points related to brain damage seem to me to come down in substance to two. The first is that Fisher J did not refer to the absence of medical practitioner witnesses in the respondent's case (apart from Dr Herron himself) along with Fisher J's comment that the contest was to a large extent a battle of the psychologists and that this diminished the attention that should have been paid to the allegedly unanswered evidence of Mr Hart's expert medical practitioners. The second aspect was that the suggestion by Fisher J in his summing-up that the brain damage, if any, was slight, unfairly trivialised the appellant's case.

These complaints need to be considered by reference to the way the appellant sought to establish brain damage at the trial.

There were two branches to the appellant's brain damage case. One relied on the psychometric testing and evidence of the psychologists; the other on expert opinion of medical practitioners based on a comparison of the appellant as he was before he went to Chelmsford and afterwards, said to support an inference that brain damage had been suffered in the interval, this being accompanied by opinions based on the hospital notes and records as supporting the conclusion that brain damage could have happened as the result of the actual medication and treatment he received.

On Mr Hart's side, Mr Todd, a psychologist, gave evidence that in his opinion his psychometric testing clearly showed brain damage. On the other side there were two experts. One of these, Mr Davies, was the only expert (apart from Dr
Herron) who had seen Mr Hart both before and after his treatment at
Chelmsford. His opinion was that Mr Hart did not have brain damage, but suffered from a paranoid personality disorder to which he had been subject when he first saw him before the treatment at Chelmsford. The second witness called in the defendants' case was an expert who had first been qualified by the appellant, but who had come to the conclusion, based on his psychometric testing, that there was no brain damage, and was thus not called in the appellant's case.

The trial judge discussed the evidence of these witnesses and dealt with other material which had come into existence before the end of February 1973 in a way which seems to me to be unexceptionable. The way in which he dealt with the methodology of the psychometric testing and reminded the jury of the arguments on both sides about that, which had been a matter of vigorous and detailed dispute in the evidence, also seems to me to be unexceptionable.

Apart from the testing done by Dr Davies before the appellant entered
Chelmsford, there was another item of evidence which was before the jury from the pre-hospital period which may well have had a substantial effect on the jury's deliberations. Fisher J read it to the jury and made some comments on it. I do not understand it to be suggested that there was any error or unfairness in his doing this. This was the letter from Dr Frank Smith, a friend of the appellant's, which first introduced the appellant to Dr Herron.
The letter described difficulties Mr Hart had been having for several months before it was written which had led Mr Hart to ask Dr Frank Smith whether he could recommend him to a psychiatrist. Mr Hart was attributing his symptoms to what he regarded as the unacceptable result of surgery he had recently had done on his eyes. Dr Frank Smith obliquely and discreetly indicated in the letter that the symptoms of which Mr Hart was complaining, anxiety, frustration, difficulty in sleeping, irritability, and increasing concern about the results of the eye operation, were probably the result of factors deeper than and antedating the eye operation.

As to the other branch of the appellant's case on brain damage, the before/after comparison, the appellant's complaint in the appeal is that insufficient weight was given by the trial judge in his summing-up to the evidence of the appellant's medical experts, who were acknowledged authorities in their field, and to the absence of any corresponding experts in the defendants' case. There was no issue at the trial about the expertise of the appellant's witnesses. There was however a considerable issue about the facts on which their opinions were based. Put in broad terms, the opinions of the appellant's experts were based on the appellant having been in generally good health at the starting point of the comparison; again speaking broadly, the factual case against the appellant, shown for example by Dr Frank Smith's letter, Dr Davies' 1972 testing and other evidence, was that before he entered
Chelmsford the appellant was already showing many of the symptoms which he later claimed were the result of brain damage caused by the defendants.

The before/after comparison was thus the major issue in assessing the amount of Mr Hart's damages. In my view the trial judge canvassed it appropriately in his summing-up. He also made it clear to the jury that depending on which (if any) of the assumptions made by the appellant's medical witnesses the jury accepted, they could conclude that Mr Hart had suffered brain damage.

It was submitted for Dr Herron in the appeal that in these circumstances it was not mandatory for Fisher J to mention in his summing-up the fact that no opposing expert medical witnesses had been called in Dr Herron's case at the trial, because the validity of the medical opinions did not depend upon a contest of medical opinion but upon the accuracy of the facts on which the opinions were expressed. This submission seems to me to be a sound one.
Counsel for the appellant, in final address, had stressed the point about there having been the expert witnesses on the one side and not the other; the trial judge directed the jury to the critical issue on the matter and, in my opinion, fairly summarised the cases on both sides concerning that critical factual issue, and I do not think that the non-mentioning in the judge's summing-up of the position about the expert witnesses had any unfair impact on the appellant's case.

This branch of the appellant's argument was linked with the submission that when Fisher J, in dealing in his summing-up with the topic of brain damage, said, "The truth of the matter, I suggest to you, about this case is that if the plaintiff has suffered brain damage, it is of such a moderate kind that it is hard to detect.", he was either making a misdirection, or, by intruding unduly into the factual aspect of the case, contributing to an unfair summing- up which would require a new trial to correct.

The criticised sentence comes in a passage of his Honour's summing-up which, in volume 11 of the appeal books, runs from p 2609U to 2612T. It is a passage which seems to me to be an accurate discussion generally of brain damage and the issues claims of brain damage can present to a jury, together with an accurate summary of the factual situation and the opinion arguments about brain damage in the instant case. In the context of the whole passage the criticised sentence seems to me to have been a proper one for the trial judge to include. I will quote only the part of the passage immediately following the criticised sentence. His Honour had continued: "You see, it is not suggested at all that there is any physical impairment. He is as he appears to be, a very fit man of forty-five. There is no paralysis, spasticity, unco-ordination, epilepsy, no impaired intelligence.
The three psychologists say that his IQ is the same now as it was in 1972. To be exactly right, Mr Todd did return an IQ of 107, which is a little below the which the other two psychologists returned. But, it was said that that was not significantly different. So, you have, as it were, all the usual things that might ordinarily be accepted as indicating brain damage turning up negatively." (2610-2611) 
The trial judge is entitled to make factual observations to a jury when summing-up although it is of course necessary for the judge to make it clear to the jury that the decision of all factual questions is a matter for them.
Fisher J did make that quite clear. He told the jury of the position on a number of occasions in a way which in my opinion would have left them in no doubt about their fact finding function.

In the circumstances of the case and in its context it seems to me that the criticised sentence was both justified and appropriate.

In my opinion the appellant's attacks upon the trial judge's summing-up in relation to the various matters relevant to the brain damage issue should not be accepted.

Point 3: pneumonia misdirection. The point taken here for the appellant was that Fisher J in his summing-up had attributed the pneumonia contracted by the appellant in Chelmsford to an embolus resulting from thrombosis. The appellant's witness Dr Smith had said it resulted from infection. Counsel for
Dr Herron in the appeal accepted that his Honour had misdescribed the mechanism leading to the pneumonia. He submitted however that the mistake was of no importance because although his Honour wrongly described the cause of the pneumonia, he also said the pneumonia was attributable to the treatment in
Chelmsford. That is, the trial judge made it clear that if the appellant were to recover damages, those damages should contain a component for the pneumonia for which the defendants were responsible. The submission therefore was that the mistake of the trial judge was of no consequence and was not adverse to the appellant.

In my opinion this submission is correct, and there is no substance in the appellant's point.

Point 7: verdict payable from Dr Herron's resources. The words complained of appear in two places in the summing-up: in volume 11 of the appeal books, pp and 2671. At p 2534 they appear in a passage towards the beginning of the summing-up where Fisher J had been making some of the customary explanations to juries concerning matters that arise generally in trials. He was explaining why it was that when a person suffers injury in some accident, that person will sometimes be able to recover damages from another person to compensate for the accident and sometimes not. As an example of the latter happening he said, "You walk down the street and $50 gets blown out of your wallet and lost. You bear the loss yourself". He said that in other cases where the injured person can show fault on the part of some other person causing the damage, then the injured person can recover from the person at fault. Fisher J was drawing the contrast between the injured person who must bear the loss himself or herself on the one hand and the injured person who can recover from a defendant, when, said Fisher J "it is proper and just under the law that the defendant should pay from his resources for the damage ...". He was speaking in general terms of "the defendant". He was not speaking directly of Dr Herron or Chelmsford. The same words at p 2671, much later in the summing-up, appear in much the same context.

The appellant's submission was that these remarks by the judge unfairly misled or could have misled the jury into thinking that Dr Herron would have to pay any damages out of his own funds whereas the probability was that he was indemnified by an insurer. Having read the words complained of in the context of the summing-up as a whole, I am not at all persuaded that they could have had any effect of the kind complained of by the appellant. In my opinion they are quite innocuous.

I do not think there is anything in this submission.

Point 9: wrong direction re figures for future economic loss. In one of the appellant's written submissions it was said that the trial judge's summing-up on this aspect of the case (11/2671-2673) was "seriously misleading, involved mathematical errors and involved the virtual dictation to the jury of the amount which it should award by way of compensatory damages".

When the matter was examined in more detail in argument, counsel for the appellant abandoned the mathematical error element of the submission (argument transcript pp 96 and 171). The error turned out to have been introduced by Mr
Hart's counsel and the effect of it was in any event later corrected.

The "virtual dictation" aspect of the submission seems to me to be answered by a reading of the whole of what his Honour actually said on the topic. What he did was to suggest that contrary to the submission of counsel for the appellant, there was no evidentiary basis for one way of going about the task of calculating future economic loss suggested by counsel, if the jury came to that, and to indicate a method that the jury might use in the circumstances. I think his comment about the lack of evidentiary basis was well founded. He did not say the jury should not assess any figure but left it to them to assess a figure by some other method.

In the event, the jury appears to have used a method, which was open to them, but which was not recommended by the judge.

I do not think that this point is of any weight.

Point 10: Mr Syron's evidence. The complaint here is that his Honour omitted to refer in his summing-up to a particular part of this witness's evidence. I do not think the complaint is of any significance in the overall context of the summing-up. It is true that his Honour might quite properly have included in his summing-up a reference in the terms sought by the appellant's counsel.
It is equally true that the judge was not bound to include every item of evidence which one counsel or the other thought helpful to his case. The trial judge's task was, in light of the mountain of evidence, the lengthy addresses of counsel, and his own judgment of what was fitting, to help the jury understand and decide the significant issues in the case, by summarising and explaining what he thought appropriate for those purposes. I do not think the "omission" complained of in regard to Mr Syron's evidence detracted from his
Honour's attempt to do that, which, with respect, seems to me in all the circumstances to have been well-balanced.

Conclusion on new trial grounds.

In my opinion the appellant has not shown that the court should grant a new trial.

Interest.

Fisher J heard argument about the interest rate to be applied to various parts of the verdict moneys assessed by the jury, and the dates from which interest would begin to run. In this court the appellant submitted that interest should have run from the date of the injury on each of the items instead of the date of commencement of the proceedings in the District Court, the date chosen by his Honour.

Since 1980 there has been a perceptible shift in the way courts regularly exercise discretion in regard to the starting date of the running of interest.
The present practice is, in my understanding, one more favourable to the appellant than resulted from the practice and the authorities as they were understood in 1980.

Looking at the matter from the point of view of Fisher J when he had to exercise his undoubted discretion and make his decision on 30 October 1980, I see no misunderstanding of principle by him nor any failure to take into account matters which he should have taken into account or any taking into account of matters he should not have taken into account.

In my opinion this court should not interfere with his exercise of discretion.

Costs.

There was argument about an appropriate order for costs following the jury's verdicts. The defendants submitted that the parties should be left to bear their own costs.

Fisher J was of the view that the issues between the parties were comparatively straightforward and had not required for their proper litigation anything like the time that was taken up at the trial, which by his count occupied seventy-one days or part days with another nine days taken up by out of court work on the part of counsel.

Fisher J was of opinion that the extraordinary and unnecessary length of the case was caused by the way it had broadened into being a general battle about deep sleep therapy and the conduct of treatment at Chelmsford. He gave detailed reasons and references for having formed this view. His point was that the way the case had been conducted on behalf of Mr Hart had meant that much more time was taken up at the trial than was necessary for the decision of the issues between Mr Hart and the defendants. On this he said: "I make no observation as to whether courts should be used to present controversies that are intended to reverberate beyond these walls. What I am sure of is that in such litigation the opposite party need only expect to meet the issues exposed by the pleadings and if unsuccessful to pay only the costs appropriately incurred in litigating those issues. Whatever the value of the very large volume of irrelevant sentiments that are to be found both in addresses and in subject matters of cross-examination, the further cost of litigation so extended in this way remains something for which a defendant should not in fairness be required to pay." 
Fisher J had earlier referred to the relevant rules and authorities concerning the power of the court in regard to costs orders. These were, in my opinion, the appropriate sources of legal authority by which he was bound to be guided.

The way in which he dealt with the factual matters relating to the costs question also seems to me to have been soundly based. He was clearly in the best position of anyone to make estimates about times properly taken up and times wasted, so far as resolution of the issues at the trial was concerned.
There is no sign of any mistake or misunderstanding in his approach to these matters.

His conclusion was that "to bring into some balance the costs that the defendants ought fairly to bear", he should not order the defendants to pay costs to the extent to which he considered "costs should not fairly be borne" by them. His view of the appropriate way of doing this, after taking into account various matters which he enumerated, was that the defendants should pay Mr Hart's costs as of a hearing of thirty days with no order as to the costs of the remaining thirty-four days (of the sixty-four spent in evidence and argument) and that subject to those orders the defendants should pay Mr Hart the general costs of the action.

In the course of his reasons Fisher J had referred to ss 42 and 47 of the
Legal Services Commission Act 1979. The paragraph in which this reference was made was dealing with a submission made on behalf of Mr Hart that he would suffer hardship if an order for costs adverse to him were made. In the event no costs order was made against Mr Hart.

A party seeking to overturn a costs order on appeal must show some error of principle or clear miscarriage of exercise of discretion on the part of the court which made the order.

In an effort to meet these requirements, counsel for the appellant submitted that the trial judge had made an error of law in his interpretation and application of ss 42 and 47 of the Legal Services Commission Act 1979.

I do not think it is necessary to examine this submission because, it seems to me, the view taken by the trial judge of those sections did not play any part in his arriving at the orders which he made in the exercise of his discretion.
It was not necessary for him to consider the sections in arriving at the orders which he made and those orders show no sign of having been affected in any way by what he said about the two sections. In any event I do not think it is clear that he made any error in what he said about the sections.

Other arguments of a factual kind were directed towards persuading the court that the result arrived at by the judge must have involved some error in his exercise of discretion. These arguments involved an examination of the details of what the trial judge did. This court would only accept such an argument if some clear error were demonstrated. In my opinion no such error was shown in the present case. Indeed, one consequence of my having had to look through the entirety of what happened in the course of this trial is that I have been left with the distinct impression that what the trial judge did was well founded on the facts and well within the boundaries of an appropriate exercise of discretion.

I would dismiss the appeal against the costs orders.

Conclusion.

In my opinion the appeal should be dismissed with costs.

CLARKE JA: I agree with Priestley JA.

SHELLER JA: I have had the benefit of reading the judgment prepared by Priestley JA. I entirely agree with the order he proposes and the reasons he has given for making it.
 * * * 
