

Quantum Performance Group Pty Limited -v- Northpak Pty Limited and 4 ORS [1997] NSWSC 159 (24 April 1997) 
QUANTUM PERFORMANCE GROUP PTY LIMITED -v- NORTHPAK PTY LIMITED & 4 ORS /96 
Thursday, 24 April 1997 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMERCIAL DIVISION 
HUNTER J 
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: Quantum Performance Group Pty Ltd (Quantum) formerly known as Northpak Paper Suppliers Pty Ltd sues Northpak Pty Ltd (Northpak), Lindsay Raymond Gulliver (Gulliver), George Stavros (Stavros), George Stavropoulos(Stavropoulos) and Cleo Antoniou (Antoniou), the personal defendants being sued as guarantors, in respect of the indebtedness of Northpak under a deed dated 2 April 1996 (the agreement) by which Northpak agreed to purchase the goodwill of Quantum's business (the business), together with its assets, and agreed to assume the liabilities of the business. The purchase price of the business was made up as follows: "3. PURCHASE PRICE .1 The Purchase Price payable shall be the aggregate of: for basic Goodwill - $50,000.00 plant and equipment $114,867.00 inventory 
Additional Goodwill $225,000.00" (Exhibit K, Tab 1, p 4, cl 3.1) 
Payment of the purchase price was provided for as follows: "4. PAYMENT OF PURCHASE PRICE .1 The Purchaser shall pay to the Vendor the Purchase Price as follows: 
On Completion: 
The sum of Fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) basic Goodwill.

The sum of Twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) being the first instalment of Additional Goodwill referred to herein.

The sum of $144,867.00 being the value of all plant and equipment.
 ......................

Further Monthly Payments of Additional Goodwill: 
Monthly instalments of Additional Goodwill at the rate of $2,250.00 per month for the first twelve (12) months following Completion. The first instalment being paid one (1) month from the date of Completion.

Twelve (12) equal monthly instalments of $14,416.67 during the second year after completion with the first instalment payable thirteen (13) months from completion.

If the actual Gross Margin derived by the Purchaser from the business during the 12 month period after completion is less that the Minimum Gross
Margin the Additional Goodwill instalments are subject to reduction in accordance with clause (j) hereof." (Exhibit K, Tab 1, pp 4-5, cl 4.1) 
Provision was made for the taking of an inventory of stock and for the payment of one third of the inventory value within thirty days of completion, a further third within sixty days and within ninety days the final third, subject to a provision in respect of stock remaining unsold.

Cl 4.1(j) provided for an adjustment of the Additional Goodwill payable in the event that it was found that the gross margin derived from the business during the first twelve months of trading was less than the Minimum Gross Margin, that being defined as a sum which "equals $168,750 plus 18% of Net Sales of the Purchaser during the first 12 months after Completion." Under cl 4.3 the adjustment of Additional Goodwill pursuant to cl 4.1(j) could not operate to reduce Additional Goodwill payable below $52,000.

Under the agreement Quantum gave certain warranties which included the following: "11. WARRANTIES, REPRESENTATIONS AND INDEMNITIES .1 The Vendor represents and warrants to and covenants with the Purchaser as follows that: ...................
 .1.8 (d) There is no material change in the turnover or level of profitability of the Business since 30 June 1995.
 (The material change warranty) .1.9 There is no material event since 30 June 1995 that has or will have a material impact on the Business which the Vendor has not disclosed to the
Purchaser in writing." (The material event warranty) (Exhibit K, Tab 1, pp 10-12, cl 11.1) 
Under the agreement the first stock payment of $116,103 was due on 1 July 1996 and the monthly payments of $2,250 for Additional Goodwill were due on the first day of each month after the month of completion. The stock payment due on 1 July 1996 was unpaid as were the monthly instalments for additional goodwill as from that date. Counsel for Quantum has submitted an up to date schedule of damages claimed which includes the monthly payment for additional goodwill of $14,416.67 said to be due on 1 April 1997. In my view, that claim is premature having regard to the provision of cl 6.1 of the agreement which provides for completion on 1 April 1996 and from the provision of cl 4.1(h) which calls for the first of such payments to take place thirteen months from completion.

There is no defence to Quantum's claim other than by way of a cross-claim by
Northpak in respect of which a set off is raised. The cross-claim seeks the following relief: "1. Damages.
A declaration that the Cross-Claimant is entitled to set-off the damages the Cross-Defendant is liable to pay it against the claim made by the Cross-
Defendant as Plaintiff in the Summons filed on 9 September, 1996." (Pars 1 and 2 of the Amended Cross-Claim) 
The cross-claim relies upon breach of the material change and the material event warranties. Northpak alleges breach of those warranties as follows: "The warranties were false, to the knowledge of the Cross-Defendant as at 2
April, 1996 in that on a date unknown to the Cross-Claimant but believed to be in or about November, 1995 the Cross-Defendant had lost a major contract with various universities in New South Wales known as "the University contract" which event: 
Significantly reduced the income of the business and caused a material change in the turnover and level of profitability of the business; and 
Was a material event that had a material impact on the business; and 
Had not been disclosed by the Cross-Defendant to the Cross-Claimant in writing or at all." (Par 7) 
In addition Northpak relies upon contravention of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the [Trade Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth), alleging misrepresentations by Quantum as follows: "Further, prior to the sale of the business the Cross-Defendant made a number of misrepresentations to the Cross-Claimant ("the misrepresentations").
 
The Cross-Defendant represented to the Cross-Claimant that there had been no significant or material changes to the turnover of the business June ;
 
The Cross-Defendant represented to the Cross-Claimant that the business had not lost any significant customers since June 1995.

PARTICULARS 
The misrepresentations were express and oral. They were made by Mr. Gary
Pilgrim at meetings between the Cross-Claimant and the Cross-Defendant on or about 23 January, 1996 and 4 March, 1996." (Par 7A) 
Northpak was granted leave to amend the cross-claim at the commencement of the hearing to rely upon the misrepresentations as above particularised. Up to that point it had relied upon the representations as contained in the warranties. By the amendment, the claim for damages sought to be set off by way of cross-claim was expanded in the manner which appears from the particulars of damage set out below.
 "(a) The University Contract in the years June, 1994 to July, 1995 produced a gross income of the business of at least $541,66.85.

The profit component of such income for the business was approximately %.

The Universities had committed themselves to a contract with another supplier from January, 1996 for two years, thus preventing the Cross-Claimant from tendering for the University Contract until January, 1998 at the earliest.

The Cross-Claimant has not been able to replace the business lost from the other customers.

The Cross-Claimant claims at least $162,500.00 which is two years expected profit from the University Contract.

Diminution in value of the business.
 
Trading losses incurred by the business from 2 April, 1996.
 
Amount of the purchase price of the business." (Par 8) 
Leave so to amend was granted notwithstanding the likelihood of there being some interruption to the continuous hearing of the proceedings by reason of the fact that the claim for trading losses said to have been incurred by the business from 2 April 1996 had not been the subject of expert evaluation on behalf of Quantum. My reasons for granting leave to amend and the course which
I proposed the hearing should take are to be found in my reasons of 16 April
In accordance with those reasons, the hearing commenced on the issues raised by the amended cross-claim except for the abandonment of a claim for damage particularised in par 8(f), namely for "Diminution in value of the business". In relation to the claim for the "expected profit from the
University Contract in the sum of $162,500", that claim came down to one for $51,812 and that was identified as the claim for damages for breach of warranties: the claim in respect of "trading losses incurred by the business from 2 April 1996" being identified as a claim for damages pursuant to [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s82.html) of the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/).

The Court's ability to proceed with the hearing of the amended cross-claim was greatly assisted by Wilhelm Martin Jansen (Jansen) and Warwick Richard Finney , the accountants retained respectively by Quantum and Northpak, in responding to my request to confer and, so far as was possible, to produce schedules upon which the claim for profit from the "university contract" could be assessed. The proceedings were adjourned at the conclusion of the first day's hearing for one day, to enable that process to get under way. I have no doubt that the cooperation of the two accountants was achieved only with significant inconvenience to their other professional commitments. On the resumption of hearing on Friday, 18 April 1997, the parties were in a position to tender financial schedules created by the accountants and in respect of which they were in substantial agreement as described later in these reasons.
At the conclusion of evidence on Friday, 18 April the matter had proceeded as far as was practicable and to an extent which the parties agreed would permit the Court to proceed to the determination of issues on liability and to determine the question of damages from breach of warranty. That meant that the only issue that the Court was not in a position to consider was any entitlement of the cross-claimants to damages pursuant to [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s82.html) of the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) in respect of any "trading losses incurred by the business from 2 April 1996".
Accordingly, on the adjournment it was agreed that, although no formal order pursuant to Pt 31 of the Supreme Court Rules had been made for the determination of any separate questions, the Court should proceed to determine the questions which I have identified above, as it was in the interests of the parties to have an early determination of those matters.

Gary David Pilgrim (Pilgrim) was the managing director of Quantum and with his wife Kathleen Ethel Pilgrim (K Pilgrim), conducted the business for approximately twelve years prior to its sale to Northpak.

The business conducted by Quantum was a wholesale business which purchased and resold paper and plastic products for consumption by industrial organisations, clubs, retail shops and restaurants. Over the period from its acquisition in by Quantum, the annual turnover from the business increased from $400,000 to $3,843,874 for the financial year ended 30 June 1995. That represented an increase over the previous year of $207,759. The previous year had seen an increase of $100,699. Prior to the sale of the business it had been trading unprofitably showing an operating loss of $57,225 in the year ended 30 June on a turnover of $3,636,115 and a further operating loss of $18,540 for the year ended 30 June 1995.

The nature of the business was described by Pilgrim in his evidence in chief as follows: "9. Our business traditionally serviced a number of universities, schools, technical colleges and various major companies for many years. Although the ongoing business could not be guaranteed, there was a steady ebb and flow of customers. There was never any true exclusive contract with any customer. For example, the University of New South Wales was a major customer of the company from 1984 to 1987. In 1988 the university procured all its product from our competitors, however, in 1989 it again commenced to purchase most of its requirements from us. This continue during 1989 and 1990. The University again went to a competitor in 1991. In 1992 the University returned to the Company and the Company remained the University's main supplier during 1993, 1994 and
The University accepted a tender from a competitor for 1996. This type of fluctuation was not uncommon.
Another example was Qantas which was a major customer in 1990 and 1991, however, they accepted a tender from another company in 1992. Qantas returned to the Company in 1993 and remained at the time of the subsequent sale. Other examples include various groups of technical colleges including North Sydney,
Granville and Hornsby. Again the scenario was similar in that the Company supplied the group of technical colleges in 1992 and 1993 but lost the tender in 1994. In 1995 that group returned to the Company." (Exhibit 1, pars 9 and 10) 
This evidence was elaborated upon by a further statement of evidence in chief of 11 April 1997 as follows: "I refer to paragraph 9 of my first statement dated 21.3.97 and in particular to my statement that "this type of fluctuation was not uncommon". It was a characteristic of the company's business that, not only the universities, but also other major account customers, came and went as customers of the business. Annexed and marked "A" is a schedule showing the movement of certain major customers during the period 1990-1995." (Exhibit 2, par 1) 
That schedule showed the movement of the designated customers as follows:          ---|---|---|---|--- 
QANTAS 
C'TEEN  
X  
NTH SYD 
TECH  
X 
X (5/95)  
G'VILLE 
TECH  
X 
X (5/95)  
H'NSBY 
TECH  
X (7/95)  
BONDI 
SURF 
SEAFOD  
X (7/95)  
ESN C'TEEN  
X  
ES TECH 
C'TEEN  
X 
X (8/95)  (Annexure A) 
The figures appearing in the "1995" column represent the month in the year when the subject custom was recovered. I have need to refer later in these reasons to that aspect of the schedule.

Of the guarantors, Antoniou and Stavropoulos controlled a company known as
Confetta Pty Ltd (Confetta), a manufacturer of "patty pans and cake boards", which supplied Quantum and other wholesale distributors with those products.
That relationship had existed for several years prior to the sale of the business. In addition, Stavropoulos was associated with the company known as
Paper Wholesalers Pty Ltd, a manufacturer of cake boxes, which also supplied
Quantum. I infer from the association between Stavropoulos and Antoniou that the latter was also interested in Paper Wholesalers (see T7.38). It also appears that Confetta acquired a small business known as Les Ross in November
That was a wholesale distributing business in competition with Quantum.
Included in the customers of Quantum in the year of sale of the business were members of the University Union's Purchasing Co-Operative (the co-operative) whose members numbered some ten university unions. Goods were supplied by
Quantum to co-operative members, for the most part, under the terms of a tender to supply "paper and plastic goods for the period 4 July 1994 to 31
December 1995" (the co-operative arrangement). Under the terms of the tender the tenderer was required to stipulate the period during which the prices "would remain firm". There was no obligation upon member unions to purchase any products of the successful tenderer, nor were member unions under any obligation to purchase such products only from the successful tenderer. In fact, from time to time, member unions did purchase products the subject of a successful tender from sources other than the successful tenderer.

It is common ground that the gross margin percentages derived from Quantum's sales to university unions under the co-operative arrangement were insufficient to cover its fixed and variable costs. For the year ended 30 June , the percentage of fixed and variable costs to sales, net of sales tax, was 16.7 per cent while the gross margin derived from sales under the co- operative arrangement was calculated at 14.84 per cent. It is also agreed as between the accountants that, for the year ended 30 June 1995, sales, less sales tax, under the co-operative arrangement amounted to $459,732 in a total net sales of $3,453,569.

On 31 October 1995, Quantum retendered to the co-operative for the supply of products to the co-operative members for the period of two years from 1
January 1996 with prices to be held firm for a minimum of 1 year. That tender was unsuccessful.

Jansen for some twenty years had practised as a chartered accountant and for several years had been a senior partner in the firm of Ernst & Young. He had been the accountant for the Pilgrims and Quantum for some fourteen years and had a close familiarity with the business. His report of 11 April 1997, amended to accord with changes agreed by him with Finney and excluding par 8, was admitted into evidence without objection. It should be noted that the transcript does not accurately record the withdrawal of objections to the report. In that report Jansen evidenced the following: "Opinion
It was my practice, prior to preparing the financial statements, to review the business each year in consultation with Mr & Mrs Pilgrim. I have followed that practice during the last 14 years when I have been the accountant to the business and to Mr & Mrs Pilgrim. I am and was familiar with the business, its profitability and the profit margins being achieved in different areas of the business. I was familiar with the sales to universities and their general effect on the turnover and level of profitability of the business.
During the period 1994 and 1995, when conducting my annual reviews of the business, I formed the opinion that the sales of product to the universities were not profitable, and that the profitability of the overall business of the company would be enhanced if the universities were not customers. I still hold that opinion. My opinion is and was based upon my general knowledge of industry margin, my close familiarity with the affairs of the company acquired over 14 years, and my knowledge of the approximate level of turnover generated by the business, the approximate profit margins being achieved and the approximate costs being incurred to service that turnover. During my reviews in about February, 1994 and February, 1995 I informed each of Mr & Mrs
Pilgrim of the fact of my opinion." (Exhibit 9, pars 6 and 7) 
Pilgrim's evidence was to similar effect. He described the sales under the co- operative arrangement as requiring a high level of service and that for approximately two years prior to sale of the business he was in the process of replacing that business with other customers. It was Pilgrim's evidence that at the time of the October tender, Quantum had decided not to further reduce prices quoted to the co-operative to avoid further loss in the sale of goods to co-operative member. In his statement of evidence in chief he said that upon the loss of the co-operative business he reduced the staff level by three. That was clearly inaccurate in so far as one of the persons there referred to left the employment of Quantum in September 1995. It is necessary to examine more closely staff changes in order to understand some of the remaining differences in approach to the calculation of loss advanced by
Finney and Jansen. However, I think the evidence is clear and not in dispute that the reduction of Quantum's staff by three in the second half of 1995 contributed to an improved gross margin in sales, the extent of which is addressed later in these reasons.

The failure of the co-operative to accept Quantum's tender for the two years commencing 1 January 1996 is at the centre of the cross-claim.

Gulliver was a director and principal shareholder in Northpak, who was in search of a business in 1995 following the sale of a bookshop which he had conducted for several years prior to that. Through Stavropoulos, who was the cousin of Gulliver's wife, Gulliver became aware of the possibility that the business might be available for sale and, after discussing the prospect with his accountant, Phillip Donnelly (Donnelly), a meeting was arranged for the morning of Tuesday 23 January 1996, at cafe premises in Leichhardt known as
Cafe Baba (the Cafe Baba meeting). Present at that meeting with him were
Stavropoulos, Antoniou and Pilgrim. At that meeting Gulliver had a note of questions which had been prepared by Donnelly. Gulliver used those notes to further record matters discussed at the meeting.

Set out below are a list of the questions and the notes made by Gulliver in respect of those matters at the Cafe Baba meeting: "NORTHPAK
REASONS FOR SELLING: 
Moving into P.D, Motivation Etc FINANCIALS
TOTAL MARKET VALUE (our reserve 1994 - $3.7 M)
COMPETITORS 
ANTHIO 
GNM 
CHRIS 
DJC 
SYDNEY PACKAGING
STAFF NUMBERS & ROLES 
NOT WC 11 - 3 SALES/ORDERS - TERRITORY & 
GARY OR 3 DRIVERS - TEAM (6 CARS) 
CATHY (3 MOBILES 7 3 CB RADIO) WAREHOUSE OFFICE (NEEDS 1 MORE) PART-TIME - GINA
HOW LONG OWNED BY GARY PILGRIM 
FATHER 17 YEARS 
GARY 13 "
LEASE OF PREMISES 
CAR PARKING SPACE x 5 
POSS $60,000 P.A.

OUT-GOINGS - INCLUDED
CURRENT LIST OF P & E AT WRITTEN DOWN VALUE AS AT 30-6-95 $120,000
TOTAL NUMBER OF CUSTOMERS - REGULAR 
BALANCE IRREGULAR
SPREAD OF CUSTOMERS - HOW MUCH 1 OF NO DO TOP 5 CUSTOMERS REPRESENT? 
NO - SPREAD
WILL HE MAKE AVAILABLE BANK STATEMENTS AND TAX RETURNS (PERSONAL &
COMPANY) FOR LAST 3 YEARS?
WORKING CAPITAL REQUIRED? (IS THERE A PEAK SEASON & LOW SEASON?) $175,000 - CONSISTENTLY .25% - CITIBANK
ANY SIGNIFICANT CUSTOMER LOSSES IN LAST 3 YEARS? 
NO.
EQUIPMENT/VEHICLES UNDER LEASE? VAN UNDER LEASE OWNED (5 ARE 10 Y.O. - + 90 DI-ACT, 92 - DI-ACT & 1 COMMODORE - OWNED - 89 & 93 D1-ACT 
FBT ON WIFES CAR ONLY
EXPANSION?
SUPPLIERS - HOW MANY & HOW COMPLICATED? +
INSPECTION OF PREMISES? 
STAFF KNOW OF SALE - NO 
EXPANSION: 
COMMERCIAL / INDUSTRIAL / FACTORIES 
TOILET PAPER, ASSOCIATED PRODUCTS 
BOWLING ALLIES - 21 TO OPEN 
BOUTIQUE PRODUCTS - JEWELLERS, ETC 
MENU-MASTER $500,000 % T/O - $380,000 G.W.
 $120,000 P & E W/D 
STOCK $350,000 (COULD BE $300,000) 
DEBTORS: 
CREDITORS: 
ACCOUNTANT - BILL JANSEN 
ERNEST ~~ERST~~ & YOUNG 
HOURS 7.30 - 5. 5 DAYS 
THURS. 2" (Exhibit B, Annexure A) 
Gulliver expanded on those notes in his statement of evidence in chief as follows: "During the course of the meeting some of the questions I asked Mr. Pilgrim and the answers he gave me were contained in conversations to the following effect: 
I said: "Are there any significant customer losses in the last (3) years"? 
He said: "No." 
I said: "What is the total number of customers"? 
He said: "It varies, but there are approximately 1,200 regular customers." 
I said: "How much percentage of turn over do the top five (5) customers represent"? 
He said: "Turnover is spread evenly over the whole of 1,200 customers." 
I said: "Will you make available the bank statements and tax returns for the last three (3) years?" 
He said: "Yes." 
I said: "We will need to have access to all the financial figures. All the tax returns and everything else." 
He said: "I can assure you will have that information." 
I said: "Does any one customer represent 10% or more of the business"? 
He said: "No." " (Exhibit B, par 7) 
This evidence was not contradicted and was partly corroborated by Antoniou and
Stavropoulos.

In his statement of evidence in reply, of the meeting at Cafe Baba, Pilgrim accepted that he "probably said words to the effect that there had been no significant customer losses in the last three years. But (that he) did not make that statement in isolation": that he also said words to the effect that the business was not particularly dependent upon any one customer and that there was a tendency of customers to fluctuate.

The statement by Pilgrim that there had been no significant customer losses in the three years prior to the Cafe Baba meeting has to be reconciled with the failure of the co-operative to renew the co-operative arrangement with Quantum as from 31 December 1995. I think the statement has to be viewed in the context of the further information supplied by Pilgrim that the customer base of the business was spread over 1,200 customers with none representing more than 10 per cent of the business: in the context of the nature of the co- operative arrangement which did not involve sales to the co-operative but sales to member unions of the co-operative who were under no obligation to make any purchases from Quantum. The arrangement could be regarded reasonably as one which resulted in a number of individual sales to individual co- operative members. The statement should also be viewed in the context of the unprofitable nature of sales under the previous co-operative arrangement and of the gradual replacement of those sales with other business.

Northpak's case, expressed in the simplest of terms, was that there had been a loss of sales of approximately $500,000 in value which was not disclosed. I do not think the evidence, when examined more closely, supports that case.

Following the Cafe Baba meeting, which lasted about three hours, a further meeting took place on 25 January 1996 when Gulliver inspected Quantum's business premises over a period of about two hours. Of that occasion Pilgrim gave evidence that the following conversation took place: "On 25 January 1996 Gulliver attended the Company's premises at 230 Denison
Road, Dulwich Hill at which time we had further discussions in relation to the conduct of the business and the possible sale. During his visit other staff members, Sonia Modellino and Michelle Pearson were in the warehouse and office. During the course of this meeting I remember saying words to the following effect: "Northpak has diversified over the last few years. We are not particularly dependent upon any one customer because it would be foolish to become dependent upon any one single customer to maintain profitability. The business is extremely competitive and although it is not uncommon to lose customers it is equally common for most of those customers to come back." 
We had general discussions in relation to various customers. I specifically remember a conversation in relation to the University business. I distinctly remember a saying words to the following effect: "For example, the Universities used to be a good customer for us but in the last few years our margin had been shaved to the point where we weren't breaking even. When the tender came up last year we could not shave any more off our margin otherwise we would have made a loss on their business. Although the Universities bought a lot in volume it was at a very low margin and because of the high level of service they required it was no longer profitable for us to continue dealing with them." 
Gulliver said: "What effect did that have on the business?" 
I said: "No effect, in fact it has increased our overall profitability because I put off three staff and what we were paying them was more than we were making from the Universities. Also we have canvassed a number of new shops and picked up the turnover on our high profit areas, plus we have regained the Technical colleges which we lost last year and we have also picked North Shore Hospital, so at this stage we expect the turnover to be maintained and our profitability to increase." 
Gulliver said: "What sort of margin did you make on the Universities?" 
I said: "On some products we made around 16% and some others it was as low as 7%. The average margin on their overall business was around 11%." 
Gulliver said: "We don't want that sort of business anyway, we're not interested in maintaining any business that makes less than 20%." 
I said: "Well, I hope you can achieve that." 
Gulliver said: "Is it common for customers to come and go?" 
I said: "It is common but Northpak probably has the most stable customer base in the industry because of our history and service level. More of our customers have been with us for a very long time, we have a high retention level, in fact we still serve most of the customers that my father used to serve. In any case we have diversified the business to make our customers more dependent upon us and we have introduced new systems which allow us to operate more efficiently." 
Gulliver said: "Thanks for all the information you have given me. If we buy your business my brother-in-law could be one of the partners, his role would probably be the warehouse manager. How long would it take him to learn that position and become competent at the job?" 
I explained to him in general terms what would be required." (Exhibit 1, par 39) 
Gulliver denies that conversation. The way in which that conflict should be resolved is addressed later in these reasons.

This was not the only instance of conflicting evidence regarding the negotiations leading up to the agreement. I have been little assisted in resolving those conflicts by the demeanour of the witnesses, most, if not all of whom, I thought, in varying degrees, gave their evidence with conviction without signs of prevarication or evasiveness. In some instances, I was assisted in reaching a positive finding by the manner in which evidence was given. For example, I am quite satisfied that approximately two weeks after the sale there was a discussion concerning the sales to co-operative members between Gulliver and Pilgrim which Gulliver denies having taken place. That is referred to later in these reasons. The point I wish to make here is that I considered Pilgrim displayed an absolute conviction in the accuracy of his recollection in relation to that matter. Similarly, I am satisfied that there was some discussion concerning Quantum's business with co-operative members at a restaurant dinner on 23 February 1996 at which the Pilgrims, Stavros, Assad
Warrak (Warrak), a then employee of Quantum, and others were present. Both
Warrak and Pilgrim gave evidence of this matter in their evidence in chief. K
Pilgrim made no mention of it in her evidence in chief, nor was she cross- examined on it. I had occasion to ask her about that dinner and I was quite convinced that she made an honest effort to recall what had taken place at the dinner conversation concerning that aspect of Quantum's business. Generally, K
Pilgrim made a very favourable impression in cross-examination. Counsel for the defendants has attacked the credit of the Pilgrims, in part, based upon their admissions in relation to tax evasion. If anything, I regarded the manner of the responses of K Pilgrim in making those admissions as assisting me in coming to a conclusion that she was a witness whose evidence could be accepted. Her answer that she had no regret in relation to this matter was given thoughtfully, somewhat whimsically, and, I thought honestly. I think it is also reasonable to observe that the relations between Gulliver and Warrak and Pilgrim are very much soured by the fact that Warrak left Northpak's employment in August 1996 taking with him a significant number of Northpak's customers to a competitor organisation: further, that each of them were not unmindful of the respective commercial interests of the parties. Beyond that I would not be prepared to go.

Both Warrak and Pilgrim were cross-examined upon the striking similarity of the content of their statements of evidence in chief. It is fairly obvious that each of those statements bear the hallmark of a single author. I do not regard that fact as undermining the credibility of either Warrak or Pilgrim.
It does, however, raise a serious question as to the reliability of the details of those statements. It is not the first time that in the course of reasons for judgment I have had occasion to comment on the coincidence of contents of statements of witnesses in the same interest. It was put to
Pilgrim and Warrak, in effect, that they had colluded in the preparation of their statements. I do not think that is the explanation. I am more inclined to think that the problem lies in the method by which witness statements are prepared once instructions have been received for the purpose of preparing statements of evidence to comply with the Commercial Division's directions in the course of case management.

Returning to Pilgrim's version of the discussions that occurred at Quantum's premises on 25 January 1996, I would not be prepared to accept the detail of that evidence. I think it has an element of self-serving about it. There are no contemporaneous notes of it and if discussion had been as detailed as the evidence would indicate I would not have expected Gulliver's response to be so receptive. At the same time, I am reasonably satisfied that at some stage prior to the signing of the agreement either Pilgrim or Warrak did raise with one or other of the guarantors the unprofitable nature of the co-operative members' custom and probably that either that business was no longer sought after by Quantum or had been passed up by it.

The evidence of Pilgrim of the conversation concerning the universities custom at the dinner on 23 February 1996 was as follows: " .... I specifically remember a conversation regarding the Universities when
Assad Warrak said words to the effect of the following: "Northpak is far better off without the Universities." 
George Stavros said words to the effect of: "Why is that?" 
Assad said: "They require a huge amount of service but they only want to pay the lowest possible prices, there was just no profit in it for us anymore." 
George Stavros said: "How much did they used to buy?" 
The I said: "The Universities combined accounted for around 10% of the previous years' turnover but the accounted for 0% profit because of the prices we had to give them to get their business. When we served them we needed three more staff than we have now just to serve them. Now that we don't have them we have been able to get rid of the extra staff, restructure our work and operate far more efficiently and profitably." " (Exhibit 1, par 43) 
There is not much point in repeating the evidence of that occasion as contained in the statement of evidence of Warrak: it is almost word for word with that evidence of Pilgrim.

It is the evidence of Stavros that the first time that he heard of "the university contract" was in a conversation "a few months after (Northpak) had purchased the business". Stavropoulos gave similar evidence. The evidence of
Antoniou was that there was no mention of the universities' business in the negotiations and that the only time that subject matter was referred to prior to the agreement occurred years before.

Stavros has no recollection of the conversation and would not deny that it had taken place. Stavros had commenced work as warehouse manager with Quantum on 6
February 1996 at the suggestion of Pilgrim. Pilgrim's evidence of that arrangement was as follows: "..... I said words to the following effect: "Perhaps your brother-in-law could come and work for us for a few months to get to know the business, that way he can learn first hand what the business is like before he invests in it. In fact, I'll let him act as an employee so that the other staff wouldn't know anything else about him, that way he could get close to the employees and find out about the entire operation of the business first hand. It will also show you that I have nothing to hide from you guys." 
This was agreed to by Gulliver who informed me that the decision was made in consultation with the other partners." (Exhibit 1, par 40) 
There was no dispute about the circumstances in which Stavros commenced work with Quantum. The conditions under which he worked between 6 February and 2
April were described by Pilgrim generally as follows: "On 6 February 1996 George Stavros commenced work as a warehouse manager with
Northpak without the general staff knowing that he was a possible purchaser of
Northpak. I agreed with the purchasers not to disclose any details of the pending sale to any third party at this stage and that Stavros would be regarded as another employee. His activities included, the loading of vans, checking invoices, serving customers who attended the premises and made deliveries over an eight week period." (Exhibit 1, par 41) 
In respect of that period, Pilgrim gave evidence that he had a number of discussions with Stavros in which the question of the universities' business was raised in terms as follows: "... I remember saying to him: "The Universities used to be a good customer for us but in the last few years our margin has been shaved to the point where we weren't breaking even. As I told Lindsay, when the tender came up last year we simply could not shave any more off our margin otherwise we would have made a loss on them. Although the
Universities bought a lot of product, it was at a very low margin and because of the high level of service they required it was no longer profitable to us."
We are so much better now because we have increased our overall profitability.
Just putting off three staff has saved us more than we were making from the
Universities." " (Exhibit 1, par 42) 
The evidence of Stavros was that he had no recollection of any of those conversations including that said to have taken place at the dinner on 23
February 1996. His cross-examination on that subject matter was as follows: "PEMBROKE: Q. Mr Stavros, you had a number of conversations with Mr Pilgrim and Mr Assad Warrak on a number of different occasions in the period of
February/March of 1996, didn't you? 
A. Yes.

Q. And your position is that you do not recollect the conversations in the precise terms set out by Mr Warrak in his affidavit? 
A. Yes.

Q. They may or may not have occurred, but you certainly don't remember? 
A. That's right." (T26.42 - .55) 
As appeared from that cross-examination, Warrak also gave evidence of similar conversations with Stavros in the period of the latter's employment by
Quantum. That evidence was as follows: "13. Between late February and early March 1996 I recall having a number of conversations with George Stavros in the warehouse of the business. George would often say to me words to the effect of:- "I can't believe how much stuff you guys can fit into those trucks." 
I can recall saying to him on more than one occasion words to the effect of:- "You should have seen us when we had the universities. You are lucky that we don't have them now, because if we did you would have to help make the deliveries as well. That would mean longer hours for you. The university orders used to be so big that they would monopolise a whole truck, which meant that the deliveries to the other customers would be late unless we took on another driver and storeman."
It was common practice in the business for orders to be assembled on the warehouse floor awaiting delivery trucks to arrive back at the warehouse to be loaded for delivery. I can recall on more than one occasion in February and
March 1996 George Stavros saying to me words to the effect of-: "We sure have a lot of stock on the floor ready to load today." 
To which I replied words to the effect of-: "You should have seen it when we had the universities as customers. When their orders were set up on the floor ready for loading, they would go all the way out the front door and onto the driveway." 
Again, I am sure that I had that conversation with George Stavros more than once and prior to the end of March 1996 when I became aware that he was part of the group purchasing the business.
I can also recall in late February or early March 1996 having a conversation with George Stavros in the office of the Plaintiff, at which the office staff were also present. I recall Sonia Modellino saying to me words to the effect of:- "Guess who is ordering stuff from us?" 
To which I replied:- "Who?" 
She then said to me:- "One of the unis. We don't have the stock in right at the moment but we can get it in quickly. They want table covers. I have given them a price and taken their order." 
George Stavros then said to both myself and Sonia Modellino words to the effect of:- 
If we provide the unis with good service then maybe we can get their business back."
I recall that on more than one occasion I said to George Stavros:- "Don't load any orders for customers with the Compact Recycled Table Napkins.
They are just for the universities. Our other customers don't like them. They are too low quality for them." 
In one such conversation that I had with George Stavros in March 1996 regarding those napkins he said to me words to the effect of:- "Why do you bother keeping these recycled napkins in stock if you don't serve the universities any more?" 
To which I replied in words to the effect of:- "You never know, some of them might be back with us by the end of the year, and in any case they can often call out of the blue when they have run out themselves, and if we can sell them to them at a good price that is all they care about." " ( Exhibit 5, pars 13 - 16) 
Although, in my opinion, Warrak clearly aligned himself with the interests of
Quantum, I think, on the probabilities, that the subject of the past custom of the universities was discussed in terms which made it reasonably clear that it no longer formed part of Quantum's business. I would not be prepared to accept the detail of the recollection of either Pilgrim or Warrak in relation to those discussions.

I think the evidence does disclose, however, that there was an openness on the part of Quantum in exposing its business activities to the cross-claimants.
Gulliver, in his statement of evidence in reply, claimed that the guarantors had not been provided with all of the documents and information that had been requested of Quantum, identifying in particular the following: "(a) Profit and loss statements up to the end of December, 1995; 
Balance sheets for periods subsequent to June, 1995; 
Bank statements and bank deposit books; 
Wages books; and 
Group tax books and receipts." (Exhibit C, par 2) 
He gave further evidence of this in cross-examination. I am firmly of the view that there was an open approach in the provision of information by the
Pilgrims. K Pilgrim, in her statement of evidence in chief, described the approach of Quantum to the provision of financial information in the following evidence: "4. On or about 30 January 1996 I forwarded to Mr Lindsay Gulliver or his accountant, Mr Donnelly a copy of the income tax returns for the business for the years ended 30 June 1992, 1993 and 1994, and the draft return for the year ended 30 June 1995 was supplied by me to them on or about the 16th February .
On or about the 30th January 1996 I forwarded to either Mr Gulliver or Mr
Donnelly, the accountant for the prospective buyers, a hand written list of monthly turnover figures for the business for the period July 1995 to December inclusive, a true copy of which is annexed to this statement and marked "A". I do not have the original document in my possession and the copy forming annexure "A" to this statement is, I believe, a replica of what I sent on or about the 30th January 1996.
During the first week of February 1996 I forwarded to Mr Gulliver or Mr
Donnelly my figures relating to the turnover of the business for the month of
January 1996 and in the first week of March 1996 I forwarded to Mr Donnelly, and also possibly Mr Gulliver, the turnover figures for the business for the month of February 1996. In saying this, it is my recollection that I forwarded these turnover figures to either Mr Donnelly or Mr Gulliver or both of them. I am absolutely certain that I sent the figures to at least one of them during the first week of February and again during the first week of March 1996, but as I received numerous telephone calls from both Mr Donnelly and Mr Gulliver during that period asking for various pieces of information at various times, with requests that that information was to be sent to either the caller alone or to both Mr Gulliver and Mr Donnelly, I cannot be sure now whether the turnover figures for January and February 1996 were sent to both of them or only one of them at the times referred to by me above.
Throughout February 1996 and March 1996 I received numerous telephone calls from Lindsay Gulliver and Phillip Donnelly seeking financial information relating to the business known as Northpak Paper Supplies. The bulk of those requests for information were in the form of telephone calls to me and I often supplied the information sought in the context of those telephone calls. Apart from providing to Mr Gulliver and Mr Donnelly verbal information regarding clarification of figures in documents already before them, I also answered their enquiries by forwarding additional documentation relating to various product lines of the business, plant & machinery of the business, customer lists and the like. Where possible, written information was forwarded to Mr
Gulliver or Mr Donnelly by facsimile transmission, but on one or two occasions
I recall arranging for my husband Gary Pilgrim to deliver to Mr Gulliver's home at Roseville various bundles of documents relating to the financial affairs of the business, pursuant to a specific request from him. I can also recall one occasion in which Mr Gulliver telephoned me to say that he had lost documents previously sent by me to him and asking that copies of the documents be sent again to him.
 ...............................................
On the 4th March 1993 I was handed by my husband Gary Pilgrim a note, a true copy of which is annexed hereto and marked with the letter "C". It was pursuant to that note that I forwarded to Phillip Donnelly the figures for the turnover of the business Northpak Paper Supplies for the month of February , and discussed with Mr Lindsay Gulliver the debtors and creditors of the business for that month.
By mid March 1996 I had provided to either Lindsay Gulliver or Phillip
Donnelly or both of them all of the turnover figures for the business known as
Northpak Paper Supplies for the period 1 July 1995 to 29 February 1996, and at no time during any of my numerous telephone conversations and correspondences with them during February and March 1996 did they ever question the accuracy of the turnover figures that I provided to them nor did either of them express any concerns to me about any changes in those turnover figures during that eight month period nor with respect to that period and the turnover of the business for previous years." (Exhibit 4, pars 4-7, 9 and 10 ) 
I have no doubt that there was a genuine response by Quantum to the provision of financial information in that lead up period to the agreement. While there may have been some dissatisfaction harboured by Gulliver, I do not regard that as reflecting any failure on the part of Quantum to provide reasonable information to the defendants or to Donnelly. There was no suggestion of any complaint having been made at the time which one would have expected if
Gulliver's complaint was of any substance.

There is little doubt that the defendants or their accountant had received full financial information from Quantum and in particular in relation to its turnover up until 29 February 1996. There has been no evidence from Donnelly to suggest otherwise.

On 4 March 1996, there was a meeting in the afternoon at Donnelly's office, at which were present Gulliver, Stavros, Stavropoulos, Antoniou, Donnelly,
Pilgrim and Jansen, for the purpose of the examination of "the latest financial records of the business".

According to Gulliver, he had the following conversation with Pilgrim: "During that meeting I had a conversation with Mr. Pilgrim in which words to the following effect were said: 
I said: "What about the bank statements? We want those. We will also need complete sales figures, and up to date turn over figures." 
He said: "O.K." 
I said: "Why is the stock down by $100,000.00 in the 1994 year, as compared to the 1995 and the 1993 year"? 
He said: "In the 1994 stock take we forgot to do a whole section of the warehouse. We just forgot and I didn't pick up the mistake for another three to six months".

I said: "Has there been any change to turnover since June 1995"? 
He said: "No." 
I said: "Can you assure us these figures are still accurate"? 
He said: "Yes." " (Exhibit B, par 14) 
Of this meeting on 4 March 1996, in his statement of evidence in reply,
Pilgrim agreed that he probably said words to the effect that "the business has not changed. There has been no real change in turnover". Antoniou corroborates Gulliver's evidence, in that he gave evidence of a similar discussion between himself and Pilgrim in which Pilgrim assured him that there had not been any significant loss of customers since the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 1995. Similar evidence was given by Stavropoulos and Stavros.

It is not clear whether these conversations took place in the presence of
Jansen. I infer that all financial discussions on that occasion were in his presence until the time came for his departure. He has given no evidence of those matters except to the extent that I directed his attention to the following matters at the conclusion of his cross-examination: "HIS HONOUR: Q. Mr Jansen, I can't recall whether there is any evidence of your involvement in the run up to the sale, were you in any way involved? 
A. I was to the extent that, firstly, I supplied information to the accountant for the purchases (sic).

Q. Who was that? 
A. Mr Donnelly.

Q. Was that as requested? 
A. I supplied everything that was requested that I had. Nothing was withheld. Mr Lindsay Gulliver provided a letter of confidentiality to me to say that he would treat that information confidentially, in case the purchase didn't go-ahead. The next contact I had was, I believe, towards the end of
March at a meeting at the offices of Mr Donnelly in St Leonards where the purchasers were presented (sic). Mr Donnelly, their accountant, and Mr Gary
Pilgrim. The broad terms of an offer was discussed but with particular emphasis on this formula that was subsequently built into the agreement about gross profit rates. I then had a short meeting with Mr Pilgrim confidentially in a separate room and I pointed out to Mr Pilgrim that as an accountant I would advise him to ensure that at least net tangible assets and some sum for goodwill was payable immediately, because that is the risk amount, and that he would need to consider seriously how much, if any, of any future payments should be geared to some formula and, if it was, that he should seek adequate security for such a payment. At that point I believe I left the meeting and Mr
Pilgrim continued his discussions.
 .................................

Q. Then the other matter that I am interested in is, I take it were you aware that the contract was being geared for the June 1995 account? 
A. I can't - I am not - well, to the extent that I knew that the only financial statements that were available were financial statements up to and including the years to 30 June 1995, because we had prepared them for the
Pilgrims, but we had not, at that stage, prepared any financial statements beyond 30 June 1995.

Q. Then I take it you were not aware of any express warranties in the proposed contract that was geared to require disclosures in respect of the period post- the 1995 accounts? 
A. Not specifically, no, your Honour.

Q. Even without that knowledge do you have a view as to the need for the purchaser in those circumstances to inform (sic) of changes since the last available accounts? 
A. Well, your Honour, it comes down to, again, whether it is, in the view of the purchaser, I am sorry, of the seller or the purchaser to inform the purchaser? 
Q. I will put it a little more directly to you: Were you aware of the loss of the university contract? 
A. No, I was not." (T120.21 - .52 and T121.39 - 122.6) (Emphasis added) 
In re-examination he was taken a step further as follows: "PEMBROKE: Q. Mr Jansen - I think I will ask Mr Jansen the question which your
Honour thought it might be unfair to ask him - you don't now recollect whether you knew in March 1996 whether the university contract had been not renewed; is that the position? 
A. Yes.

Q. You may have known? 
A. Well I may have. I mean, since that date, of course, it has become rather confused, having become aware of it, but I cannot specifically recollect.

Q. If, at the time of the negotiations, immediately prior to the contract having been entered into, you did become aware of that fact? 
A. Yes.

Q. Would you have advised Mr and Mrs Pilgrim that the non- renewal of that contract should have been disclosed to the purchasers?- 
OBJECTION. QUESTION ALLOWED. LEAVE GRANTED TO MR SPEAKMAN TO EXAMINE WITNESS
ON QUESTION.

A. If I had known or been made aware of the loss of the university contract my an (sic) answer to the Pilgrims would have been: What did it represent, in terms of turnover? Was it replaced by other customers? Because it is a wholesaling business, and I am aware of the fact that customers come and go, and: Is it going to have a material impact on the overall profit of this business, having regard to the replaced customers? And if the answer to that was "it is", then I would say "you need to advise the purchaser". If the answer to that was "it had no material impact on the overall turnover", given replacement customers and the profitability, I would have advised the Pilgrims that I didn't think it was a matter that needed to be raised." (T122.40 - 123.17) 
Pilgrim gave detailed evidence of the conversation that he had with Donnelly at this meeting which for the most part concerned matters that I do not think are relevant to the issues in these proceedings other than to note that, among other things, Donnelly required the monthly turnover figures to February 1996.
He recalled being asked a number of questions by Donnelly about the day to day operations of the business and which included the following: "Donnelly said: "Has there been any material change to the business?" 
I said: "What does that mean?" 
Bill Jansen said: "Has the business changed in any way?" 
I said: "No, everything is the same as it has always been." " (Exhibit 1, par 56) 
I accept that evidence.

In relation to that subject matter of materiality, in his evidence in chief
Jansen gave the following opinion evidence: "PEMBROKE: Q. Based upon the figures which you have set out in exhibits 7, 8 and 9, do you have a view as to whether the loss of the universities' contract was something which was a material change in the turnover or level of profitability of the business since 30 June 1995? 
A. I'm referring to p 2 of my first report where I stated that "In our opinion, the reduction in sales during 1996 over 1995 of less than 1 per cent is immaterial". I am still of that view following my deliberations yesterday with Mr Finney. And, secondly, "Review of the margins of the gross profit for the years stated" and the comment that "In my opinion, the gross profit actually improved during the period 1 July 1995 to 31 March 1996 as compared with the previous two years", I still hold that view following my discussions yesterday with Mr Finney. And the third conclusion was that "The loss of the universities' contract has not had a material impact on the turnover or profitability of the business", I'm still of that view in respect of profitability in my view improved by not having that contract.

Q. Do you have a view as to whether the loss of the universities' contract was a material event since 30 June 1995 that could be said to have or will have a material impact on the business? 
A. In my opinion, and taking the total turnover of the business and the effect on the total turnover and also considering the changes in other turnover that has occurred in that business, it has not had a material effect on the turnover and profitability of the business since 30 June 1995, other than to improve it.

HIS HONOUR: Q. What did you mean by having regard to the "changes in the turnover"? 
A. I looked at the total turnover of the business in my first report, your
Honour, and that is detailed in figure 1.1 of that report. I compared the monthly turnover of the business, the weekly turnover of the business, and then looked at that turnover in the light of what occurred up to June 1996. I then extrapolated the turnover and, in my opinion, the change in turnover was less than 1 per cent between the previous period and the subsequent period." (T104.19 - 105.2) 
In relation to the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) count, I think the evidence established that Pilgrim did inform the guarantors that there had been no significant changes in the turnover of the business since the financial statements for the period ended 30 June 1995 and had warranted as much in the agreement and further that he had informed them that there had been no significant loss of customers. However, in order to ascertain whether those statements were misleading or whether Quantum had been involved in breach of its warranties, it is necessary, I think, to give closer attention to the trading figures of Quantum in the period to 31 March 1996.

There is a conflict of evidence between Gulliver and Pilgrim as to the post agreement occasion when the question of the sales to university unions was discussed by them. It is agreed that there was such a discussion or discussions. However, as to the time and content of those discussions, there is serious disagreement. It is the evidence of Pilgrim, to which I have earlier referred as impressing me as to its reliability, that the first conversation occurred a short time after the agreement. Pursuant to an agreement reached during negotiations, Pilgrim continued to work in the business after the agreement as an employee of Northpak. He remained in that employment for approximately two months, during which time, it was his evidence that he had two discussions with Gulliver concerning the universities' custom. It was the evidence of Gulliver that, following the telephone conversation with the commercial operations manager at the
University of New South Wales, he became aware of the unsuccessful October tender by Quantum. According to his evidence, he had a conversation with
Pilgrim immediately thereafter to the following effect: "I said: "I am now aware of the university contract that we no longer have." 
He said: "Yes, I lost the university contract - but it was only to supply seven (7) universities, and its only worth about $250,000 per year." " (Exhibit B, par 29) 
In his oral evidence, Gulliver confirmed that the conversation took place about the first week of July 1996 after Pilgrim had left Northpak's employment.

Pilgrim had given no evidence of this matter in his statement of evidence in chief nor was he cross-examined on it. He was recalled at my request and gave the following evidence: "HIS HONOUR: Q. Mr Pilgrim, after the sale had gone through, did you have a conversation with any of the defendants concerning the loss of the universities' contract. Can you recall? 
A. Yes, your Honour, yes.

Q. Can you recall with whom? 
A. Mr Gulliver.

Q. And can you recall when that was, roughly? 
A. The first discussion would have been the second week that Mr Gulliver had taken over the business - the second week after, out in the warehouse. He approached me - do you want me to explain that? 
Q. Yes I do? 
A. He came to me and wanted to know details of the universities' contract as in who to contact, approximate value of what it was worth, how long it went for and we actually went back over into the office and he wrote down some notes on who to contact, where that person was. I told him how to access that in the computer to get the phone number of the person which was Mr Andrew
Kelly. That was about it, I think.

Q. At that stage, you didn't have the contract? 
A. That's correct, we didn't have the contract. He wanted to know if he wanted to tender for the contract in further years, how he would go about doing that.

Q. That was the first time the universities' contract was raised with you after the-- 
A. After the sale.

Q. And was there another occasion? 
A. Yes. About a month - probably about a month and a half after that, again I was still working at Northpak, Mr Gulliver again asked me about basically about the same thing, but this time he wrote it down and I said to him that we discussed it, but he said he cannot find the original notes and could I tell him again who and said it was Mr Kelly and how to call him. He asked me what the tender was that went in each year and about when it would need to be prepared and things like that.

Q. The reason I asked you is I don't think you have dealt with it in your statement and I don't recall it being dealt with in your oral evidence-- 
HIS HONOUR: Is that right? 
PEMROKE: Yes.

HIS HONOUR: Q. I want to ask you particularly whether, in about July, after he had a conversation with Mr Kelly in which he said to you, words to the effect "I'm now aware of the universities' contract that we no longer have" and you said to him "Yes, the loss of the universities' contract was only to supply seven universities and it's only worth about $250,000 a year". Did that conversation take place? 
A. We had a conversation along those lines, yes, your Honour.

Q. And that was in about July 1996? 
A. That was actually the second conversation I was talking about when Mr
Gulliver wanted to know how to go about getting the contract.

Q. I am curious about that conversation. If he already knew that the contract hadn't been regained, why would he say to you "I'm now aware of the universities' contract we no longer have"? 
A. Well, that's - I recall that conversation it was along those lines, but I don't necessarily agree that is how he actually said it.

Q. I see. Did you indicate to him that there were about seven universities involved? 
A. Yes. In actual fact, he said to me that he, he believed that there were about 10 or 12 and so he was clarifying a whole pile of things in that discussion. And then I actually told him that there were seven universities in the group that we had serviced in the contract.

SPEAKMAN: Q. You told his Honour, Mr Pilgrim, about two conversations, one in
April 1996? 
A. That's correct.

Q. With Mr Gulliver? 
A. Yes.

Q. And then another one in July 1996? 
A. Correct.

HIS HONOUR: Not quite. I understand his evidence was that there were two conversations and the second was while he was still working at the business after the sale.

Q. I understand that you worked for a month? 
A. No, I actually worked for two months.

HIS HONOUR: In that period.

SPEAKMAN: Q. Can I put it to you, Mr Pilgrim, that you had no such conversation with Mr Gulliver about the universities' contract prior to at least late June 1996? 
A. No, that's not correct. Definitely in the second week that Mr Gulliver took over because the first week he went to Melbourne and I ran the business in the normal way and in the second week he was back and he asked me about it.

Q. But you say on the second occasion you told him that the contract was worth only $250,000 per year? 
A. I don't recall saying those exact figures. I think that comes from Mr
Gulliver's statement, that doesn't come from mine.

HIS HONOUR: Is that your rough impression of the sort of money that was coming in from those universities? 
A. No.

SPEAKMAN: Q. So you deny, do you, that you told Mr Pilgrim that there were only seven universities and $250,000 per annum? 
A. I told Mr Gulliver that there were approximately seven universities. I think I told him at the time too - and I don't recall that specific figure in mind, although it was mentioned there was a specific figure." (T132.23 - 134.44) (The emphasis represents corrections to the transcript) 
In re-examination he gave the following further evidence: "PEMBROKE: Q. Would you concentrate on the second conversation you say you had with Mr Gulliver a month or two after the business changed hands? 
A. Yes.

Q. Doing the best you can, could you try to reconstruct and tell his Honour what Mr Gulliver said to you; try to put it in it (sic) first person? 
A. Mr Gulliver said to me that "I was wondering if you might be able to tell me some of the details concerning the universities' contracts as to who I would contact, how I would go about tendering if we wanted to regain that business and when I do so". And I said to Mr Gulliver "I thought we'd already discussed that earlier", he said "Yes, I wrote it down and then when I moved office or was doing the offices, I haven't got that information any more.
Would you mind telling me again?", and I said "No", and we went over to the offices and we wrote it down." (T135.7 - .24) 
I have earlier stated in these reasons that there was a discussion between
Gulliver and Pilgrim shortly after the execution of the agreement. In my opinion, it is also clear that there was a subsequent conversation towards the middle of the year. The evidence of Pilgrim in relation to that conversation,
I think, is somewhat unsatisfactory. What I draw from the evidence is that, in all probability, Gulliver did not know of the full extent of the sales represented by the university unions and was not aware of the then current legal position concerning provision of supplies to members of the co- operative. I also have the impression that Pilgrim tended to downplay the extent of that custom and the nature of the legal arrangement with the co- operative. I also have been left with the impression that Pilgrim was not forthcoming in revealing the rejection of its October 1995 tender. However, for reasons earlier adverted to and which appear later in these reasons, in the circumstances of this case, that conduct should not be regarded as misleading or deceptive within the meaning of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/). I would draw those inferences, consistently with acceptance of the fact that, in the pre-agreement discussions with one or other of the guarantors, discussion centred upon that aspect of the business concerning the supply of members of the co-operative. In my view, it is likely that Pilgrim has embellished the context of those discussions with the advantages of hindsight.

There does not appear to be any dispute between the parties as to the approach to be adopted in determining questions of materiality. Both parties accepted that some assistance may be gained from the manner in which the question of materiality is approached in Australian Accounting Standard AAS 5 and
Accounting Standard AASB 1031. In AAS 5 par 4.1.6 provides as follows: "Quantitative thresholds used as guidance for determining the materiality of the amount of an item or an aggregate of items must, of necessity, be drawn at arbitrary levels. Materiality is a matter of professional judgement influenced by the characteristics of the entity and the perceptions as to who are, or are likely to be, the users of the financial report, and their information needs.
Materiality judgments can only be properly made by those who have the facts.
In this context, the following quantitative thresholds may be used as guidance in considering the materiality of the amount of items included in the comparisons referred to in paragraphs 4.1.4(a), (b) and (c) of this Standard: an amount which is equal to or greater than 10 per cent of the appropriate base amount may be presumed to be material unless there is evidence or convincing argument to the contrary; and an amount which is equal to or less than 5 per cent of the appropriate base amount may be presumed to be material unless there is evidence, or convincing argument, to the contrary." (Exhibit O, p 1048.3) 
To the same effect is AASB 1031. That is the basis upon which, as I understand the evidence of Jansen and Finney, they have approached the question of materiality. Where they differ is in what constitutes the appropriate comparison.

Outside of those accountancy standards, counsel for Northpak has taken me to a number of authorities as to the nature of materiality in commercial transactions addressed by the warranties. Walden Properties Ltd versus Beaver
Properties Pty Ltd [(1973) 2 NSWLR 815], to which
I was referred, concerned not materiality in warranties but the fiduciary duty of full disclosure of an agent. The question of materiality concerned information relating to the value of property affecting the value of shares in the corporate owner of the property. In that context Hope JA made the following observations: "This information as to value was in my opinion material information of which full disclosure should have been made to (the principal), and which the evidence does not show was disclosed at all.

I have said that the information as to value was material, not because it would necessarily, or even probably, have caused (the principal) to come to a different conclusion (that is not to acquire the offered shares), but because it was material to the question which (the principal) had to decide, and may have had an effect on (Walden's) decision. The reason for the (previous) rejection of the offer ... by (the principal) was of course the fear of (the principal) that its capital should be "locked in". However, although the value of the property was not stated to be the basis of (that) decision, (the principal) considered the offer with their latest information as to the value being contained in the letter making the offer; they did not know ... that it had been arranged that the price put upon (the property) was to be increased ... It could not be said that (the principal) probably would have come to a different decision if (it) had known about these matters; (it) may have still decided that the risk of being locked in was too great. However, had a full disclosure been made ... (the principal) may have weighed the disadvantages of being locked in differently. The balanced judgment about being locked in would have been made in a different context. It is not possible to say affirmatively that (the principal) with the additional information, would have come to the same conclusion as it did without it, and it would be only if this conclusion could be positively reached that the undisclosed information could be regarded as immaterial and the consequences of the failure to make a proper disclosure could be avoided." (At 837G - 838C) 
The observations are useful in the context of considering the concept of materiality under the warranties in that, I think, they may be taken as an illustration of the way in which the possible consequences of a "change" or "event" may be approached in order to evaluate the materiality of that change or event. It has been accepted by counsel for the cross-claimants that the test of materiality is objective. Consistently with that approach, in my opinion, one is entitled to look at the significance of the subject event or change in the context of the reasonable purchaser in the circumstances of
Northpak in entering into the agreement. However, I think there is an element of subjectivity in the operation to be given to the warranties: in particular,
I believe it will be appropriate in most cases in considering such warranties to examine the context in which they have been given. Applying an objective test to materiality, in my view, does not exclude, for example, consideration of the commercial objective of the underlying transaction and, indeed, in some circumstances, the common understanding of the parties to the warranties may have a part to play in examining the question of materiality. For example, I think in some cases it could be demonstrated that a one per cent "change in the turnover or level of profitability" of a business could be material to the point of criticality, whereas in other instances of no moment at all and, hence, not material, even though the mathematical comparisons of costs and sales in the two cases were exactly the same. In my view, those last observations reflect the appropriateness of treating the accounting standards as to materiality as no more than a guide and one which, in most instances, will be subservient to the particular facts of each case. Reference was also made to the observations of Tadgell J in Hill versus Rose <case>; [(1990) VR 129] at 142 citing Walden - it was another case of a fiduciary's duty of disclosure - and also to the observations of Teague J in
Hanlon versus Brookes & Ors [(1996) ATPR 41-523] and of
Lord Russell in Beyfus versus Lodge [[1925] Ch D 350] at 357 which
I doubt advance consideration of the question of materiality for the purposes of this case.

As I had occasion during the hearing to express my gratitude to the accountants retained by the parties for their joint assistance in the preparation of schedules, I think that matter should be repeated. It was important for the parties to have an early resolution of so many of the issues as could be determined at this point and that objective would not have been achieved without the professional assistance of Messrs Finney and Jansen.

In considering the operation of the warranties and representations relied upon it is useful to start with some significant areas of common ground produced by the efforts of the accountants. A general comparison has been made of the trading results of Quantum as reflected in its financial statements for the year ended 30 June 1995 with its financial statements for the financial year commencing 1 July 1996 to 31 March 1996, when the business changed hands. The schedule of comparison follows: " Year to 9 months to June 1995 31 March 1996 
Gross Sales 3,842,345 2,796,069 
Less: Sales Tax (388,776) (241,241) 
Net Sales 3,453,569 2,554,828 
Less: Cost of Goods Sold (excluding settlement discounts) (2,894,751) (2,059,614) 
Gross Profit $ 558,818 $ 495,214 
Gross margin % (Gross Profit/Net Sales) 16.18% 19.38% 
Settlement discounts 2,807 0.081% 1,430 0.056%" (Exhibit 7, p 1) 
A matter of particular significance and, certainly, one upon which considerable reliance has been placed by Quantum, is the improvement in gross margins shown by the comparison of those two trading periods. I think it bears out the contention of Quantum and of Jansen's advice to Quantum in the years prior to the sale of the business that the sales under the co-operative arrangement were not profitable. There has been no evidence led that would cause me to attribute that improvement in gross margin to anything other than the decrease in those sales, the reduction in staff related to over-servicing of those sales which that change in business permitted, and the replacement of that business by other custom, at least in part. It was the evidence of
Pilgrim that the margins on the universities' sales were cut to an unprofitable level and that the costs of servicing those sales by comparison with other customers of the business was excessive to the point that he was able to terminate the services of two employees in December 1995 with the termination of the arrangement with the co-operative. Pilgrim asserted that
Quantum was also able to operate without replacing a third employee who left
Quantum's employment in September 1995. As I understood his evidence in chief he attributed the capacity to operate without that replacement to the change in university sales. I very much doubt that.

I have been assisted in relation to the sales under the co-operative arrangement by the evidence of Jansen who, as I have stated earlier, had a close familiarity with the business over many years. I have been left in no doubt that Quantum's pricing structure of the universities' sales was insufficient to recover costs. Having regard to the pricing structure of its
October 1995 tender, that losing vein could only have continued throughout
Jansen also accepted that the reduction in staff should be attributed to this turning away from universities' sales. In this respect, I understand him to accept the validity of Pilgrim's description of the high level of service required for those sales.

The comparison in the above table is also useful for its detailing of the incidence of sales tax on gross sales. The significance I think appears later in these reasons where I have found it necessary to compare turnovers on a monthly or weekly basis. That periodical comparison has been carried out on gross sales figures, whereas I think the more relevant comparison is between net sales in the sense used in the above schedule. I note that the percentage of sales tax to gross sales in the year ended 30 June 1995 was approximately per cent and in the period following to 31 March 1996 was approximately 8.6 per cent.

The further schedule arrived at by the accountants which was of assistance is the schedule of costs divided into variable and fixed costs in respect of the year ended 30 June 1995. It is agreed that the total of fixed and variable costs as a percentage of sales was 16.7 per cent. There is a divergence in the opinions of Finney and Jansen as to the break up of that percentage of 16.7 per cent between variable and fixed cost percentages. It is the opinion of
Jansen that variable costs represent 9.7 per cent and fixed costs 7 per cent: to be contrasted with Finney's assessment of 8.4 per cent and 8.3 per cent respectively for variable and fixed costs. The principal difference between them lay in the treatment of the wages of the two employees who were dismissed and not replaced in December 1995 upon the change in the sales to university unions - they were Michael King and Delwyn McMahon. Jansen accepted the opinion of Pilgrim that those employees' expenses were directly related to the university unions' sales and so should be treated as variable costs, as distinct from the balance of wages expenses which he treated as fixed costs of the business. In cross-examination, Jansen accepted that their activities would be likely to have involved work outside the sales to university unions but considered that that could be compensated or offset against employees whose wages were treated as fixed costs but who could be expected to have devoted some of their time to the university union sales. Although it may not be appropriate to treat the whole of that wages related expenses as variable costs, I think the evidence justifies treating the substance of those costs as variable and nothing, in my opinion, is to be gained of any practical value in attempting any apportionment of those expenses to fixed costs. The appropriate treatment of the costs of those two employees also arises in considering the accountants' respective views regarding the profitability of the sales to the university unions. In that context, Jansen also considered that the expenses relating to the employee who left in September 1995 should also be treated as a cost benefit to be taken into account. That matter is referred to later in these reasons.

The accountants also carried out a detailed calculation of gross profit in respect of the sales to university unions for the year ended 30 June 1995. The table that follows sets out the calculation as agreed: "Turnover (gross) $521,238 
Less sales tax $61,506 
Net sales $459,732 
Gross profit rate 14.84% 
Gross profit $68,224" (Exhibit 9, Annexure C) 
Furthermore, Jansen carried out an analysis of gross profit of the business for the period ended 30 June 1995 and compared that the period following to 31
March 1996. The table follows: "B GROSS PROFIT 30.6.95 31.3.96 (9 mths) a) Amount $556,011 $493,784 b) Monthly average $46,334 $54,865 c) Weekly average $11,120 $13,346 d) Increase in gross profit: $2,226 per week or 20.02%" (Exhibit 8) 
The importance of those tables lie in the gross profit rate of 14.84 per cent which is to be compared with the percentage of fixed and variable costs to sales of 16.7 per cent for the 1994 - 1995 year. Quite clearly as has been observed earlier in these reasons, the sales to university unions were not covering costs. That may be compared with the improved gross margin table set out earlier in these reasons evidencing an increased margin of 19.38 per cent for the nine months ended 31 March 1996 over the 16.18 per cent for the previous twelve months and the table of gross profit showing a 20 per cent increase for the nine months to 31 March 1996. I think from this evidence it should be concluded that there had been no material change in the level of profitability of the business within the meaning of the material change warranty - except, perhaps, for the better, by reason of matters associated with the ending of the pricing arrangements with the co-operative in December .

It will be necessary to return to this table in considering the differing opinions of the accountants on the treatment of fixed and variable costs in relation to assessing the way in which the sales to the university unions should be treated should I find that there has been a breach of warranty.

In relation to the issue concerning an alleged material change in turnover, there was admitted into evidence a schedule of monthly and weekly turnover of the business for the year ended 30 June 1995 and for the following period ended 31 March 1996 (exhibit L). That table has been superseded, in part, by the most recent calculations carried out jointly by the accountants. The table is Schedule "1" to these reasons.

It will be seen that the total sales of $3,805,633.58 for the year ended 30
June 1995 differs from the table of gross sales quoted above showing $3,842,345 - in each case including sales tax. In any event, I think that the table (exhibit L) requires a further adjustment to bring the monthly and weekly turnover figures into line with net sales, excluding sales tax. In the case of the sales for the year ended 30 June 1995, that calls for a reduction of approximately 10 per cent and in the case of the remaining period a reduction of sales by approximately 8.6 per cent, on my calculations. As an example, in relation to Sch 1 the net weekly sales for March 1995 would come down to $75,543 and those for March 1996 to $72,095, a difference of approximately $3,148. However, subject to those two, not unimportant, factors the table of comparison is useful in considering the question of the nature of any change in the turnover of the business after the year ended 30 June 1995.

Jansen has performed a summary of that turnover which follows: "A TURNOVER 30.6.95 31.3.96 (9 mths) a) Amount $3.8 m $2.8m b) Monthly average $317,136 $310,748 c) Weekly average $76,113 $75,587 d) Decrease in turnover: $526 per week or 0.69% " (Exhibit 8, the first half) 
Jansen has placed considerable reliance upon this analysis, as has counsel for
Quantum, to demonstrate that, either on standards referrable to the accountancy standards referred to above, or on any ordinary meaning of the word "material", a 0.69 per cent downturn in turnover should not be regarded as a "material change". Antoniou was cross-examined concerning the materiality of this change and it is clear that he regarded the change as one in which there had been a loss of sales in excess of $500,000. As my reasons to date would indicate, I do not regard the question raised by the case of breach of warranty to be quite as simple as that. His cross-examination did expose an aspect of the change in turnover, which bears noting. The evidence I refer to follows: "PEMBROKE: Q. If the effect on the turnover was not as you thought it was, then you wouldn't have any complaint, would you? 
A. I would. In effect it meant that I had to get 300 other customers to make the half million dollars' turnover.

Q. If the half million dollars turnover was made up for without you having to go out and get them, you wouldn't have any complaint, would you? 
A. Again, not necessarily. I will quantify that too. It depends how many other customers you have to source to make that and whether the gross profit is justified at the end." (T6.1 - .12) 
In my opinion, that evidence points to the fact that, in the case of a change in turnover, the materiality of the change may involve going beyond the figures to ascertain whether the change reflects a change in the nature of related underlying business transactions. For example, there may be a small change in total turnover due to replacement of a small number of large customers with a great number of smaller volume customers whose transactions required a more demanding and hence more costly, administration. However, in this case I am of the view that, first, there was some replenishment of the customer base of Quantum in the period from 1 July 1995 to 31 March 1996 which compensated for some of those lost sales to universities as evidenced by
Pilgrim, and, second, that while that may or may not have involved a greater number of customers than the university unions which they replaced, that was done with the achievement of a greater gross profit by Quantum.

Gulliver was also cross-examined along similar lines as follows: "Q. For the sake of argument, whether it was this business or any other business, if for the nine month period after you had financial statements the information revealed that gross profit had increased, that would be not something which you would consider to be a materially adverse change, would you? 
A. Not adverse, no.

Q. All the more so, of course, if it was an increase of the order of 20 per cent? 
A. Correct.

Q. And if, on this assumption, the turnover was running at the same level plus or minus 1 per cent, that would not be to your mind a materially adverse change to the turnover, would it? 
A. Are you talking 1 per cent on $3.7 million? 
Q. Yes, for the purpose of this? 
A. You are talking plus or minus? 
Q. Yes? 
A. I wouldn't consider that would have been a huge differential, no.

Q. Even if it was minus, it wouldn't be a huge differential? 
A. It would have been a concern, but it would have to be taken in the overall context of the business.

Q. One can go to ridiculous lengths, but if it was only 0.69 per cent, it is hardly likely to affect a reasonable person in your position in his assessment of the attractiveness of the business in relation to turnover? 
A. 0.69 per cent? 
Q. Yes? 
A. That wouldn't have caused me any more concern than perhaps 1 per cent would have.

HIS HONOUR: Q. What do you mean "any more concern"? Any more concern than what? 
A. The question was what would my feeling be if there was a differential of one per cent. I would have been concerned, but it wouldn't have put me off. If the difference is 0.69 per cent, my attitude would have been the same.

PEMBROKE: Q. Because if the changes were only as to turnover in the amount of per cent or less and as to gross profit as to 20 per cent, as to a 20 per cent increase, it's obvious that the business is travelling better than it was at the end of the previous accounting period? 
A. If they were the figures, yes." (T13.24 - 14.17) 
This matter was taken up in re-examination as follows: "Q. You were also asked some questions about what you would have done if there had been a 0.69 percent difference in turnover or turnover differences in the vicinity of 1 percent. If you had been told prior to 2 April 1996 that the total turnover had not changed but that a customer had been lost who accounted for over 10 percent of the turnover but had been replaced by other customers, what would you have done?-- .................

A. May I answer? I would have been highly suspicious, and I wouldn't have proceeded.

Q. If, instead, you had been told that in the three months, January, February and March 1996 turnover was down 5 percent compared with January, February and
March of 1995, and you had been told this prior to 2 April 1996, what would you have done? 
A. 5 percent? 
Q. 5 percent? 
A. I would have recommended to my colleagues that we did not proceed with the purchase." (T20.37 - 21.2) 
Stavropoulos gave similar evidence to that of Antoniou and in re-examination gave the following evidence: "SPEAKMAN: Q. Mr Stavropoulos, if half a million dollars of turnover had been lost because the university contract had been lost, but that had been made up from other customers, you say that as at 2 April 1996 that annual turnover was still around $3.8 million, what would you have done? 
A. If we were told that we had lost the university contract or if Mr Pilgrim had told us that we had lost it and he made it up with another 100 customers or 200 customers-- 
Q. If you were told that the university contract, with a turnover of half a million dollars per annum, had been lost but that it had been made up in some way to bring the total turnover back to something in the vicinity of the original figure? 
A. I wouldn't have been interested in buying the business --" (T24.15 - .29) 
Counsel for Quantum submitted that evidence of this kind is of little or no probative value and I have to say that, in relation to this evidence, I agree.
The evidence disclosed that there was no concentration on the identity of particular customers apart from the general enquiries about the customer spread to which I have earlier referred. I find it extremely difficult to accept that if the turnover had remained substantially the same and gross margins were unchanged - let alone improved - the increased number of customers would have any bearing at all upon the considerations of
Stavropoulos in Northpak's acquisition of the business. I think Stavros was more forthcoming in accepting the propositions put to him by counsel for
Quantum (see T27.5 and the re-examination that followed).

In my opinion Gulliver's evidence should be read in the context of the nature of the co-operative arrangement which I have detailed earlier in these reasons.

So far as the commercial background to this transaction is relevant, I think the evidence clearly disclosed that the attraction of the business to Northpak was the fact that it had a large volume of turnover (some of which represented cash transactions not disclosed to the revenue authorities by Quantum): that it was unprofitable, but was thought to be poorly run and capable of being "turned around". In that respect the stability of the turnover would be clearly important. The evidence disclosed that there was a customer base of some 1,200 or so and with that volume of turnover, with or without the sales to university unions, in itself, indicated some reasonably high level of stability, particularly having regard to the time the business had been operated by Quantum. It also needs to be borne in mind that the question of turnover in the minds of the parties was very much associated with gross profit rates. This is made clear from cl 4 of the agreement and was confirmed in the following evidence of Jansen who, I have noted, was involved in the final stages of financial discussions prior to the agreement: " ....The next contact I had was, I believe, towards the end of March at a meeting at the offices of Mr Donnelly in St Leonards where the purchasers were presented. Mr Donnelly, their accountant, and Mr Gary Pilgrim. The broad terms of an offer was discussed but with particular emphasis on this formula that was subsequently built into the agreement about gross profit rates. I then had a short meeting with Mr Pilgrim confidentially in a separate room and I pointed out to Mr Pilgrim that as an accountant I would advise him to ensure that at least net tangible assets and some sum for goodwill was payable immediately, because that is the risk amount, and that he would need to consider seriously how much, if any, of any future payments should be geared to some formula and, if it was, that he should seek adequate security for such a payment. At that point I believe I left the meeting and Mr Pilgrim continued his discussions.

Q. Just remind me, the formula that was being discussed related to profit margins in the future? 
A. Yes.

Q. Under the new ownership? 
A. Yes.

Q. And affected how much might be paid, depending upon that profit margin? 
A. Yes, your Honour.

Q. Is that factor in itself of any bearing in your mind upon matters that might be seen to be material, having regard to the emphasis you have placed upon the profitability of the university contracts and what you considered to be the increased profitability for the business without it? 
A. Yes, your Honour. I believe the figure was set at 18 percent and Mr
Donnelly, the other accountant in fact, faxed me some assumed calculations, one I think was a 20 percent gross profit, and what that would mean for the
Pilgrims if that gross profit was achieved. So in my mind there was a benchmark of 18 percent set because that was ultimately what was adopted in the agreement, that is there is an expectation that the business would generate at least 18 percent gross profit and hopefully more in order to make it worthwhile for both purchasers and the vendors.

Q. And I am not suggesting the answer or the answer to this question, but does that indicate the importance or the relative importance to the purchaser of profit or gross profit as against turnover? 
A. Yes, your Honour, I believe that is so; gross profit was for them the critical issue.

Q. I am not sure that you could say that, but it indicates to you the importance of-- 
A. It did.

Q. Importance of gross profit over as against turnover? 
A. Certainly in the discussions it was focused on that area of gross profit." (T120.35 - 121.37) 
I have referred to the figure of 18 per cent when noting the definition of minimum gross margin as equalling $168,750 plus 18 per cent of net sales of the purchaser during the first twelve months after completion. I have also referred to the adjustment of purchase price provision in cl 4(i) of the agreement. That mechanism of adjustment was contained in cl 4(j) in the following terms: "Possible reduction in additional Goodwill instalments: 
If the actual Gross Margin derived by the Purchaser from the Business during the first 12 month period after completion is less then the Minimum
Gross Margin the amount payable for Additional Goodwill shall be reduced in accordance with the following formula: 
Reduction in additional Goodwill = 2 x 2/3 x Gross Margin Shortfall 
Where 
Gross Margin Shortfall = Minimum Gross Margin less actual Gross Margin derived during the first 12 month period after completion.

The monthly instalments for Additional Goodwill payable by the Purchaser pursuant to clause (h) shall each be reduced by 1/12 of the Reduction in
Additional Goodwill.

If the Reduction in Additional Goodwill exceeds the amount of the instalments of Additional Goodwill payable in accordance with clause (h) an amount equivalent to such excess shall be refundable by the Vendor to the Purchaser from the instalments of Additional Goodwill already paid by the Purchaser." (Exhibit K, tab 1, p 6) 
There was a mirror share of profits arrangement provided for in cl 4(j) and I have noted cl 4.3 prevented adjustment of the additional goodwill payment below $52,000.

It was submitted on behalf of Northpak that there was no warrant for, in effect, setting off any sales of Quantum in the nine months to 31 March 1996 against the volume of sales that could have been expected to have continued under the co-operative arrangements. As I understood that argument, it was contended that there was no reason to suppose that the benefit of any increase in sales that may have compensated for lost sales to university unions would not in any event, have accrued to Quantum and eventually to Northpak. However,
I think one should have regard to the evidence of Pilgrim and of Jansen as to the unprofitable nature of the sales to university unions and how that prompted a policy of moving away from those sales. Furthermore, I take the view that, if the turnover figures for the nine months to 31 March 1996 represented some natural increase in turnover, that is a matter that Quantum is entitled to the benefit of in considering its obligations under the material change warranty.

A number of comparisons have been drawn by counsel for both parties in relation to the average weekly turnover table of figures set out above. For my part, I have great difficulty in drawing any particular inference from those figures other than those extracted in the overall average calculations performed by Jansen showing a 0.69 per cent reduction in weekly turnover. In my opinion, that indicated that there has been no "material change" within the meaning of the material change warranty. It is quite unhelpful to take individual weeks or months in the average weekly turnover table as a basis of comparison of turnover in the two periods set out in that table. For example it would be quite unsafe to compare the month of March either on gross sales figures or net sales figures showing a drop of $4,824 or $3,148 respectively in average weekly turnover. In particular, it would be quite unsafe to extrapolate that difference in absolute figures or as a percentage difference to represent some continuing loss of sales. I think the same applies to an exercise which embraced the month of February or was extended to the month of
January, particularly bearing in mind that the month of January was not regarded as typical in relation to sales to university unions. This evidence referred to the effect of vacation periods in the university calendar. One would have thought that may also have extended to December and February for that matter.

However, my concern is not limited to that problem. If one looks at the months of July to November in relation to the weekly turnover figures, it is very difficult to draw a line of consistency which could be used in a comparison of the months of January to March in the subject periods. I refer to differences of up to approximately $6,400 in the weekly average for August, of approximately $4,000 for the month of September, $3,000 for the month of
October and a similar figure for November, with swings in both directions. Not only do the swings go in both directions, but it does not follow that a swing one way is balanced immediately by a swing the other. One can see that from the first four months of each year from July to October. I say that because I think it would be unsafe to draw any particular inferences from the two differences in average takings for the months of February and March. I have come to the conclusion that, for the purpose of the material change warranty, upon the evidence before me there has been no breach. In this respect, I have not had regard to the statement of evidence of Stavropoulos of 16 April 1997, which the parties are agreed is limited to damages under the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) count, and so it is not considered in these reasons for judgment.

However, that is not an end to the relevance of the turnover evidence as, in my opinion, it gives rise to somewhat different considerations in relation to the material event warranty. The "event" on which Quantum relies is that set out earlier in these reasons and which is repeated for convenience of reference: "The warranties were false, to the knowledge of the Cross-Defendant as at 2
April, 1996 in that on a date unknown to the Cross-Claimant but believed to be in or about November, 1995 the Cross-Defendant had lost a major contract with various universities in New South Wales known as "the University contract" which event: 
Significantly reduced the income of the business and caused a material change in the turnover and level of profitability of the business; and 
Was a material event that had a material impact on the business; and 
Had not been disclosed by the Cross-Defendant to the Cross-Claimant in writing or at all." (Par 7) 
I think it is clear from those particulars that Northpak did not appreciate that the reduction in turnover was of the magnitude which I have examined in these reasons, nor was it aware of the improved gross margins related to the ending of the arrangement with the co-operative. I believe it is also clear from those particulars that there was a misconception as to the nature of that arrangement. The parties have as a matter of convenience, referred to the arrangement with the co-operative as the "university contract"; it was more in the nature of a call option with Quantum obliged to provide under a continuing offer, products at a fixed price for the period stipulated in its tender.
There was no obligation on the part of the co-operative or any of its member unions to make any purchases from Quantum or to restrict any of their requirements to purchases from Quantum. They were completely free agents to purchase such requirements as and where they saw fit.

In this respect, it is relevant to note the evidence of Pilgrim, which I accept, that there was nothing to stop Quantum from pursuing business amongst university unions outside of the tender arrangements and that Quantum in fact had done so where the pricing was considered satisfactory. I think the same conclusions can be drawn from the facts evidenced by Pilgrim that university unions, in fact, purchased goods from Quantum's competitors in the period when
Quantum's tender arrangement with the co-operative was in place. It follows that Quantum, and after it, Northpak, was at liberty to pursue business with the university unions after December 1995. To that extent I am of the opinion that there is an element of misdescription of some significance in referring to the arrangement with the co-operative as a `lost contract'.

As to the question of disclosure, the conflict of evidence is to a certain extent insurmountable. I think it is impossible to say with conviction or certainty what precisely did take place by way of disclosure. As I have stated, subject to the particular matters to which I referred in the context of the reliability or credibility of witnesses, I have not been assisted by the so called benefit of observing the witnesses in the course of giving their evidence in resolving that conflict. There were some aspects which I have specifically mentioned where some assistance was gained, but outside of that, not at all. On the probabilities, I am satisfied that there was some disclosure by Pilgrim to Stavros, and probably by Warrak to Stavros, in the form of references to the university unions' custom, its unprofitability and in general terms the fact that it had not pursued that custom. I am not satisfied that if any such discussion took place with Gulliver that it was in terms that clearly alerted him to the nature of the arrangement that existed up until December 1995 with the co-operative and of the fact that that arrangement had come to an end with the non-acceptance by the co-operative of
Quantum's October tender.

As I have earlier stated, I accept the evidence of Pilgrim that there was a conversation with Gulliver almost immediately after the agreement on
Gulliver's return from a Melbourne trip which Pilgrim fixed as occurring in a period almost two weeks after the agreement. It may be that one can infer from that evidence that there had been some earlier discussion either with Gulliver or of which he was aware, which concerned the university unions' custom.
Beyond that I am not prepared to go. I think, however, for the purposes of necessary findings in respect of the material events warranty I am not satisfied that there was disclosure either in writing or otherwise by Quantum of the `event' as relied upon by Northpak. This is also borne out by the notes of Gulliver of the meeting of 23 January 1996 and to a certain extent by the matters that transpired at the 4 March 1996 meeting with Donnelly. In my opinion, it was a little surprising that Donnelly was not called, given the contention by Gulliver that there had been a withholding of information by
Quantum during the negotiating period and one would have thought that he may have contributed to this question of non-disclosure given his detailed involvement in the negotiations and in the meeting of 4 March 1996.

I think the real question to be considered in relation to the material event warranty is the effect of the non-disclosure of the event, as particularised in the cross-claim in the context of the phrase "material event ... that has or will have a material impact on the Business".

In relation to that phrase it should be noted that it does not cover all possible ramifications of the subject event. It does not call for conjecture, it calls for disclosure of an event that "has" or "will have" a material impact - not "may have" or "possibly will have". Further, it is not all impacts which are required to be disclosed. It must be a material impact. In this respect, I think the impact must be a matter of substance, serious, important, or of consequence, or influential in affecting a judgment.

No submissions have been put to me concerning any interrelationship between the material change and the material event warranties. In particular, whether a material event includes a drop in turnover or a drop in profitability. I am inclined to think that it does not and that what is required under the material event warranty is some extraneous event that nevertheless may have its impact in such a change in turnover or profitability. In this respect, I believe it is necessary to revisit Jansen's calculation of a 0.69 percentage reduction in average weekly turnover in the comparison of Quantum's trading for the nine months to 31 March 1995 with its financial statements for the year ended 30 June 1995.

What is not addressed by Jansen's analysis, at least not addressed fully, is what impact, if any, as at April 1996 the event of the `lost contract' would have. This arises, I think, because of the very limited period under review in
Jansen's analysis that could be isolated as representing a period of sales when university sales were not a factor. If it is accepted that the month of
January is atypical, then one is left with the months of February and March as the basis for assessment of trading without university unions' custom under the co-operative arrangement. As I have observed, those two months do show a reduction in sales when comparing those months in 1996 with the two months trading in 1995. As I have stated, I believe it would be unsafe to draw any finding on those figures by way of extrapolating the reduction beyond March , or, for that matter, by way of inferring that the difference represented the absence of university union custom. It could be said that there had been no two consecutive preceding months in the nine months ended 31 March 1996 in which the average weekly turnover was below the comparable months' takings for the year ended 30 June 1995 except in the case of the months of November and
December which were not of the same magnitude as the difference to be found in
February and March. Although I have some discomfort with the state of the evidence, I am unable to conclude that the "event" relied upon could be said to be one, as at April 1996, that has or will have a material impact on the business. In this respect the parties have treated the evidence to which I should have regard as the evidence of the financial position up to April 1996.
As stated earlier in these reasons, there has been accepted into evidence the statement of evidence of Stavropoulos of 16 April 1997 which relates to
Northpak's trading for the twelve month period ended 31 March 1997. It is accepted that that has been tendered only in relation to the claim under the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) for alleged trading losses said to have been incurred by Northpak in that period.

If one looks at the question of material impact in the context of any change in customer base reflecting any effect on turnover or on gross margins, I think one is directed back to the matters I have considered in relation to the changes in the turnover or profitability of Quantum which could be related to the end of the arrangement with the co-operative. Northpak approached this cross-claim with a degree of oversimplification which was exposed only late in the case management with the filing and serving of statements of evidence which revealed the unprofitability of the university union custom and unveiled a situation, far removed on the face of it, from the cross-claimant's contention that there had been a loss of business of some $500,000. Until the commencement of the hearing, the claim of Northpak had been limited to a breach of warranty case and a [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) case based purely on the warranties contained in the agreement and claiming a loss of profit represented by the lost "university contract". What I have said so far is not intended as a criticism. Given the amount of business conducted by
Quantum with the university unions it would have been of no surprise if, with the termination of the co-operative arrangement in December 1995, there was shown to be a marked downturn in the turnover and gross profits of the business. The evidence simply has not disclosed that, in my view, and, so far as profitability goes, has evidenced the contrary. In my opinion, the cross- claim based upon the changed event warranty fails.

While it is unnecessary to consider the quantum of loss claimed by the cross- claimants by way of damages for breach of warranty, it should be noted that it has been agreed between the parties that the measure of that loss is limited to consideration of the effect of the university union transactions in the trading operations of Quantum. In this respect, Finney and Jansen have adopted the same starting point, namely, the determination of the gross profit, in the manner which I have set out in the table earlier in these reasons which is repeated below: "Turnover (gross) $521,238 
Less sales tax $61,506 
Net sales $459,732 
Gross profit rate 14.84% 
Gross profit $68,224" (Exhibit 9, Annexure C) 
From that point the two experts diverge with the principal difference lying in bringing to account by Jansen of fixed costs, as appears from the following table: "Gross Profit $68,224 
Less: Direct expenses associated with university contract 
Wages and on-costs $98,449 
Motor vehicle expenses $7,630 
Total expenses $106,079 
Net profit/loss on university contract ($37,855)" 
Finney, on the other hand, excludes fixed costs, as appears from his table as follows: "Gross Profit $68,224 
Variable Expenses 8.4% $38,617 
Net Contribution $29,607 
Net Contribution over 21 months (being the balance of the 1996 - 1997 co-operative tender period) $51,812" (Exhibit N) 
Of that diversion I make the following observations. In my view, if the joint approach by the accountants is the correct one, namely focussing solely on the quantum of sales to the university unions, then Finney's approach is correct in excluding fixed costs. However, that would still leave a divergence in approach by Finney and Jansen in Finney's adoption of a percentage of 8.4 per cent for variable costs. It will be recalled that Jansen has a percentage of .7 per cent which arises out of his inclusion in variable costs of the costs related to the two employees whose services were terminated by Quantum in
December 1995. As earlier stated, I think Jansen is correct in substance as treating those costs as variable. In any event, even if they were to be treated normally as direct fixed costs, those costs should be brought to account as a cost benefit with the ending of the co-operative arrangement in
December 1995 which made way for the termination of their employment. Jansen also considered in his calculation that the costs of the employee whose employment terminated in September and who was not replaced, should also be treated as a cost benefit. I have some difficulty in accepting that proposition having regard to the time of termination of that employment. If it was necessary to resolve the differences between the two accountants, I would adopt in principle the Finney calculation. However, I would substitute for his variable expense rate the variable expense percentage rate estimated by
Jansen, and exclude any cost benefit represented by the September employment termination.

In any event, I believe there is some real doubt as to the validity of either approach having regard to the operation of cl 4 of the agreement and the adjustment for payment of goodwill based upon gross profits in the period which overlaps with the period of calculation of profit in both experts' analysis of the university unions orders. These matters have not been the subject of argument, nor of consideration, by either of the expert accountants and I make these observations only on the basis that my decision on the case for breach of warranty proves to be erroneous.

There only remains to be considered the question of liability under the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) count. So far as the case depends upon the warranties in the agreement, for the reasons
I have given, the cause of action fails. However, I think it is clear from the evidence of Gulliver, as noted in his contemporaneous notes of the Cafe Baba meeting, that Pilgrim had stated that there had been no significant customer losses in three years prior to that meeting, and that at the meeting on 4
March at Donnelly's office, Pilgrim stated that the business had not changed.
I am not satisfied that the recollections of Antoniou and Stavropoulos can be relied upon in relation to their evidence concerning the meeting of 4 March. I would have expected that any significant discussion as to customer losses or change in the business to have taken place between Donnelly and Jansen or
Pilgrim who, as I have noted, has given somewhat extensive evidence of that discussion with Donnelly and which, in my view, is to be accepted. So far as anything was said by Pilgrim at the 4 March 1996 meeting to the effect that business had not changed was, for the reasons that I have given, in substance an acceptable response by Pilgrim to the enquiries made of him. In respect of the Cafe Baba meeting, if one takes into account the nature of the co- operative arrangement, the evidence of turnover, the policy of gradual replacement of the university union custom because of its unprofitability, I would not be prepared to find that it was misleading and/or deceptive on the part of Pilgrim to have stated that there had been no significant loss of customers when questioned on that subject by Gulliver: particularly, when one considers the spread of customers. Consistent with that finding, I have been left with the impression that Pilgrim downplayed any reference to the university unions' custom in any reference to that aspect of the business in the pre-agreement negotiations and, as I have found, I do not think he disclosed the fact of the unsuccessful October tender. That, in my opinion, does not amount to misleading conduct in saying that there had been no significant loss of customers. I do not know whether anything turns on the form of the allegation raised in this respect by the cross-claim. In the contentions of the cross-claim the allegation is that Pilgrim represented that there be no loss of significant customers. In my view, nothing turns on that difference, in that the evidence disclosed that the statement by Pilgrim was that there be no significant loss of customers and I have addressed that matter. It follows that the cross-claimants must fail and the plaintiff is entitled to judgment.

I grant leave to the plaintiff to amend its summons in accordance with the schedule of damages presented by counsel for the plaintiff, as initialled by me and placed with the papers, save for the claim, item "3". I make the following orders:
There shall be judgment for the plaintiff in the sum of $151,450.80;
The cross-claim is dismissed;
The defendants are to pay the plaintiff's costs of the proceedings.
 * * * 
