

Yusen Daly Smith International Pty Ltd versus Smith and Anor Matter No 2400/97 [1997] NSWSC 521 (28 October 1997) ` 
Yusen Daly Smith International Pty Ltd (In Liq) versus Thomas Edwin Curtis Smith & Anor` ` 2400/97` `28 October 1997` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` /97 YUSEN DALY SMITH INTERNATIONAL PTY LTD (IN LIQ) versus THOMAS EDWIN CURTIS SMITH & ANOR 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is a notice of motion brought by a person who has the right to be subrogated to the rights of the ANZ Bank under a mortgage debenture granted by the plaintiff to that bank on 23 October 1989. 
The essential commercial situation is that the plaintiff in liquidation has an amount of money in hand, which is insufficient both to pay the claims of Mr
Smith under the mortgage debenture and also to pay $80,000 towards the liquidator's own costs of proceedings, which are fixed before Hamilton J next
Monday. However, the probabilities are that, in any event, an extra $1.6 million will flow into the liquidation so that in due course there will be no deficiency.

The debate before me can be isolated to considering whether or not the claim for approximately $788,000 for Mr Smith's own legal costs is prima facie within the mortgage debenture. If the answer to that question is no, then there will obviously be enough money to pay all legitimate present claims and it is idle to grant any injunction as asked for by Mr Smith in his notice of motion.

The mortgage debenture is in very wide terms in imposing a charge for all monies which became payable to the bank. The Court of Appeal, in its judgment of 21 November 1996 in the associated proceedings 1931 of 1995, indicated that in this document those words must be construed in accordance with the nature of the document, which demonstrates that they had a wide operation.

Notwithstanding that, two things need to be said. The first is that when a person is subrogated to another person's rights, the person does not acquire an independent cause of action in his or her own right; see eg Sydney Turf
Club versus Crowley [[1971] 1 NSWLR 724], 734. All that happens is that the rights of the other party belong to the person who has the right of subrogation. Accordingly, all that Mr Smith has is the rights which the ANZ Bank had against the company in liquidation. I cannot see how these could include Mr Smith's own personal and legal costs. It may be that they do include some but I cannot see how they could get anywhere near the amount of $788,000 that would be secured under the charge.

Secondly, the Court of Appeal's declaration 3(ii) as to Mr Smith's rights, when read literally, says that Mr Smith's rights are limited to an amount of money which has already been paid. Thus his rights on that construction would now be exhausted. However, it is hard to see, if that is the proper construction, what order 6 made by the Court of Appeal could possibly mean.
Possibly it was made to refer to the ANZ Bank alone. If there is any problem about the Court of Appeal's order, that should be raised on a motion before the Court of Appeal rather than as a matter raised on a side wind before a single judge.

Accordingly, I am not satisfied that there is any right of Mr Smith that is being detrimentally affected by the liquidator's intended action. This being so, I do not have to consider the balance of convenience which would ordinarily flow in Mr Smith's favour, seeing that the freezing of the payment is only intended to last till next Monday when Hamilton J will hear this or an associated case.

Accordingly, the motion is dismissed with costs.

I decline to make an order for indemnity costs.
 * * * 
