

Regina versus Brincat Matter No Cca 60158/98 [1998] NSWSC 539 (18 September )

Last Updated: 27 November 1998 
REGINA versus MICHAEL ALBERT BRINCAT 
CCA 60158/98 September 1998 
Grove J, Kirby J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
GROVE J: This is an application by Michael Albert Brincat who appeared before his Honour Judge Delaney in the District Court where he was sentenced in respect of a charge of robbery with wounding contrary to s96 of the Crimes Act to which he had pleaded guilty. His Honour imposed a sentence amounting to a total term of four years and three months which he divided into a minimum term of twenty seven months and an additional term of two years. The offence arose out of circumstances which it is not necessary to detail at length but which it is appropriate to sketch. 
The applicant became acquainted with a young man called Leoni who was aged approximately two years his senior. Leoni had a partner and child and had been a tenant of the woman who became the victim in the crime to which the appellant ultimately pleaded guilty. Leoni, apparently, bore some malice towards his former landlady in respect of the provision of substandard accommodation to him. He suggested to the applicant that they should rob her.
The applicant agreed and into the plot came the applicant's then girlfriend.

It is apparent from what the applicant later told police that they became aware that the victim had visited a bank and had returned to her home. She apparently lived alone and was a woman aged sixty four years. The plot was executed in the following manner. It was agreed that Leoni would not go to the door as, obviously his former landlady would recognise him. The applicant's girlfriend went to the door and persuaded the victim to allow her entry on the pretext that she needed to make a telephone call because there had been accident involving a dog. Thus the applicant made entry to the premises.

Leoni remained essentially as a look out although at some stage of the venture he appears to have entered the premises. The victim was secured and on the description of events given by the applicant to police, and unchallenged, either at the sentencing hearing or before this court, it was he who was the principal actor in the events which took place inside the house.

He demanded money and this was given to him. He asserted that this was insufficient and appeared to reject protestations from the victim that there was no safe in the house nor any other money. She had been placed in the position where her ability to see was considerably handicapped and, it indeed, it was the admitted intention of the applicant effectively to blindfold her.
At the end of proceedings having acquired several hundred dollars, the applicant took from a bag what has been described as a pipe, its origin appears to have been some of the piping which was part of a BMX bicycle.

At the time the victim had a cardigan over her head and eyes and he struck her a blow with this metal piece of pipe. The explanation which he offered to police was that he thought he should render her unconscious in order to facilitate escape. The applicant and his two companions decamped from the premises and boarded a passing bus. Shortly thereafter the bus was brought to a halt by police who had been called to the scene.

The applicant and the female offender were arrested on the bus but the offender Leoni made good an escape. As I have indicated, the applicant pleaded guilty. He was seventeen years and four months at the time of this offence and had no prior convictions. He offered to give evidence and it was accepted that his identification of Leoni as the third offender was of valuable assistance to law enforcement authorities. Thus the applicant appeared for sentence before the District Court.

In addition to his prior unblemished record and the offer to give evidence, there was before the sentencing judge a collection of favourable references all of which his Honour indicated that he took into account. There were also other subjective matters which inevitably would give rise to considerable sympathy for the applicant. There is no need to relate those matters. They are set out amongst other places in the report of Mr John Howard, a psychologist.
The critical fact which had been revealed to the applicant at the age of thirteen, no doubt had a considerable effect upon him. Nevertheless, it must be observed that he had been in possession of that information for several years before the current offence.

There is also material which indicates that the applicant was passing through a more than usually difficult and stormy teenage period and there were suggestions of what is commonly referred to as an attention deficit disorder.
His Honour expressly took all these matters into account. In passing sentence he said that specifically for the offer to give evidence at the trial of the co- offender, he would reflect in the sentence a reduction of one third. Given the total sentence which he imposed an arithmetical projection would demonstrate that his Honour's original assessment must have been seventy six and a half months, and that would be, if I may say so, a most unusual assessment.

The matter is a little further complicated in the arithmetical sense in that at the conclusion of his remarks his Honour finally stated that he added to the matters which he took into account the fact that the applicant had served a month in custody and stated that he took that into account in imposing a minimum term of twenty months. There is no indication as to how that month was taken into account in terms of relativity which necessarily must have been involved in the reduction for the offer to give assistance.

In the course of submissions, the difficulty in analysing precisely how his
Honour's final figure was reached was raised with senior counsel appearing for the Crown. In his usual helpful fashion he has conceded the difficulty there involved and, in my view, this Court should intervene to resentence in order that in particular the applicant should be able to understand clearly the construction of the sentence imposed upon him. I should turn, however, to the two principal matters argued on his behalf. First, it was contended that an assessment of something in the order of six and a third years as a total sentence for the applicant was manifestly excessive. The sketch of the facts and circumstances which I have given is sufficient itself to demonstrate the invalidity of that submission and I would reject it.

The second matter raised on behalf of the applicant was what might be described as a parity argument. In particular, reference was made to the sentence ultimately imposed upon the co offender Leoni. Leoni, unlike the applicant, did have a prior record. He was, as I have observed, some two years older than the applicant. He was sentenced to a total period of five years comprising a minimum term of thirty three months and an additional term of twenty seven months. The parity argument poses an obstacle at the outset in that the co-offender Leoni was not charged with the offence of robbery with wounding but rather with robbery in company.

Counsel for the applicant recognising this, said nevertheless that there was available a comparison of the respective participations in the offence and that despite the differences in the charge the applicant could and did harbor a justifiable sense of grievance arising out of the way in which his co- offender was more leniently treated. He was, of course, more leniently treated in a relative rather than specific sense. On any view, I do not consider that this submission can be upheld.

The applicant was the sole inspiration and executor of the blow to the head and the restraint of the sight of the victim. He candidly told police when interviewed shortly after his arrest that there had been no previous discussion about hitting the lady. The only explanation that was forthcoming was that he thought that it was something that he ought do in order to facilitate flight. It can readily be inferred that the action involved in striking the lady and causing her serious enough injury to render her admission to hospital was something for which the applicant was directly responsible in distinction from his co-offenders. That act of violence was not part of the pre planning. In my view, there is no justifiable basis upon which the applicant could be aggrieved by observation of the way in which his co- offender was treated.

I return to the matter upon which I earlier remarked concerning the arithmetical structure of the sentence. In my view, it would be appropriate for this Court to intervene in order to provide a clear imposition and an explanation of the structure of that imposition which is not obscured in the way in which the present sentence is.

The order which I intend to propose is slightly more advantageous to the applicant than simply giving effect the one month variation about which submissions were made on his behalf. I repeat that, in my view, there was no error in an assessment of something in the order of six years as an appropriate total sentence for this offence by taking into account all subjective matters with the exclusion of the one third discount for the promised help in respect of the identification for the prosecution of the co- offender. As is to be implied from the circumstances of the sentence of the co-offender, that assistance came to appropriate fruition.

I would, therefore, propose the following orders:
The application for leave to appeal against sentence be granted.
The appeal be allowed.
The sentence imposed in the District Court be quashed and that in lieu thereof the applicant be sentenced to a total term of four years penal servitude divided into a minimum term of two years commencing on 2 April 1998 and expiring on 1 April 2000 together with an additional term of two years commencing on 2 April 2000. The applicant is to be eligible for parole from 2
April 2000. We would direct that the sentence be served by the applicant in a detention centre until he attains the age of twenty one years.

KIRBY J: I agree with the reasons given and with the orders proposed. 
GROVE J: The orders will, therefore, be as I have proposed. * * * 
