

Close and Anor versus Arnot Matter No 10107/96 [1997] NSWSC 569 (21 November )

Close & Anor versus Arnot /96 November 1997 
Graham AJ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
HEARING DATES: 18 SEPTEMBER 1997, 10, 14 NOVEMBER 1997 
CATCHWORDS: 
PRIVATE INTERNATIONAL LAW - Foreign judgments - Effect and enforcement -
Common law - Jurisdiction - Entrapment - Defence of fraud - Meaning of "fraud" -Undefended foreign proceedings - Applicable principles 
Applied: 
Watkins v. North American Land and Timber Company (Limited) <case>; [(1958) 98 CLR 310] 
Evers versus Firth [(1987) 10 NSWLR 22] 
Perrett versus Robinson (1985) 1 Qd 83 
Patch versus Ward (1867) III Ch. App, 203 
Wentworth versus Rogers (No.5) [(1986) 6 NSWLR 534] 
Wentworth versus Rogers (No.9) [(1887) 8 NSWLR 388] 
Owens Bank Limited versus Bracco [(1992) 2 A.C. 443] 
Considered: 
Herman versus Meallin [(1891) 8 WN 38] 
Adams versus Cape Industries Plc [(1990) 1 Ch. 433] 
Emanuel versus Symon [(1908) 1 KB 302] 
Emerson versus Udall (1841) 37 Amercian Decisions 604 
Jacobs versus Beaver (1908) 17 O.L.R. 496 
Referred to: 
Roglass Consultants Inc. versus Kennedy, Lock and Kennedy, Lock & Willett Inc.
[(1984) 65 B.C.L.R. 393] 
Union of India versus Bumper Development Corporation [(1995) 7 W.W.R. 80] 
Rogers versus The Queen [(1994) 181 CLR 251] 
Syal versus Heyward [(1948) 2 KB 443] 
Jet Holdings Inc. versus Patel [(1990) 1 QB 335] 
Distinguished: 
Keele versus Findley [(1990) 21 NSWLR 444] 
REPRESENTATION: 
Counsel 
Plaintiffs: J.J. MILLAR 
Defendant: J.R. WILSON 
Solicitors 
Plaintiff: THORNTONS 
Defendant: AVERN McINTYRNE & CO. by their Sydney Agents 
J. BIADY & ASSOCIATES 
Judgment category classification: A 
Number of pages: 23 /96 - CLOSE & ANOR versus ARNOT 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The defendant Dr. Richard Shackleton Arnot is a General Surgeon who resides in Inverell, New South Wales, with his wife and three children by his second marriage. His first wife, now Penelope Thornton-Close is the second plaintiff in the current proceedings. The first plaintiff, John Close, is the second plaintiff's second husband. 
The second plaintiff and the defendant had two children William Arnot born on August 1971 and Lucy Arnot born on 10 May 1973 both of whom have lived with their mother and her second husband since their parents' divorce in mid-1982 although the children have lived away from home as part of their respective educations. In the case of Lucy she has at some stage been a student at
Trinity College in Dublin, Ireland, and William has been a student at the
United World College of the Atlantic in the United Kingdom.

At no stage has any order been made by an Australian court for the payment of maintenance by the second defendant in respect of his children or either of them. However, the defendant consistently made payments of $A200.00 per month in the period from 12 August 1983 to 14 July 1986 and $A250.00 per month between 11 December 1986 and 2 July 1991.

On 12 August 1983 the defendant lodged an authority for periodical payments with the Inverell branch of Commonwealth Bank of Australia directing it to make monthly payments of $A200.00 per month to the account of his former wife at the National Bank and Trust Company in Charlottesville, Virginia where she then lived.

On 30 January 1986 the first plaintiff wrote to the defendant advising that "We are closing our Charlottesville bank accounts" and nominating a new bank account for the second plaintiff. On 11 December 1986 the defendant lodged an authority for periodical payments with the Inverell branch of Commonwealth
Bank of Australia directing it to make payments of $A250.00 per month to the credit of the second plaintiff's bank account at the 640 5th Avenue New York branch of Citibank.

The defendant failed to make any payments in the period August-November 1986.
In respect of the increase from $A200.00 per month to $A250.00 per month the first plaintiff says "After our negotiations in Charlottesville they increased from $200 to $A250".

I observe that in the letter of 30 January 1986 no complaint was made by the first plaintiff of any failure by the defendant to honour any commitments in respect of the payment of maintenance for the children.

The first plaintiff alleges that he advanced moneys for the support and necessaries of the children William and Lucy, the defendant promised to repay the advances but despite repeated demands the defendant has failed and refused to repay the advances. The first plaintiff further alleges that commencing in at least October 1986 he lent the second plaintiff certain sums of money repayable upon demand to enable the second plaintiff to pay for the support and necessaries of the children. It is alleged that the defendant was at all times aware that the loans were being made and the defendant approved and encouraged the second plaintiff to obtain the loans from the first plaintiff.
It is alleged that the defendant on numerous occasions represented to the second plaintiff that he intended repaying the loans to the first plaintiff on behalf of the second plaintiff but has failed to do so.

In a spread sheet which has become Exhibit 3 before me the details of the amounts claimed in respect of the calendar years 1986-1994 respectively are set out under the headings Food, Housing, Clothing, Transportation, Education,
Medical/Dental and Miscellaneous. These amounts total $US233,487.52. In a further document which has become Exhibit 4 before me entitled "Total
Necessaries" further items have been added as follows:- "Trinity College expense for Lucy Arnot $US 6,935.00 
United World College expense for William Arnot $US20,457.00 
Van for William $US 5,000.00 
Volkswagon for Lucy $US 3,000.00 
Allowances for William and Lucy $US13,000.00" 
Adding these items to the amount of $US233,487.52 a grand total of $US281,879.52 was obtained for "Total Necessaries".

As it transpires Dr. Arnot took an extended holiday overseas in 1994, which he described as a sabbatical, with his wife and three children in the course of which they visited Europe, South Africa and parts of the United States of
America.

When the first plaintiff learnt that the defendant was going to visit New York he consulted his attorney, Mr. David E. Pugh a member of the New York State
Bar and also of the Federal Bar for the Eastern and Southern Districts of New
York and instructed him to institute proceedings against the defendant for the recovery of moneys allegedly paid by him to provide for necessaries of the defendant's children William and Lucy. The claim made was for $US525,000.00 and was not the subject of any prior letter of demand. The Summons and
Complaint, in which the plaintiffs in these proceedings were shown as the plaintiffs, were filed in the Supreme Court of the State of New York, County of Westchester on 20 May 1994 and given the Index No.8752/94.

The defendant left Sydney on 18 May 1994 arriving in Los Angeles on the same day. On 20 May 1994 he travelled to San Antonio, Texas, where he attended a conference. He was keen to visit his son William whilst in the United States and at that stage William was living with the plaintiffs in New York.

The first plaintiff appears to have engaged in an exercise of entrapment to ensure that he could effect service of the initiating process on the defendant whilst present in the State of New York. He telephoned the defendant and arranged to book the defendant into the Gramercy Park Hotel on Lower Manhattan
Island in New York and have a car meet the defendant at the airport to take him to the hotel.

The defendant and his family arrived in New York on 27 May 1994 whereupon they were met and driven to the hotel. Whilst waiting to be attended to at the reception counter the defendant was confronted by a man who proceeded to effect service upon him of the Summons and Complaint issued out of the Supreme
Court of the State of New York.

The defendant did not believe himself to be amenable to the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of New York and failed to enter an appearance. He did consult his solicitor in Inverell about the matter and wrote to the solicitor on 29 or 30 May asking him to attend to the matter. He could not remember seeing an answer to that letter.

The defendant's solicitor in Inverell made inquiries as to the cost of legal representation in New York. The defendant established that the likely cost of defending the proceedings would be $A50,000.00. He also ascertained that any
New York law firm could be expected to require payment of $US20,000.00 up- front which was then approximately $A30,000.00. Not considering that the Court had any jurisdiction over him he declined to appear. He says that he was not in a position to answer the Complaint because of the prohibitive cost which he expected to be approximately equal to his total income for the year. He says that he couldn't afford it.

He was however, aware of the implications of non-appearance.

The suggestion was put to him that he did not file any Answer in the Supreme
Court of New York because he knew the allegations contained in the Complaint to be true. He rejected this suggestion saying that he did not think that there was any way that the allegations could be accepted and that they were manifestly false.

To the extent to which it may be relevant I accept the defendant's evidence as to the reasons for his inaction in the New York proceedings and that he considered the allegations to be false at the time. However, it may be noted that the defendant did not file an Answer challenging the plaintiff's allegations in the Complaint that he had continuously failed, neglected and refused to pay for the support and necessaries for William and Lucy, that he had requested the first plaintiff to advance money to pay for the support and necessaries and agreed to repay such advances and that he had represented to the second plaintiff that he would repay moneys which he encouraged the second plaintiff to borrow from the first plaintiff to pay for such support and necessaries.

In the result a hearing took place in the Supreme Court of the State of New
York on 28 July 1995 before the Honourable Aldo Nastasi, J.S.C. The plaintiffs were represented in the New York proceedings by Mr. Pugh, who gave evidence before me as an expert on New York Matrimonial Law, but there was no appearance for the defendant. The transcript of the proceedings is 65 pages in length but contains a record of about as much evidence on each page as one might expect to find on a third of a page of transcript produced in this
Court. Apart from Exhibits the only evidence before the Supreme Court of the
State of New York was that of the first plaintiff. One of the documents which become Exhibit 1 in the New York proceedings was an affidavit of the first plaintiff sworn 29 November 1994, a copy of which has also become Exhibit 1 before me.

In the said affidavit the first plaintiff swore as follows:- "...
Commencing in at least October, 1986 defendant ceased meeting his financial obligations to support his children. He has continuously failed, neglected and refused to pay for housing, food, utilities, insurance, clothing, education, medical insurance and unreimbursed medical expenses, repairs, furnishings, household help, automobile expenses and all other expenses reasonably necessary for the support and maintenance of defendant's children, William and Lucy.
... On information and belief, defendant has earned more than sufficient sums which would enable him to provide necessaries to the children, William and Lucy.
Since at least October of 1986, I have made numerous requests of defendant that he pay for the necessaries of the children, William and 
Lucy. He has continually acknowledged his responsibility to provide support for the children and has repeatedly requested that I advance funds to meet their necessary expenses. Defendant has further represented that he would repay my advances. I have made numerous requests of defendant that he repay advances. Defendant has failed and refused to repay the advances and has caused me to bring this action.
Commencing in at least October 1986, plaintiff, Penelope Thornton- 
Close, requested that I loan her certain sums of money to pay for the support and necessaries of the children of defendant and plaintiff, 
Penelope Thornton-Close, namely William and Lucy. Defendant was at all times aware that the said loans were being made. Defendant approved and encouraged plaintiff, Penelope Thornton- Close, to obtain the loans from me. On information and belief, defendant, on numerous occasions, represented to plaintiff, Penelope Thornton- 
Close, that he intended repaying said loans to me on behalf of plaintiff, 
Penelope Thornton-Close. Defendant has repaid none of the aforesaid loans.
 ..." 
In his oral testimony the first plaintiff said that he had a conversation with the defendant in June 1982 as follows (Transcript pages 17-18):- "I told him that Penelope and I plan to get married, and he asked how I plan to support the children. I said - - and I answered that he should support the children.

The conversation continued, and he said he wasn't able to offer support at that time because he had just moved to Australia and he was setting up a new practice and he was setting up a new life.

And I said well, understand, I am going to law school for the next three years, and have no income, but I am sympathetic to his problem, and I said I have some investments, some savings, and I can tide us over on the understanding that he would then reimburse me later.
 ...

I urged him to consider that the children should be uppermost in all our minds, and that no harm should come to them because of the actions of adults.
And I said that they could even benefit from having a doctor and a lawyer providing for them.

And he further said that he would reimburse me later on if I could pay." 
I should interpolate that the first plaintiff duly completed his Law degree and has since become a member of the New York Bar although he presently works as editor of the American Lawyer magazine.

The first plaintiff's evidence continued in respect of 1983 by suggesting that the plaintiffs received only one cheque for $A200.00 from the defendant in the course of that year. The first plaintiff then said that the defendant started sending $A200.00 a month. When asked for how long he replied "It was for a very short period of time, and it would continue for a few months, and then stop, and then start again. It was 186 American dollars when it did arrive".

When asked whether a time came when the periodic payments ceased altogether the first plaintiff said "I believe it was '84 or '85; somewhere around '85".

When asked whether subsequently the plaintiffs received "no support whatsoever" from the defendant for the children the first plaintiff replied "One semester of tuition payment I recall when my stepdaughter was in Dublin for a semester".

Later (Transcript page 23) the first plaintiff was asked whether during the time subsequent to 1983 he made any further demands on the defendant that he live up to his promise to support the children. The first plaintiff responded suggesting that he had done so between 6 and 10 times. His evidence was:- "Typically I would say or ask him to recall our agreement in the summer of ; I would tell him that the expenses continued to mount, and it was clear that he was able to pay, and I asked him to please increase the payment and reimburse me for the expenses up to that point." 
When asked whether the defendant ever responded by repudiating or recanting his agreement to make payments the first plaintiff responded "Never".

In the result the Supreme Court of the State of New York entered judgment for the first plaintiff against the defendant on 16 October 1995 in the amount of $US281,879.52 with interest from 27 May 1994 in the sum of $US31,711.05 making a total of $US313,590.97.

The current proceedings were instituted by a Statement of Claim filed 12
January 1996. The Amended Statement of Claim of 26 March 1996 seeks a judgment in this Court for $US313,590.97 together with interest pursuant to section 95 of the [Supreme Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) and costs. The suit brought by the plaintiffs on the New York judgment is brought at Common Law; registration of the judgment of the Supreme Court of New York is not sought as a foreign judgment.

The defendant filed an Amended Defence on 20 May 1997.

Mr. Julian Millar of Counsel who appears for the plaintiffs concedes that the second plaintiff cannot succeed. Mr. Millar stated the issues as follows and this statement was accepted, with some revision which I have included, by Mr.
John Wilson of Counsel who appeared with Miss Fox for the defendant:-
Were the circumstances of the service of the initiating process in New
York sufficient to give the Supreme Court of the State of New York jurisdiction in a private international law sense.
Were the proceedings in the Supreme Court of New York so affected by fraud as to constitute a valid defence to the current enforcement proceedings. In this regard the defendant alleges that the assertion by the first plaintiff that the defendant ceased making maintenance payments by October 1986 was false and that they in fact resumed, as I find to be the case, between
December 1986 and July 1991. The defendant alleges that the plaintiffs' assertion that the defendant represented to the second plaintiff that he would reimburse the first plaintiff for moneys spent for the support and necessaries of the children William and Lucy was false. I accept the evidence of the defendant in this regard. Furthermore the defendant denies that he relevantly requested the first plaintiff to advance money to pay for the support and necessaries for William and Lucy and agreed to repay such advances. Once again, I accept the evidence of the defendant in this regard.
In relation to undefended proceedings in a foreign court can fraud of the kind alleged be relied upon by the defendant. As a subsidiary issue the question has been put as to whether the same rules apply as would be applied by this Court in considering whether a domestic judgment could be set aside for fraud.

I should say that I found the first plaintiff who gave evidence before me to be a singularly unimpressive witness. He seems to me to have approached the giving of his evidence in the Supreme Court of the State of New York with a cavalier indifference to the truth.

In his evidence in chief before me he admitted that maintenance payments had been made as alleged by the defendant in the period 1986 to 1991. He says that he only discovered the fact that these payments had been made when he obtained replacement bank statements for the period mid-1989 to July 1991. Somewhat curiously, the first plaintiff presented his case before the Supreme Court of
New York on the basis that each and every amount claimed by him and referred to above was backed up by a cancelled cheque. The practice is, of course, in the United States, for cheques which have been paid (cancelled) to be returned to the drawer with the bank statements which are issued periodically to the account holder. The first plaintiff's excuse for not considering his bank statements (more particularly, the second plaintiff's bank statements) when addressing the question of receipts as opposed to payments was that they had become lost in one of the many changes of residence which the plaintiffs experienced.

The first plaintiff said that he gave his evidence both in his affidavit and before the Supreme Court of New York relying upon his best recollection, not making any inquiries before doing so. I had the distinct impression that the first plaintiff knew that the maintenance payments had been received but considered them to be so trifling in amount as to not warrant disclosure to the court. From the terms of the letter written by the first plaintiff to the defendant on 30 January 1986 advising him of the change in the second plaintiff's bank account details it is evident that at that stage the first plaintiff had no concern that regular payments were not being received from the defendant. In his evidence before me he said "The payments were so small.
My issue was they were minute, not that they ceased".

Before me the first plaintiff conceded that he had, by the evidence which he gave, deceived the New York court. I should add that the first plaintiff was called to give evidence before me in the plaintiff's case in reply and no objection was taken to any of his cross-examination on the ground that it was directed at relitigating issues which had been before the New York court and determined by it. Furthermore, no relevant objection was taken to the defendant giving evidence on the factual matters raised in the New York proceedings and which the defendant sought to challenge.

The first plaintiff understood that his entitlement to recover for payments said to have been made by him for the benefit of his step children in the proceedings in the New York court depended upon the amount of the provision made for those children by their natural father, the defendant, which renders the falsity of his evidence before the New York court all the more important.

In relation to the alleged promises made by the defendant to effect payments to the first plaintiff it is important to note the terms of a letter sent by the defendant to the first plaintiff on 16 July 1985. That letter provided as follows:- "Thank you for your recent letter requesting a contribution to the cost of
Williams dental treatment in the USA. In Australia my family are covered by a comprehensive medical and dental insurance policy, but I am not sure if this covers them while they are in America. If you would like to send me all the relevant accounts, invoices etc. I will forward them to the insurance company and see what can be done, but I am not that optimistic.

In future I would be glad if you could consult me prior to incurring any expense on my childrens behalf for which you might later be looking to me for additional payment. 
As you are aware, I pay a regular maintenance amount which I expect to cover expenses, and this, together with the huge cost of their travel to Australia for visits when I can afford it amounts to a considerable burden." (The emphasis is mine) 
The first plaintiff was reluctant to accept that the second paragraph of this letter telegraphed in no uncertain terms that the defendant was unwilling to reimburse the plaintiff for any expenses incurred by him for William and Lucy without his prior approval. In my opinion the meaning of the letter is quite plain. In the face of this letter I cannot see how the first plaintiff could assert that in 1986-94 he had the benefit of a promise by the defendant to repay advances made by him to pay for the support and necessaries of William and Lucy especially in respect of "additional" items such as "Van for William" and "Volkswagon for Lucy".

Before leaving the facts I should draw attention to a letter from the defendant to the second plaintiff of 4 April 1983 in which the defendant said:- "When things improve here, I should certainly be in a position to send you more money for the childrens maintainance, but until such time I regret John will just have to continue to fork out as he has up to now. From what various people have told me however I gather that your reasons for marrying him in the first place were not totally unconnected with his most fortunate financial situation, and I hope he realises that and the burden he has undertaken.
Should John not be able to afford this however, I would be only too happy to look after the children myself in Australia." 
It is also instructive to note that contrary to the assertions of the first plaintiff that he paid a number of expenses including schooling for William and Lucy in Charlottesville the first plaintiff's father wrote to the defendant on 1 April 1986 saying:- "As you know, I provided for their education in a `private' school in
Charlottesville for three years. ... Despite the expense, which was far beyond what John (meaning the first plaintiff) (or you, evidently) could afford to pay, I think the results have proven the wisdom of that decision." (The words in italics are mine) 
Jurisdiction 
In relation to the question of jurisdiction, the plaintiffs submit that the defendant was temporarily present in the State of New York at the time when service of the Summons and Complaint was effected upon him and that this was sufficient to give the Supreme Court of the State of New York jurisdiction in the matter (Herman versus Meallin [(1891) 8 WN 38] and Adams v. Cape Industries Plc [(1990) 1 Ch. 433] at 518-9).

In Emanuel v. Symon [(1908) 1 KB 302] at 309
Buckley L.J. enumerated 5 cases in which courts in England would enforce a foreign judgment obtained in an action in personam. These included "(2) where he (meaning the defendant) was resident in the foreign country when the action began". If this test be correctly stated, the question is what is meant by the phrase "when the action began". Does it embrace a case where the defendant was, as here, served with the relevant initiating process when present within the jurisdiction, but was not present within the jurisdiction when the initiating process was filed.

Mr. Wilson contends that the critical date is the date upon which the initiating process was filed. Inter alia, he points out that under the [Foreign Judgments Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fja1973192/), which codified the prevailing common law, a foreign court is deemed to have had jurisdiction if the judgment debtor was "at the time when the proceedings were instituted" resident within the jurisdiction of that court.

In Adams v. Cape Industries Plc the Court of Appeal in England (Slade,
Mustill and Ralph Gibson L.JJ.) said, by way of obiter, at page 518:- "From the last sentence of the dictum of Lord Parmoor cited above (in the
Employers' Liability case [(1927) A.C. 95] at 114-5 his
Lordship said `the right to serve a writ, in an action in personam, on a foreign defendant, only becomes effective, as a source of jurisdiction, to be recognised in other countries when, at the date of service, such defendant is within the territorial jurisdiction of the English courts.'), and from a dictum of Collins M.R. in Dunlop Pneumatic Tyre Co. Limited v. Actien- gesellschaft fur Motor und Motorfahrzeugbau vorm. Cudell & Co. [(1902) 1
KB 342], (presumably a reference to a query raised by Collins M.R. as to whether the defendant in that case could be said to have been resident in England when service of the writ was effected upon one of the defendant's assistants, who was looking after articles being exhibited by the defendant, a German company, at the National Cycle Show at the Crystal Palace), it would appear that the date of service of process rather then the date of issue of proceedings is to be treated as `the time of suit' for these purposes. But nothing turns on this point in the present case and we express no final view on it." (The words in parenthesis are mine) 
In Laurie v. Carroll <case>; [(1958) 98 CLR 310] the court comprising Dixon C.J., Williams and Webb JJ, said at page 323:- "The defendant must be amenable or answerable to the command of the writ. His amenability depended and still primarily depends upon nothing but presence within the jurisdiction." 
The question remains - presence, when? 
At page 331 the court said:- "In the case of personal service within the jurisdiction of a writ of summons in an action in personam the view seems to be accepted that it is enough that the defendant is present in England at the time of service. It does not matter why, so long as he has not been enticed there fraudulently for the purpose. It does not matter whether he is a foreigner or a subject of the
Crown. It does not matter how temporary may be his presence, how fleeting may be his visit." 
Earlier, at page 324, the court drew attention to the competing views of Dr.
Schmitthoff that the decisive moment when the defendant must be within the jurisdiction of the court is that of the issue not service of the writ and
F.T. Piggott that the mere issue of a writ is not of itself an act of jurisdiction: it is but an inchoate command until it is served on the person to whom it is addressed. The service perfects the exercise of jurisdiction.

Whilst presence of a defendant within the jurisdiction at the time of filing the initiating process may be determinative of whether or not a later order for substituted service can be made, I would understand the view of F.T.
Piggott to be correct for the purposes of this case. Subject to what may be said about Dr. Arnot being enticed to go to the State of New York fraudulently for the purpose of enabling the plaintiffs to serve him with the New York Writ and Complaint, I am of the opinion that the New York court's exercise of jurisdiction in the matter was valid, the defendant having been within the jurisdiction of the New York court when the proceedings were "instituted" i.e.
when the process was served upon him.

In relation to wrongful enticement, the question seems to me to be whether the defendant would have gone to the State of New York on 27 May 1994 independently of the first plaintiff's exercise of entrapment to which I have referred. As I see it, he would have. The defendant said:- "I had never lived in New York, had no connection with New York. I was there by chance, and a Summons served on me by trickery. ... Had I been aware of this, I would not have gone to New York in the first place and would have made private arrangements to stay and not broadcast them to New York." 
I do not accept that the defendant would not have gone to New York. His evidence suggests to me that, had he suspected impropriety on the part of the first plaintiff, he would have pursued his original intention of going to New
York but done so covertly thereby minimising the risk of his being served with process by the plaintiffs whilst there.

The principle seems to me to be that if a person has been induced by fraud of any kind to come within the jurisdiction of a foreign court for the concealed purpose of serving him with a writ in an action, then the service should be set aside as an abuse of process and a domestic court would not enforce a judgment founded upon such service (Watkins v. North American Land and Timber Company (Limited) (1904) 20TLR 534 at 535-6; Evers v. Firth [(1987) 10 NSWLR 22] at 29 and Perrett v. Robinson [(1985) 1 Qd R 83).] 
In the instant case, I do not consider that the defendant came within the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of the State of New York because of the first plaintiff's exercise of entrapment. That entrapment was simply directed at facilitating service of the relevant process on the defendant when he was within the jurisdiction. Accordingly, I consider the service of the initiating process on the defendant in New York was sufficient to give the Supreme Court of the State of New York jurisdiction in a private international law sense over him.

Fraud in the conduct of the New York proceedings.

A judgment said to have been obtained by fraud in domestic proceedings may be impeached in proceedings in equity in the following circumstances:-
The fraud relied upon must be actual fraud, such that there is on the part of the person chargeable with it the malus animus, the mala mens putting itself in motion and acting in order to take an undue advantage of some other person for the purpose of actually and knowingly defrauding him. Mere constructive fraud not originating in actual contrivance, but consisting of acts tending possibly to deceive or mislead without any such intention or contrivance, would probably not be sufficient to set aside the order which has been made. (Patch v. Ward (1867) III Ch. App. 203 at 206-7 and 213). As Sir
John Rolt, L.J. said in Patch v. Ward at page 212:- "The fraud must be actual positive fraud, a meditated and intentional contrivance to keep the parties and the Court in ignorance of the real facts of the case, and obtaining that decree by that contrivance."
It must be shown, by the party asserting that a judgment was procured by fraud, that there has been a new discovery of something material, in the sense that fresh facts have been found which, by themselves or in combination with previously known facts, would provide a reason for setting aside the judgment. This rule has an ancient lineage. There is a public interest in finality of litigation.
Parties ought not, by proceeding to impugn a judgment, to be permitted to relitigate matters which were the subject of the earlier proceedings which gave rise to the judgment.

Especially should they not be so permitted, if they move on nothing more than the evidence upon which they have previously failed. If they have evidence of fraud which may taint a judgment of the courts, they should not collude in such a consequence by refraining from raising their objection at the trial, thereby keeping the complaint in reserve. It is their responsibility to ensure that the taint of fraud is avoided and the integrity of the court's process preserved. (per Kirby P. in 
Wentworth v. Rogers (No.5) [(1986) 6 NSWLR 534] at 538; see also Wentworth v. 
Rogers (No.9) [(1987) 8 NSWLR 388] at 396 and
Owens Bank Limited v. Bracco [(1992) 2 A.C. 443] at 483).
Although perjury by the successful party or a witness or witnesses may, if later discovered, warrant the setting aside of the judgment on the ground that it was procured by fraud, and although there may be exceptional cases where such proof of perjury could suffice, without more, to warrant relief of this kind, the proof of perjury will not normally be sufficient to attract such drastic and exceptional relief as the setting aside of a judgment. The other requirements must be fulfilled.
In hard fought litigation, it is not at all uncommon for there to be a conflict of testimony which has to be resolved by a judge or jury. In many cases of contradictory evidence, one party must be mistaken. He or she may even be deceiving the court. The unsuccessful party in the litigation will often consider that failure in the litigation has been procured by false evidence on the part of the opponent and the witnesses called by the opponent. If every case in which such an opinion was held gave rise to proceedings of this kind, the courts would be even more burdened with the review of first instance decisions than they are. For this reason, and in defence of finality of judgments, a more stringent requirement than alleged perjury alone is required. (Per Kirby P. in Wentworth v. Rogers (No.5) at page 539).
It must shown by admissible evidence that the successful party was responsible for the fraud which taints the judgment under challenge in such a way as to render it inequitable that the successful party should take the benefit of the judgment.
The evidence in support of the charge ought to be extrinsic (per Kirky P. in
Wentworth v. Rogers (No.5) at page 539).

In Story's Commentaries on Equity Jurisprudence (12th edition, 1877) volume 2 at paragraph 1582 the learned author says:- "The only question of fraud which is open to examination in a court of equity, as a ground for enjoining the judgment of any court having jurisdiction of the case, whether domestic or foreign, is such as intervened in the proceedings by which the judgment was obtained. All questions, prior to the proceedings by which the judgment was obtained, are necessarily concluded by it. ..." 
One of the authorities cited by Story for this proposition is the case of
Emerson v. Udall (1841) 37 American Decisions 604 where Redfield J said at page 606:- "The party must, either by suggestion of falsehood, or the suppression of truth, have presented to the arbitrators a state of facts in regard to the merits of the claim which were factitious, and which the party at the time believed to be such. And it is questionable even how far such a case will justify a court of equity in setting aside the award. Some cases of good authority seem to justify such a course. It is certain nothing short of this would justify it." 
In Emerson v. Udall the plaintiff sought to enjoin a judgment creditor from pursuing the judgment obtained by him at law founded upon an award of arbitrators.

If the current proceedings were proceedings to impeach a domestic judgment for fraud, I would be inclined to the view that, on the evidence before me, the defendant has satisfied the above tests. Whilst I hesitate to find that the first plaintiff gave evidence which was deliberately false before the
Honourable Aldo Nastasi, J.S.C., I have no hesitation in finding that his evidence was in fact false in the respects mentioned above, that, notwithstanding his denial, it was given with reckless indifference to the truth or falsity thereof and that it had the effect of materially deceiving the New York court. It seems to me that his conduct amounted to actual fraud even in the absence of a finding of a positive intent to deceive. Unlike
Wentworth v. Rogers (No.5), this is not a case where the issue of fraud was addressed at a pleading stage. The issue has been canvassed, without objection, before me and evidence of the relevant fraud elicited. The fresh extrinsic evidence of the fraud is to be found in the admissions of the first plaintiff before me.

In England a foreign judgment given by a court of competent jurisdiction over a defendant is treated by the common law as imposing a legal obligation on the judgment debtor which will be enforced in an action on the judgment in which the defendant will not be permitted to re-open issues of either fact or law which have been decided against him by the foreign court. But this is subject to a special defence that the foreign judgment was obtained by fraud. And if the fraud upon the foreign court consists in the fact that the plaintiff has induced that court by fraud to come to a wrong conclusion, you can re-open the whole case even although you will, in the English court, have to go into the very facts which were investigated and which were in issue in the foreign court. (Per Lord Bridge of Harwich in Owens Bank Limited v. Bracco at page -487).

At page 489 His Lordship said:- "An English judgment, subject to any available appellate procedures, is final and conclusive between the parties as to the issues which it decides. It is in order to preserve this finality that any attempt to re-open litigation, once concluded, even on the ground that the judgment was obtained by fraud, has to be confined within such very restrictive limits (see the principles referred to above in respect of the impeachment of domestic judgments). In the decisions of Abouloff v. Oppenheimer & Co. ((1882) [10 QBD 295)] and Vadala v. Lawes ((1890) [25 QBD 310)](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=25%20QBD%20310 "View LawCiteRecord" ) the common law courts declined to accord the same finality to foreign judgments, but preferred to give primacy to the principle that fraud unravels everything." (The words and figures in parenthesis are mine.) 
Lord Bridge referred in his speech to the criticism of the decisions in
Abouloff v. Oppenheimer and Vadala v. Lawes by academic writers and to the fact that they had not been followed by the Canadian courts. However he observed that they had been followed and applied by the Court of Appeal in
Syal v. Heyward [(1948) 2 KB 443] and Jet
Holdings Inc v. Patel (1990) 1QB 335 and said that they must stand as establishing the relevant English law unless and until overruled by the House of Lords. Notwithstanding the submissions of the appellant that the House should do so in that case, it declined to over rule Abouloff v. Oppenheimer & Co. and Vadala v. Lawes.

If it were necessary for me to resort to the English rule governing the enforcement of foreign judgments and give primacy to the principle that fraud unravels everything in this case then plainly, on the findings of fact which I have made, the first plaintiff could not succeed in his present action. As I have already observed, Mr. Millar concedes that the second plaintiff cannot succeed, no relevant judgment having been ordered in her favour in the Supreme
Court of the State of New York.

In Vadala v. Lawes Lindley L.J. said at page 316:- "There are two rules relating to these matters which have to be borne in mind, and the joint operation of which gives rise to the difficulty. First of all, there is the rule which is perfectly well established and well known, that a party to an action can impeach the judgment in it for fraud. ... Another general proposition which ... is perfectly well settled, is, that when you bring an action on a foreign judgment, you cannot go to into the merits which have been tried in the foreign Court. But you have to combine those two rules and apply them in the case where you cannot go into the alleged fraud without going into the merits.

Which rule is to prevail? ... That point was raised directly in the case of
Abouloff v. Oppenheimer and it was decided. I cannot fritter away that judgment, and I cannot read the judgments without seeing that they amount to this: that if the fraud upon the foreign Court consists in the fact that the plaintiff has induced that Court by fraud to come to a wrong conclusion, you can reopen the whole case even although you will have in this Court to go into the very facts which were investigated, and which were in issue in the foreign
Court. ... The question of fact, whether what the plaintiff had said in the
Court below was or was not false, was the very question of fact that had been adjudicated on in the foreign Court; and, notwithstanding that was so, when the Court came to consider how the two rules, to which I have alluded, could be worked together, they said:- `Well, if that foreign judgment was obtained fraudulently, and if it is necessary, in order to prove that fraud, to re-try the merits, you are entitled to do so according to the law of this country.' I cannot read that case in any other way." 
In the Canadian decision of Jacobs v. Beaver (1908) 17 O.L.R. 496 at 506
Garrow, J.A. took objection to the conclusion reached by Lindley, L.J. in
Vadala v. Lawes contending that it in no way took account of or defined the nature of the fraud which could be successfully opposed to a judgment. His
Honour said:- "The combination of the two rules, with which no one quarrels, is made easy and without the reproach of any thing like hairsplitting, if my first objection is answered, as I think it should be, in the line of authorities which no one can question, namely, that the fraud relied on must be something collateral or extraneous, and not merely the fraud that is imputed from alleged false statements made at the trial, which were met by counter- statements by the other side, and the whole adjudicated upon by the Court and so passed on into the limbo of estoppel by the judgment. This estoppel cannot, in my opinion, be disturbed except upon the allegation and proof of new and material facts, or newly discovered and material facts which were not before the former Court and from which are to be deduced the new proposition that the former judgment was obtained by fraud." 
Since Jacobs v. Beaver the Canadian courts have applied the rule applicable to the impeachment of domestic judgments for fraud to the enforcement of foreign judgments said to be tainted by fraud. (See Roglass Consultants Inc.
v. Kennedy, Lock and Kennedy, Lock & Willett Inc. [(1984) 65 B.C.L.R.
] and Union of India v. Bumper Development Corporation [(1995) 7 W.W.R.
).] 
In Keele v. Findley [(1990) 21 NSWLR 444] Rogers
C.J. in Comm D addressed the disparity between the English approach to actions for the enforcement of foreign judgments and the Canadian approach. His Honour said that he did not understand why the alleged point of difference should be allowed to prevail. Rhetorically, he asked "Why is it more serious to deceive the foreign court than the English court?" (see page 453). He questioned why there should be a different rule in respect of foreign judgments from that which applied in relation to local judgments (page 455).

His Honour proceeded to adopt the Canadian approach as applicable to the circumstances of the case with which he was concerned. At pages 457-8 His
Honour said:- "Eventually, I decided that, faute de mieux, the parties should have my expression of what I believe is the applicable law. This is for a number of reasons. First, there is no authority in this country where the point has squarely arisen for decision. Secondly, there is a respectable line of judicial authority in Canada which I believe represents the correct view.
Thirdly, it is important that, what I believe to be an error, should not be transplanted into this country in a matter of such importance in the administration of justice. The Act (referring to the [Foreign Judgments Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fja1973192/)) uses the word fraud in [s.8(1)(iv)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fja1973192/s8.html) and it is important that in its interpretation there should be no error.
After all, for whatever reason, there may be no appeal from my decision, whichever way it goes. Fourthly, every academic writer I have consulted accepts the Canadian thinking in preference to the English cases. Fifthly, the historical evolution of the state of the English authorities readily explains how the present error came about. Finally, the English judges seem to accept, in several instances, that the same rules should apply to enforcement of local and foreign judgments in the case of allegations of fraud.

I can do no better than to say that all the considerations enumerated by Kirby
P in Wentworth v. Rogers (No.5) as justifying the law's approach to local judgments, cry out for the same approach to be taken in relation to foreign judgments. With very great respect, it seems to me, odd to say the least, that on the one hand, local courts should grant a stay of proceedings in their courts, and send the litigants to a foreign court, and at the same time, arrogate to themselves the right to re-try an issue determined by the foreign judge, simply on the basis that the local court may be more skilful in detecting perjury than was the foreign judge. It is accepted, on all hands, that, whatever errors of fact, or law, the foreign court may commit, its judgment is conclusive. I can detect no difference in principle between a grossly erroneous finding of fact and an incorrect conclusion that a person is telling the truth. Yet under the law of England, the resultant foreign judgment cannot be challenged in the first case, but grounds a permissible argument of fraud in the latter. The principle of enforcement of foreign judgments calls for self denial in those circumstances.

As I understand it, it is common ground between the parties that the defendant cannot satisfy the more rigorous tests for setting aside a local judgment on the ground of fraud, and in those circumstances, there must be judgment for the plaintiffs." (The words in parenthesis are mine) 
I observe that whilst in Owens Bank Limited v. Bracco Lord Bridge drew attention to the approach adopted in the Canadian courts and to the academic criticism of the English rules applicable to the enforcement of foreign judgments he did not make reference to the judgment of Rogers C.J. in Comm D in Keele v. Findley. Nevertheless, after reference to the criticism, the earlier authorities were applied.

In Keele v. Findley, the defendants in this court asserted that the judgment obtained against them in the Superior Court of Arizona for the County of La
Paz, the enforcement of which was sought, rested upon perjured evidence. They wished to relitigate the falsity of certain alleged representations made by
Mr. Keele senior, the father of the plaintiffs who was a cross-defendant in the proceedings, in connection with a certain cotton growing proposal. The defendants had appeared in the Arizona Court and already been heard in relation to the alleged fraudulent representations of Mr. Keele senior.

If it were necessary for me to do so I would distinguish Keele v. Findley and find that the English rule continued to apply in New South Wales in respect of actions to enforce judgments obtained in undefended proceedings in a foreign court where the defendant has, for good reason, been unable to meet the plaintiff's case in that court. In such circumstances, it does not seem to me that one can say that a defendant has colluded in the deception of the foreign court by refraining from taking exception to the evidence presented against him and later attacked by him as being fraudulent. He could not be said to have improperly "kept his complaint in reserve".

In this case the defendant came within the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of New York by chance. Whilst he may have erroneously formed the view that the court had no jurisdiction over him, I am satisfied that he addressed the question of defending the New York proceedings and genuinely concluded that he could not afford to fight the matter in that court. Whilst the Complaint which was served upon him may have caused him to suspect that the plaintiff's evidence would not accord with what he knew and understood the facts to be, he had no reason to expect that the first plaintiff's evidence in the Supreme
Court of the State of New York would be given with reckless indifference to the truth or falsity thereof.

In my opinion, the very circumstances of this case demonstrate the need for a rule which treats the deception of a foreign court as more serious than an
Australian one.

If it had been necessary for the defendant to rely upon his own intrinsic evidence, which in theory he could have presented to the court in New York, to establish the first plaintiff's fraud, I consider that, in a case such as this, he ought to be permitted to do so.

In all the circumstances, I consider that the proceedings in the Supreme Court of New York were so affected by fraud as to constitute a valid defence to the current enforcement proceedings. Any step taken in this Court to aid the plaintiffs in their attempted enforcement of the New York judgment would, in these circumstances, constitute an abuse of process and tend to bring the administration of justice into disrepute (cf Rogers v. The Queen [(1994) CLR 251).] 
The orders which I propose to make are as follows:-
Judgment for the defendant.
Order that the plaintiffs pay the defendant's costs.
 * * * 
