

Regina versus Pellow Matter No Cca 60144/97 [1997] NSWSC 286 (1 August 1997) 
Regina versus Matthew Benton Pellow /97 August 1997 
Newman J, Levine J, Barr J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Crown appeal against inadequacy of sentence.

FILE NO: 60144/97 
DELIVERED: 1 August 1997 
HEARING DATE: 28 July 1997 
PARTIES: REGINA versus Matthew Benton PELLOW 
JUDGMENT OF: Newman J, Levine J, Barr J 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: MC Marien 
Respondent: TA Game SC 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: SE O'Connor 
Respondent: Paris J Carr 
CATCHWORDS: SENTENCING - Crown appeal - dangerous driving occasioning death, grievous bodily harm - respondent fell asleep at the wheel - pleas of guilty - strong subjective case - respondent sentenced to two concurrent periods each of 500 hours' community service. 
HELD: Sentences inadequate - two concurrent periods each of 12 months' periodic detention substituted.

NO. OF PAGES: 14 
RESERVED/EX TEMPORE: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Allowed 
REGINA versus Matthew Benton PELLOW 
JUDGMENT 
NEWMAN J: I have had the advantage of reading in draft the judgment of Barr J and I agree with both his reasons and the orders he proposes. 
REGINA versus Matthew Benton PELLOW 
LEVINE J: I agree with the orders proposed by Barr J and his reasons therefor. 
REGINA versus Matthew Benton PELLOW 
JUDGMENT 
BARR J: This is a Crown appeal against sentences imposed on the respondent in the District Court on 24 February 1997. The respondent pleaded guilty to two offences, namely dangerous driving occasioning death, pursuant to <case> Crimes Act and dangerous driving occasioning grievous bodily harm, pursuant to <case>. His Honour Judge Robison sentenced the respondent on each charge to perform 500 hours of community service and ordered the sentences to be served concurrently. His Honour ordered that the respondent be disqualified from obtaining or holding a driving licence for five years from the date of sentence. 
At about 7.30 am on Wednesday, 3 January 1996 the respondent finished his night shift at an hotel in Elizabeth Bay, where he was employed as a porter, and drove towards his home in Rockdale. At about 8 am he was driving south in the middle of three southbound lanes in General Holmes Drive, Kyeemagh. The speed limit was 70 kilometres per hour and the respondent was driving at a speed between 80 and 85 kilometres per hour. At Henson Street the road took a slight curve to the left, but the respondent's car ran straight on and drifted into and across the westernmost lane and mounted and crossed the median strip.
It continued on a straight path and the brakes were never applied. It collided head on with a car being driven northwards by Mr Jose Coroas-Bouso. Mr Coroas-
Bouso had no chance of avoiding the collision. He sustained serious chest and leg injuries, as a result of which he had to spend a number of weeks in hospital. His wife, Mrs Benedetta Sirianni, was a passenger in the car and was killed. The respondent himself sustained serious injuries as a result of which he spent a long time in hospital.

All the evidence pointed to the respondent's having fallen asleep shortly before the collision, and his Honour concluded that that is what had happened.
Although the respondent was awake as his car crossed the median strip, he could make no effective attempt to prevent the collision. Alcohol had no part to play and, although the respondent was exceeding the speed limit, that fact was not put forward by the Crown as a serious feature of the case.

The respondent was spoken to briefly at the scene of the collision and said that he thought that he had fallen asleep. Later on he was able to give a more detailed account, which was tape recorded. A transcript of the interview was before his Honour. The respondent told police that he had no memory of the collision itself and that the last thing he remembered before the collision was driving through the airport tunnel. He said that after the tunnel his eyes were starting to drop and that he was feeling pretty tired. However, he thought that he would make it home, which was a further five or six kilometres, another five minutes' drive, so he continued to drive. He wound down the windows in the car and turned the quarter window to direct cool air onto himself. This Court was informed that the collision took place one to one and one half kilometres further on.

The reason why the respondent was tired was that he had not slept for over 24 hours. On the previous morning he had risen at 6 o'clock. He had spent a busy day and had taken no rest. Between 6 pm and 10 pm he had carried out a casual cleaning job at Garden Island and had then travelled to the hotel, where he was permanently employed, to get ready for the night shift. His shift went from 11 pm to 7.30 am. He told the Court that he felt tired during the later part of his shift but that he felt alright to drive when the time came for him to go home. As he drove between Kings Cross and the airport tunnel he felt weary; the tiredness was increasing. By the time he left the tunnel, he said, he should have pulled over because he was very tired, but he ignored his tiredness and pushed on. He told his Honour, "I felt that I was going to make it home." 
As well as the objective gravity of the offences, his Honour was obliged to consider some subjective features favouring the respondent. He was a young man, 21 years old at the time of the offences and 22 years old when sentenced.
Apart from some minor traffic offences, which were of no significance in sentencing, he had no prior convictions. He was a man of prior good character.
Impressive testimonials were tendered. He was a hard worker and well regarded by his employer, which had kept his position open for the several months it took him to recuperate from his injuries, and had since promoted him. He made full and frank admissions to the police. There was abundant evidence that he was truly remorseful and would never forget the horror of what he had done. He had pleaded guilty, though he did not decide to do so until a year after the collision. He had strong family support. The Crown acknowledged in the appeal that the subjective features were compelling.

Having reviewed the report of Ms Rappaport, a senior clinical psychologist with the Commonwealth Rehabilitation Service, his Honour said - "I have no doubt that the accident has changed his whole life as considered by the author of this report. To a large extent the prisoner is already (serving) a sentence. He has sentenced himself." 
His Honour went on to summarise the other subjective features and said - "And I remind myself he is a young man of only twenty one years of age at the time of this accident. It seemed though that he was burning the candle from both ends. Clearly, he needed more sleep, clearly he should have done something to address those aspects which led to his eventual falling asleep with the tragic consequences which followed.

He felt that he was able to drive the vehicle that no doubt is the case when he left his employment that night or the early hour of the morning. What is of concern however, he did not fully appreciate the effect that had upon him until it was too late. But it did seem to me from his evidence the consequences of his tiredness did not really dawn upon him till he reached the tunnel. But he did say in his evidence that his tiredness was one of some progression before he reached the tunnel. I note from the record of interview he did take some steps to address that tiredness, unfortunately it was not enough. He did not stop, as he felt he could make it home, which was at that stage at the tunnel only some five to six kilometres away. He says now, no doubt with the benefit of hindsight that he should have pulled over but he pushed himself on." 
His Honour asked himself how the public's interest would be served by the imposition of a full-time custodial sentence and, in imposing the sentences he did, implied that in his Honour's view it would not.

In bringing this appeal the Crown did not submit that his Honour erred in stating facts or principle but that the offences so clearly called for the imposition of full-time custodial sentences that his Honour must be taken to have given insufficient weight to their objective seriousness and to the need to deter others and to have given undue weight to the subjective features favouring the respondent.

The offence of dangerous driving causing death is a serious one. It was introduced in 1994 to replace the earlier offence known as culpable driving.
If the offences under consideration in this appeal had been committed before the amendment took effect, this case would have been dealt with as culpable driving. When the legislation was amended the maximum penalty when death resulted was doubled to ten years' imprisonment. Where grievous bodily harm resulted the maximum penalty was increased from three to seven years' imprisonment. In introducing to the Parliament the bill for the amendments on October 1994, the Attorney General said - 
The effect of the reforms proposed by this bill is to overcome the perceived problems with the existing legislation. This bill will provide a stronger deterrent against these type of offences. In particular, the Government is sending a message to the community and to the courts that dangerous driving which kills or maims will be severely punished wherever and whenever it occurs. (Legislative Council debates, 4794.) 
His Honour was bound, as are all courts, to give effect to the clear intent of the legislature sharply to increase sentences for offences of the kind his
Honour was considering. R versus Slattery, Court of Criminal Appeal, 19
December 1996, unreported per Hunt CJ at CL at 12.

Mr Game of Senior Counsel, for the respondent, submitted that driving whilst sleeping does not of itself found criminal liability. That is clearly correct.
Jiminez versus The Queen <case>; [(1992) 173 CLR 572] at 577. Mr Game went on to submit that without the respondent's plea of guilty the Crown might well not have succeeded in its case because, there being evidence establishing that the respondent held an honest and reasonable belief that it was safe to drive (a matter of fact), the
Crown would have had to prove beyond reasonable doubt that the respondent did not have that belief. Jiminez at 582 and 583. He submitted that the respondent's criminality consisted in his continuing to drive after realising at the airport tunnel that he was sleepy, and fell at the bottom of the range of seriousness for offences of this kind because the respondent did not think it dangerous to continue driving and thought that he would be able to drive home.

I think that those statements well illustrate the importance of the respondent's pleas of guilty, especially as to the "belief" referred to, and demonstrate that substantial weight had to be given to them. However, I do not agree with Mr Game's assessment of the respondent's criminality, which should not be assessed only by reference to what happened at and after the airport tunnel. The respondent knew when he set out on his journey that he had been awake more than 25 hours. He knew that he was tired when he started off. He noticed his feeling of tiredness increasing as his journey continued. This all happened before he reached the airport tunnel. Finally, he kept on driving after emerging from the tunnel, even though he then knew that he was in danger of falling asleep. This was not a case of momentary inattention or of a serious misjudgment made in a split second. It was a case of failure by the respondent to respond to increasing signs that he was in danger of becoming unable to control his vehicle.

To adopt the language of the High Court of Australia in Jiminez versus The
Queen at 579, the tribunal of fact is in my view entitled to infer from the circumstances I have just summarised that the manner in which the respondent continued to drive his car involved not merely a want of care but subjected the public to a risk over and above that ordinarily associated with the driving of a motor vehicle. It is also proper, in my opinion, to infer that the respondent must have had warning that he might fall asleep if he continued to drive and that he knew or ought to have known that he was running a real risk of falling asleep at the wheel (at 581). In my opinion the respondent's criminality in continuing to drive in all the circumstances, although it was by no means the most serious for offences of this kind, was not of the least serious kind.

During the course of his remarks on sentence his Honour referred to a decision of this Court, R versus Manwarring, 13 April 1994, unreported, in justification of the sentence imposed. In that appeal, the Court considered that a sentence of less than full-time or periodic detention was warranted.
His Honour's intention in referring to the case was, I think, to justify the sentence about to be imposed, because he considered that the two cases bore some factual similarities. In fact, the two cases are quite unalike.
Manwarring involved a failure to obey traffic lights and the events giving rise to the charge lasted only a few seconds. In addition, the members of this Court were concerned that there was evidence that the traffic lights were malfunctioning and the sentencing judge's findings about that were unclear. Finally, and most importantly, Manwarring was decided under the old legislation, a fact to which his Honour did not refer. I do not think that the sentences under appeal can be justified by reference to that case.

His Honour was entitled to have regard to the subjective features which I have mentioned, though in cases of this kind youth and prior good character are properly afforded little weight. R versus MacIntyre [(1988) 38 A Crim R .] His Honour's remarks on sentence make clear that regard was had to all appropriate features, subjective and objective. However, the very leniency of the sentences imposed persuades me that his Honour gave too much weight to subjective features and was diverted from his duty to impose sentences commensurate with the objective gravity of the offences, so as to deter others from behaving in a similar manner.

It was submitted by Mr Game that the deterrent purpose in sentencing was not important in this case, since the respondent was a young man of good character, having no relevant prior convictions, and was not a hooligan or a member of a class of driver about which there is substantial public concern.
It was put that there was no need for his Honour to send a message to shift workers. I think that the need for deterrence was substantial. The section under which the charges were brought applies to all types and classes of drivers. The experience of the courts has been that young men involved in serious motor vehicle collisions are often of unblemished character.
Furthermore, there was at the time of these events and still is a public campaign designed to try to persuade tired drivers to get off the road and rest. The respondent told his Honour that he was aware of that campaign.

Two reasons were put forward why, if the sentences were found to be inadequate, this Court should decide in its discretion not to interfere. The first was as follows. Counsel appearing for the Crown on the appeal, who did not appear before his Honour, contended for a full-time custodial sentence. It became apparent during argument that the Crown prosecutor had submitted to the sentencing judge that a sentence of periodic detention would have been appropriate. It was put by Mr Game that those circumstances, though not binding this Court as a matter of law, would ordinarily and should here lead to the exercise of discretion in the manner I have indicated. However, I have come to the view that in the exercise of the discretion ordinarily imposed where a Crown appeal is successful, this Court should not impose sentences of full-time custody on the respondent. I intend to propose sentences which the
Crown prosecutor in the Court below submitted were appropriate. Furthermore, it is clear from his Honour's remarks and from the sentences imposed that, notwithstanding the Crown prosecutor's submission, his Honour considered the whole range of sentences open, from full-time custody to the sentences finally imposed.

The second matter is that the respondent has already served 255 of the 500 hours of the community service to which he was sentenced. Letters were tendered on the appeal showing that his work has been quite outstanding. This circumstance seems to me to be very important, and I propose that the Court should take it into account in fashioning the sentences to be imposed, but it should not in my view lead to the Court's dismissing the appeal.

I propose the following orders.
Appeal allowed and sentences quashed.
On each charge sentence the respondent to imprisonment for twelve months, the sentences to be served concurrently by way of periodic detention.
The period of disqualification imposed by his Honour is to stand.
 * * * 
