

Trust Company of Australia Ltd versus Perpetual Trustees (Wa) Ltd (No P2) No.
 of 1992 Procedure [1995] NSWSC 163 (15 November 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
EQUITY DIVISION
YOUNG J
HRNG
SYDNEY, 19 May 1995 #DATE 31:5:1995 #ADD 15:11:1995 
Counsel for the Plaintiff      J.T. Gleeson 
Solicitors for the Plaintiff    Freehill Hollingdale and Page 
Solicitor for the 11th Defendant  M. Richards (Blake Dawson Waldron)
ORDER
Orders made
JUDGE1
YOUNG
J These reasons deal with an awkward point of construction of the
Supreme Court Rules which has considerable significance in the present case.
The background of these proceedings is that the plaintiff sued a number of defendants for breach of fiduciary duty as well as in tort and for breach of contract in respect of the failure of a unit trust, of which it is now the current trustee.
The unit trust involved members of the public subscribing funds which were to be used to purchase rural properties for the benefit of the unit holders. In essence the plaintiff said that because of the conduct of the first defendant, the then trustee, and inter alia the eleventh defendant,
Australian Rural Management Limited (in liquidation) ("ARM"), the fund suffered loss and it should receive damages or equitable compensation. The trial was set down for hearing before me for approximately five months.
However, very shortly before the hearing was to commence, the matter was settled between the plaintiff and most of the defendants, though not as against
ARM, and there are also various cross claims outstanding.
ARM filed a submitting appearance. The plaintiff took out a motion for a decree on admissions based on the fact of filing the submitting appearance.
ARM appeared by its solicitor, or rather the solicitor for its liquidator, and took the attitude that it neither consented to, nor opposed, the plaintiff's application. The plaintiff made it clear that all it required was judgment for liability and that the quantum of the damages or equitable compensation could be dealt with at some later time if it was not admitted by the liquidator.
The motion raised the issue of the effect of a submitting appearance in this Court. Mr J.T. Gleeson, for the plaintiff, put that the effect of a submitting appearance is an admission of the plaintiff's claim and that all that is necessary is to ask for a decree. I use the word "decree" because as will appear shortly, it is necessary to delve back into old equity procedure and that is the word that is used in the old authorities as it was the correct term before 1972.
It should be observed that the plaintiff's claim is a mixed claim seeking relief in respect of both common law and equitable rights, though the main thrust of it was for equitable compensation for breach of fiduciary duty. It may be that some different consequence flows from the submitting appearance in respect of a common law claim as opposed to an equitable claim.
That will be examined in due course.
Section 18 of the Equity Act of 1880 which was substantially reproduced by s 36 of the
Equity Act 1901 provided that the defendant shall, upon entering an appearance, "file a memorandum as prescribed, disputing or submitting to the plaintiff's claim or disclaiming any interest in the subject matter of the suit, and shall within the prescribed time file ... a demurrer plea or statement of defence to the statement of claim."
The defendant could thus do one of three things with appearance, (a) dispute; (b) submit; or (c) disclaim. If the defendant filed a memorandum of dispute that did not mean that he answered the plaintiff's claim. It was a mere indication that in due course he would file a defence and if he did not, then there could be a motion for decree against him: Rundle versus Short <case>; [(1883) 4
LR (Eq) 47.] It should be noted that Rundle versus Short came in for considerable criticism by the Court of Appeal in Termijtelen versus Van Arkel [(1974) 1 NSWLR 525] at 529-530, but for present purposes this is of no moment.
A defendant could disclaim if he or she had no interest in the proceedings such as the case where a person had ceased to be a trustee before the suit was commenced; see for instance Woy Woy SC versus Palmer [(1935) 52 WN 57], 59.
If a memorandum of dispute was filed, then in due course the defendant theoretically could do one of three things, (1) file a statement of defence which denied some of the facts pleaded by the plaintiff; or (2) file a demurrer which, for the purpose of argument, admitted the facts in the statement of claim but put forward matters of law which would defeat the plaintiff; or (c) file a plea which was a special answer to the statement of claim setting out additional facts as a cause why a suit should be dismissed, delayed or barred. A plea was filed where the plaintiff's case was defective but the defect did not appear on the face of the statement of claim. An example is where it is alleged that the plaintiff was an alien enemy: Schering
AG versus Pharmedica Pty Ltd <case>; [(1950) 52 SR 16], 18.
In practice before 1972, defendants never filed demurrers or pleas, there was merely an extra paragraph put in the statement of defence craving leave to the same benefit as if the point had been taken by way of demurrer or plea.
Alternatively, there would be a demurrer ore tenens as occurred in Schering's case.
The significance of what I have just said is that it would appear that a defendant who had a point of law had to demur. He could not merely submit and argue the point of law at the hearing as is made clear by cases such as Cant v
Miller <case>; [(1913) 13 SR 505.] Again, disclaimer of interest was a matter which was specifically dealt with by the Rules. What then, was the effect of a submitting appearing under the Equity Act?
The 1960 edition of the University of Sydney Law School Notes on Equity
Practice at p 15 says:- "If one defendant disputes, and another admits, submits or disclaims the latter need not be served with notice of any proceedings except (1) hearing; (2) further consideration; and application to dismiss suit (Rules 98, 156, 206).

In such a case, the decree can be made immediately against an admitting or submitting defendant, but it is usual to wait until the hearing unless there is special reason for not waiting." 
There is no authority given for the second paragraph of that statement.
Although the Equity Practice Notes were written by practitioners of wide experience and 23 years has now passed since the [Supreme Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/) came into force, I think, with respect, it is not completely accurate unless one reads the word "can" as meaning that the Court has a discretion to make the decree in an appropriate case but is not bound to do so.
The cases where there might be a submitting appearance cannot be put into any one category. Probably the most usual situation was where a person was a necessary party to proceedings but no relief was sought against that party such as the situation where a solicitor is holding the deposit in his or her trust account and the real dispute is between the vendor and the purchaser.
Another example is where a trustee holds a legal estate but the beneficiary is either the plaintiff or the defendant.
However, there are more complicated situations than this. One is thrown up in Hughes'
Equity Draftsman 2nd ed (S Sweet and Stevenson Sons London 1828) pp 31-32 where the learned authors give a form of answers that could be given by executors. So an executor answers "As there are some doubts as to the true construction of the said will and the several parties entitled to all of whom this defendant is to account, he this defendant is desirous to act in the premises as executor of the said SM deceased under the directions and indemnity of this Honorable Court." And a further answer is given by which an executrix admits in her defence the will mentioned in the statement of claim was the last will of the testator and that she proved it in the proper ecclesiastical court and that she is possessed of the testator's assets and then "submits to this Honorable Court what interest the said complainants are entitled to in the personal estate of the said SW by virtue of his said will; "Saith she hath in a schedule set forth a true and particular account of all the personal estate to which the said testator was entitled at his death ...
 "Saith she is ready and willing to account as this Honorable
Court shall direct for all such parts of the personal estate of the said testator as have been possessed or received by this defendant, having all just and reasonable allowances made which she is entitled to as such executrix; and in all other respects this defendant submits to act as the Court shall direct, upon being indemnified and paid her costs of this suit...".
This situation is where the trustee shows that he or she wishes to administer the estate under the direction of the Court so long as he or she is indemnified as against all proper expenses.
It would seem that the better practice in New South Wales was for a disputing appearance to be filed, but then a statement of defence was put on in much the same form as the form in Hughes. This is because, if a submitting appearance was put on, no defence could be filed.
Another situation is illustrated in Rudd versus Rowe  <case>; [(1859) 4 Drew 458], 178, as a situation which probably could never happen. In Rudd's case the plaintiff filed a statement of claim for administration of an estate for payment of (pounds) 4.2.6. due to her and for payment of a gross sum sufficient to purchase an annuity of (pounds) .0.0. a year. The defendant said that he had never disputed the plaintiff's right and that she had only filed a bill to make costs.
James VC said that if a suit was instituted for the mere purpose of making costs upon the undertaking of the defendants to pay what the plaintiff claimed and which they said they never denied, all further proceedings should be stayed but without costs.
Under the old practice, if there were two defendants, one disputed and one submitted, then the submitting defendant was entitled to a notice of the hearing. Just what that submitting defendant could do at the hearing is not clear from the rules. However the practice in
Equity before the [Supreme Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/) was that the submitting defendant could not put in issue any of the facts pleaded in the statement of claim or raise matters by way of demurrer or plea, but the submitting defendant could raise questions as to the form of the order or relief and the Rudd versus Rowe situation could be dealt with. If an executor or other fiduciary or quasi fiduciary filed a submitting appearance, submissions could be made by that defendant as to what the terms of the order should be, for example what sort of management fee should be allowed it for its time and trouble in preserving the fund.
This is not only my own recollection of what happened in those days, but appears from contemporary judgments. For instance, in Barton versus Armstrong, LW
Street J, 19 December, 1968 unreported (Appeal reported [(1973) 2 NSWLR 598)], a considerable amount of Street J's judgment is taken up with discussion as to the form of order based on submissions made by submitting defendants, see eg pp 93-94.
Submitting appearances were not brought into the Supreme Court Rules on their promulgation. The submitting appearance did not come back into the Rules until 1991. The introductory note to Part 11 of the Rules as it appeared in
Service 111 to Ritchie's Supreme Court Practice issued in March 1984 contained this sub-paragraph:- "There is no longer any distinction between a submitting appearance (sic). In every case of unconditional appearance form 16 is used. If no contest is intended in proceeding in the Equity Division the service of the notice of appearance should be attached to a covering letter to that effect."
For some reason which is completely unexplained by anything that I have read, submitting appearances were reintroduced into the practice of the
Supreme Court of New South Wales by Amendment 258 made by the Rule Committee on 14 October
The explanatory note merely says, "The object of the amendment ... is to provide for entry of a submitting appearance (other than in the Court of Appeal)." The new Rule which currently appears as Part 11 rule , provides, so far as relevant:- "3. A defendant who wishes to take no active part in the proceedings may - include in the defendant's appearance a statement that the defendant submits to the making of all orders sought and the giving or entry of judgment in respect of all claims made; and add to the statement ', save as to costs'." 
Sub-rule (4) then makes it clear that the defendant who has filed a submitting appearance shall not, without the leave of the Court, file a defence or affidavit or take any other step in the proceedings.
This Rule has rather weird effects. First, it applies to all Divisions of the Court. It thus introduces into court procedure for the first time ever, a submitting appearance at common law. Secondly, by forbidding a person to file a defence it completely nullifies the provision of Part 17 rule 5 which provides that if a defendant is in default, a plaintiff may enter judgment for damages to be assessed and for costs. A defendant is only in default if under
Part 17 rule 2 the defendant is required to file a defence and the time has expired without him doing so. By removing the obligation to file a defence, the Rule no longer allows default judgment to be signed. It is perhaps strange that no delay seeking defendant has dared to adopt this course in the last four years, but the reasoning that I have just noted appears to be unassailable. An answer may be that the plaintiff may apply to the Court for leave to seek an order that the defendant be required to file a defence. It is hard to see how this could happen as an application for leave usually means an application that the applicant have leave or permission to do something.
However, it is not necessary to go deeper into that matter.
Another weird effect of the Rule is that no affidavit can be filed by the defendant without leave.
Accordingly, no executor could file an affidavit saying that the executor was prepared to do anything that the Court asked him or her to do so long as there was an indemnity for the costs and expenses of due administration. Nor would the Rule deal with the Rudd v Rowe situation.
Again a submitting defendant may have some difficulty in arguing as to the form of order if it cannot even file an affidavit without leave. Just what the
Rule was intended to do is a complete mystery.
A clue to the mystery may be that by Amendment 256 of August 1991, Part relating to the Court of Appeal was amended by adding a new Rule 13B permitting submitting appearances to be filed in the Court of Appeal. By some mistake, Amendment 259 did the same thing by adding another Rule 11A which was repealed in October 1992. It would seem that the reason for this Rule was a pragmatic one, that was (a) to identify the solicitors for each party to a matter in the Court of Appeal (which may well have originated in a court outside the Supreme Court); and (b) to link up with Part 52 rule 11A which made special provision for costs where there was a submitting appearance. It may well be that it was thought in line with the policy that the same procedure should apply throughout the whole Court that there should be a corresponding
Rule for the first instance Divisions of the Court. One wonders why the Court of Appeal could not have been caught up in the same
Rule as everybody else, but that is just another mystery.
Mr Gleeson for the plaintiff, argued that there was a clear reason for enacting Part 11 rule 3 in its present form, namely, to make it clear that on a submitting appearance, one could proceed immediately to decree. I am unconvinced by that argument.
First of all, it is significant that the Rule does not displace some earlier
Rule as to submitting appearances, but makes a new Rule as to submitting appearances. The significance of this is, however, diminished by the fact that as the note from Service 111 of Ritchie shows, there was in fact a submitting appearance regime in the Court before
Part 11 rule 3.
Secondly, a more likely explanation for the Rule is the purely pragmatic one of identifying in the Court who is contesting the plaintiff's claim and who is not, and providing for costs.
Mr Gleeson then argues that the Rule does not mean the reintroduction of the old equity practice as to submitting defendants. He says that the words "Submits to the making of all orders sought and the giving or entry of judgment in respect of all claims made" make it quite clear that the defendant is not entitled to contest the plaintiff's claim. He is not entitled, as under the old equity rules, to be given any notice of hearing, nor is he allowed to file an affidavit so that he cannot even speak as to the form of order without leave.
After a lot of reflection, it seems to me that Mr Gleeson's proposition should be accepted. I should point out that it makes quite a difference in the instant case because if this procedure was not available, then there would have to be an application for summary judgment under Part 13, or alternatively, there would have to be an ex parte trial. There are in Court, some 50 lever arch files of documents which would have to be read and proved and the hearing would take some little time even on an ex parte basis. I am told that if a summary judgment application is necessary there is somebody who would be prepared to swear that that person knew of no defence to the plaintiff's claim, but it is submitted that that is not required.
However, even though I accept Mr Gleeson's submission, it does not seem to me that it follows as night follows day, that the plaintiff is entitled to a decree or order. I think this is clear when one looks at the authorities decided in equity under Rules such as Part 18 rule 3.
Courts of Equity have adopted a practice over a long period of time not to make certain types of orders on admissions or without proper examination.
This practice manifests itself in many ways. For instance, equity does not make declarations without a proper contradictor. However, this is a discretionary rule as is made clear by Territory Insurance Office versus Kerin <case>; [(1986) 42 NTR 15.] Again, a declaration will not be made by consent, at least in a situation where rights other than the rights of the parties might be affected. An affectation will occur if the Court considers that other people might be induced by the fact that the Court has made a declaration in a particular matter to assume that that declaration has been made after full consideration: Myer Queenstown Garden
Plaza Pty Ltd versus Port Adelaide CC [(1975) LGRA 70], 82. Another manifestation is in the statutory jurisdiction under the [Family Provision Act 1982](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/), no order will be made by consent of the parties except a dismissal of the proceedings. I discussed such matters in
Hamilton-Smith v Markby, 24 May 1995, unreported. Doubtless there are other manifestations of the general practice.
A good starting place for the examination of the authorities is the decision of Kekewich, J, an acknowledged master of equity procedure, in Verney v Thomas [(1888) 58 LT 20.] At p 22, his Lordship sets out the then rule which concluded that "the Court ... may ... make such order or give such judgment as the Court ... may think just." His Lordship said at p 22, "That must mean with reference to the established practice of the Court, and the peculiar circumstances of the case."
In Charles versus Shepherd [(1892) 2 QB 622] at 624, Lord Esher MR made it clear that having consulted all the Judges of the Court of Appeal the Court was not bound to give judgment for the plaintiff even though the statement of claim may on the face of it look perfectly clear, if it could see any reason to doubt whether an injustice might not be done by giving judgment.
This view has been consistently followed in both Australia and
England.
It is adopted by the Court of Appeal in Termijtelen versus Van Arkel [(1974) 1 NSWLR ]; see particularly per Hope JA at pp 528-529 and Bowen CJ in Eq at pp -533. That case actually concerned the situation where the admissions of one defendant made by failure to plead ran contrary to the evidence in the case put forward by the other parties. The
Court of Appeal held that the trial judge was correct to dismiss the suit as against all defendants. It seems to me, however, that the principles set out in the judgments go beyond that situation. See also Kelly versus Mawson  <case>; [(1935) 54 CLR 134], 139, about such an admission, "It does not follow that, because such evidence is admissible, it is enough to prove the issue." Another situation where the Court may not make a decree on admissions without evidence is where there has been substituted service of the originating process: Watson v Eager [(1892) 9 WN 76] Both these cases were followed by the Court of Appeal in Termijtelen's case.
Despite these reservations, it must be remembered that as Hope JA said in
Termijtelen's case at p528, "... in the ordinary case, the Court will grant the relief sought if the allegations in the statement of claim justify it in so doing ... ". In the instant case the process was properly served, the defendant has appeared by its liquidator's solicitor and has not raised any matter, the evidence has justified many of the appearing parties reaching a commercial settlement which advantaged the plaintiff to some extent. It would accordingly seem to me that this is an "ordinary case", in which case, the order should be made.
It seems to me also that this is a case where the Court may make a declaration of liability without affecting persons who are a stranger to the order.
As I have noted earlier, there is a distinction between common law rights to damages and equitable remedies. Although the Rules now have precluded the cheap procedure of signing interlocutory judgment against a submitting defendant who does not file a defence, there appears to be no reason why a judge on motion for judgment in respect of purely common law rights, should look into the facts.
Accordingly, in my view the Court is justified in making a declaration that the 11th defendant, ARM, is liable to the plaintiff for breach of fiduciary duty, breach of contract and in tort and is liable to have assessed against it awards of equitable compensation or damages as the Court will, in the absence of agreement between the parties, assess. Costs of the motion should be paid by the 11th defendant.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/163.html  
