

Susan Grams versus Ernest Gordon Grams and Budget Rent-A-Car Systems P/L [1996]
NSWSC 384 (29 August 1996) 
SUSAN GRAMS versus ERNEST GORDON GRAMS & BUDGET RENT-A-CAR SYSTEMS P/L /92 
THURSDAY 29 AUGUST 1996 
REVISED THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
GROVE J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is a claim for damages for personal injuries sustained in a motor accident which occurred on 18 December 1991. Accordingly, the Motor Accidents Act applies. 
The plaintiff was riding as a passenger in a small campervan which had been rented on the previous day when she, her husband and two daughters arrived in
Australia for the purpose of a holiday. The plaintiff is a Canadian citizen, but in 1991 and for some time thereafter she was resident in Peru, where her husband was employed as an engineer.

The plaintiff was riding as a passenger in the front seat of the van, which was being driven by her husband, the first defendant. The second defendant is the registered owner of the vehicle.

At about 3pm on the date specified, in fine, clear conditions they were travelling north in the Pacific Highway in the vicinity of O'Sullivan's Gap, near Bulahdelah. The evidence of Sgt Kimber, a police officer then attached to the Accident Investigation Unit, is that although O'Sullivan's Gap, as is well known, involves a considerable climb and descent, the accident occurred on one of the relatively level areas, although there was a slight upwards incline for northbound traffic and an obvious sweeping right-hand curve.

At the time, two employees of the Roads and Traffic Authority, both of whom have given evidence in these proceedings, Mr Maurer and Mr Cooper, were engaged in placing chevrons upon poles located just outside the traffic barrier on the western extremity of the carriageway. These chevrons were not accompanied by any particular speed advisory indication, and I would conclude that they were being placed there to assist drivers in navigating the wide sweeping curve.

It is common ground that the applicable speed limit was eighty kilometres per hour. The road surface was divided into four relatively wide lanes. There was at the time a central division marked by separated unbroken lines.

The Roads and Traffic Authority employees had with them a truck described as a table-top Ford Trader. It can be viewed in a number of photographs in evidence. The nature of their task was that they moved forward to place each of these poles at intervals of about five to eight minutes. They placed the truck as close as possible to the extreme of the available space beyond the carriageway, and I accept their evidence that the vehicle was left stationary with its running board on the nearside touching the traffic barrier. The result of this positioning was that there was an encroachment onto the western lane of the carriageway of something in the order of half a metre. I accept their evidence that the truck was equipped with flashing amber strobe lights and that both of these were illuminated at the time.

The first defendant was approaching this stationary vehicle. I accept the evidence of the plaintiff that his driving was such as to provoke concern and that she requested him to slow down.

In a statement admitted into evidence the first defendant has said that he was driving at forty to forty-five miles per hour. If that be accurate, it was nevertheless too fast for the extant conditions and his driving skills, despite the upper speed limit of eighty kilometres per hour. He also stated that just prior to the collision he was being overtaken by another vehicle. In fact, on one occasion he suggested that there may have been two such vehicles.
Whether that be so or not, there is no suggestion that any overtaking vehicle was inhibiting his occupation of the western lane, which was potentially impeded only to the extent of the encroachment of about half a metre by the truck displaying the warning flashing lights.

I accept the evidence of Mr Maurer and Mr Cooper that whilst they were performing their task, the truck was comfortably passed by vehicles travelling in the westernmost lane, including large vehicles such as trucks and semi- trailers, and that these vehicles were able to use the trafficable portion of that lane without themselves encroaching into the adjacent lane. It therefore leads me to a conclusion that the existence of any overtaking vehicles was irrelevant to the occurrence of the accident, save that their presence may have distracted the first defendant so that he failed to keep his vehicle under sufficient control to avoid any danger which arose.

The question arises as to why, if there was sufficient space for the campervan to pass the stationary truck, the collision occurred. I deduce that by reason of speed and failure to attend sufficiently to his task of driving, the first defendant simply collided with the truck. He was unable, because of the position in which he found himself and the momentum of the vehicle under his control, to prevent its collision with the back of the truck.

A principal issue in the litigation has been the joinder by way of cross-claim of the Roads and Traffic Authority. Little needs to be said about the primary issue of negligence so far as the plaintiff's claim against the first and second defendants is concerned. It has not been suggested in counsel's address that she should not succeed, nor is there any reason to diminish her damages.
It is obvious that if the first defendant felt that he was not competent to safely negotiate past the stationary truck, then he should have kept his vehicle sufficiently in hand to bring it to a halt, or at least to a very slow pace so that he could "snail" by, as it were. This he failed to do, and in fact, contrary to the exhortations of his passenger, he continued to drive at a speed which at least she assessed as unsuitable in the circumstances. A significant circumstance of course is that on the evidence the first defendant would have been relatively unfamiliar with the practice of driving on the left-hand side of the road, the traffic arrangements, both in his native country and in Peru, being the reverse.

I return, however, to the issue of the cross-claim. It is vigorously contended on behalf of the defendants that there ought to be contribution by the Roads and Traffic Authority to any damages which the defendants must pay the plaintiff. My attention is drawn to the circumstance that since this accident, although there is no evidence that it was as a consequence of it, there has been a change in the road formation, so that rather than having two northbound and two southbound lanes, there is now a single northbound lane and two southbound lanes, divided by a concrete barrier. The inference that I would draw is that that change casts no light upon the responsibility for the present accident, and the conclusion that I would draw is that the separation barrier has been erected for the purpose of inhibiting head-on collision between northbound and southbound traffic.

It was argued by counsel on behalf of the defendants that by reason of the existence of overtaking vehicles, it became mandatory for the first defendant to keep his vehicle within the westernmost lane. I accept that submission but, as I have already indicated, that offers no excuse, let alone even explanation, for why his vehicle should have collided with the stationary truck, given that there was ample room for much larger vehicles to make safe passage by it.

It is accepted that the first defendant would have had a view of the stationary truck for something in excess of 100 metres, but it is put that would not enable him to assess the circumstance that his way was impeded when he was at that distance. As I have indicated, although there was a small encroachment onto the carriageway, trafficability was not impeded to the extent that a reasonably careful driver of even a larger vehicle could not safely make passage.

It was submitted that the Roads and Traffic Authority by its negligence contributed to the damage suffered by the plaintiff because it failed to put in position either a warning sign or a human being carrying an appropriate warning, telling oncoming traffic of the danger. The situation was, as I have indicated, that this vehicle was performing a task taking something in the order of five to eight minutes. As a truck engaged in road maintenance, it had illuminated two flashing warning signs. To the reasonably prudent motorist, that would indicate that caution should be taken, and in my view that was a reasonably prudent step for the cross-defendant through its employees to take.

It was suggested that the Road Traffic Authority could have closed the lane.
As a matter of power, I agree such could have been done, but I reject the contention that that would have been reasonable in the circumstances. As counsel for the defendants himself asserted, this was a busy major thoroughfare. The need to close the road would be balanced against the degree of risk involved. The degree of risk involved may be perceived most readily by the ease with which volumes of traffic, to the exclusion of the first defendant, were able safely to pass the stationary truck.

I am unpersuaded that any negligence on the part of the cross-defendant caused or contributed to the damage suffered by the plaintiff, and there will in due course be judgment in favour of the cross-defendant.

I turn therefore to the issues of damage.

The plaintiff was born on 11 September 1951 in Canada. She completed her high school education and at tertiary level received a degree in Arts, majoring in
Psychology. She later undertook nursing training and was qualified as a post graduate in what is described in Canada as Critical Care Nursing, and commonly referred to in Australia as Intensive Care Nursing. She married the first defendant in 1972. They have two daughters, born in 1980 and 1987.

The plaintiff has undertaken a considerable amount of her employment history at the Kelowna General Hospital in British Columbia. She ceased working when her husband obtained a job, initially I gather on contract, to work as an engineer in a copper mine in Peru.

In the years subsequent to the accident the marriage has broken down, and early last year the plaintiff returned to Kelowna where she now resides with her two daughters. The plaintiff's mother, aged eighty-three, lives nearby.
Her father has been deceased for many years. The first defendant remains in
Peru where, according to material tendered, he is engaged in some work on his own behalf rather than in the employment of the mine. There is some evidence before me that the first defendant has, during his life, had a problem with alcohol. He has at times been a member of Alcoholics Anonymous. There is no suggestion that alcohol contributed at all to this accident and I do not regard the evidence as directly relevant, although it gives me some background concerning the plaintiff and her family situation.

The plaintiff testified that had the accident not intervened it would have been her intention upon return to Kelowna to resume employment at the hospital. She had altered her status before departing for Peru from full-time to part-time employee. As I understand the evidence, she would be at risk of losing her registration status if she did not participate in nursing activity for a period of five years, and she had this in view in the arrangements that she made.

I accept that if the accident had not intervened the plaintiff would have returned to Kelowna and would have exercised her earning capacity as a
Critical Care trained nurse in the employment of that hospital.

The injuries which the plaintiff sustained in the accident have been considerable. Most of the medical evidence consisted of medical reports and other records tendered on behalf of the plaintiff. The defendants tendered a report from Dr Ross Mellick, a consultant neurologist, who saw the plaintiff after her return to Australia for the purpose of this case on the 22nd of this month. It does not seem to me that a great deal will be served by my extravagantly detailing what can be read in the medical reports, and it will suffice to make some general references.

In the accident itself the plaintiff sustained fractures of the left pelvis involving the left sacro iliac joint and the left acetabulum. She had numerous cuts and no doubt abrasions. So far as final consequence is concerned, the most important matter is that about forty-eight hours following the admission to hospital after the accident, the plaintiff was noted to develop a very dense left hemiplegia. After investigation it was shown that this was a consequence of dissection of both carotid arteries. They had completely blocked the right carotid artery and had a significant occlusion in the left common carotid artery.

The result has been that the plaintiff is permanently disabled by a hemiparesis. Medical prognostication is that no further improvement is expected. I note that Dr Mellick, if I may say so with respect, ruminated about possible contributions to the cause of the infarct which led to the hemiparesis, but he did say that on the basis of the existing data there is a clear correlation between the occurrence of the trauma and the occurrence of the right-sided infarct.

I am satisfied that the plaintiff has demonstrated the necessary causal connection between her current condition and the accident.

As the report of Dr Mellick puts matters as highly as they could be in favour of the defendants, it is perhaps useful for the purpose of measurement to recite some further observations made by Dr Mellick. He said: "On the basis of the clinical assessment there would appear to be significant abnormalities of higher intellectual function, together with the impairment of left arm and left leg function, sufficient to impair the capacity for gainful employment in her pre-accident profession as a nurse." 
In addition he observed: "Because of the hemiparesis in particular, and the amount of impairment of left upper limb function, Mrs Grams would be very much less capable of performing work at home than prior to the occurrence of the accident and this disability." 
Dr Plowman, who saw the plaintiff for assessment and report some years ago, and again this month upon the plaintiff's return, summarised the plaintiff's disabilities as including recurring neck pain and headaches by the end of the day, a more or less functionless left arm, a painful, weak left leg, a spastic type gait, a more or less fixed equinovarus deformity of the left ankle, weakness of the left leg, muscle pain and spasms affecting the left leg, painful stiff left hip, back aches, hyperaesthetic feeling of the left arm and left leg, and restriction of activities, including walking.

I have had the opportunity to see the plaintiff in two contexts. As part of her rehabilitative treatment in Australia, a short film was made, on the face of it for the purpose of recording what is described as a consumer's viewpoint concerning issues in health care services. This shows the plaintiff in a very distressed state from time to time during the rehabilitation process. The camera work is such that the plaintiff is filmed from her right side, whereas the deficits that she suffers are predominantly in the left side, and to that extent the film is not as useful as it might otherwise have been. I hasten to say of course that it is obvious that the film was not produced for the purpose of litigation, but for the purpose which I have mentioned.

I have also seen the plaintiff during the course of her testimony. She is halting in delivery, and obviously handicapped in mobility and agility. I record that I found her an honest and impressive witness and I accept her testimony without reservation. I note that the distress and depression that she suffered for some time has fortunately been relieved by the effects of the prescription for her of the drug Prozac. That was prescribed for her only after several years, although it must be noted that a few months after the accident she returned to join her husband in Peru, and the prescription of
Prozac apparently followed visits to medical practitioners in North America.

I am satisfied that the plaintiff is, for all practical purposes, without residual earning capacity. I propose to turn to assess the individual ingredients of damage, and I shall make some observations about my findings as
I perform that task.

The first item that must be included in the award of damages is the out-of- pocket expenses, which are agreed at $2,945.

The next item of claim to which I turn is an ingredient for future medical expenses. The evidence given by the plaintiff is that for an expenditure of $77 Canadian per month she has been able to join a scheme whereby future medical expenses will be covered. The plaintiff has postulated a claim based upon awarding her the present value of that expenditure through her lifetime.
That is a very conservative claim and I propose to include it in damages.

The cost of Prozac is $70 Canadian per month. I regard it as more probable than not that the plaintiff is likely to require medication of that or some similar sort at that sort of cost throughout her life, and I propose to include that ingredient in the damages.

The third item sought by way of damages involves an expenditure of $120
Canadian per month. The plaintiff has identified a centre in her home town of
Kelowna which has an exercise programme for the disabled. It includes aquatic exercises, exercises in a weight room and some individual assistance. She has claimed that this will meet a need for her continuing ability to be as agile as she is, and to live and move within the physical limitations of her injury.
I regard that claim as reasonable and certainly tort induced.

I therefore propose to include in the damages, for future expenses, each of the items of $77 per month for the membership of the medical scheme, $70 per month for palliative drugs and $120 per month for membership of the centre.
This totals $267 Canadian per month.

There is evidence before me that as at yesterday the exchange rate between the
Australian dollar and the Canadian dollar was in favour of the latter at the rate of 1.0681. It seems to me that it will be a reasonable approach to conversion to regard the Canadian dollar for the purpose of damage as having that value, and I propose, rather than performing detailed calculations, to turn Canadian dollars into Australian dollars by applying a rate of 106 per cent. Thus, $267 per month Canadian can be converted into $283 per month
Australian. That involves a notional expenditure for the future of $3,396 per year, or in round terms, $65 per week.

I indicate that in this and other calculations which I shall do in the assessment of damages, I propose to make slight roundings of the sort that I have just indicated.

Although the plaintiff is a Canadian national, I have access only to
Australian life tables for the purpose of assessing life expectancy, and in the absence of any other guide I propose to use them. The plaintiff's present life expectancy in full years is thirty-five. Accordingly, using the 5 per cent tables, I propose to award her for future medical expenses $65 per week for thirty-five years, and an ingredient will be included in the damages of $56,914.

The next item to which I turn involves an actual expenditure in respect of house cleaners. I think that it is a reasonably fulfilled tort induced need.
The evidence is that the plaintiff has a team of two people who come in for three to four hours at the rate of $14 per hour for the pair of them, twice a month. This would seem to involve an expenditure for eighty-four hours per annum, or $1,176 Canadian. In Australian dollars I convert that to represent $1,246 per year, or $24 per week. Using the life table expectancy of thirty- five years and the 5 per cent tables, this item produces an ingredient of $21,014 and I propose to include that amount in the damages.

A claim is made for compensation to represent other services received by the plaintiff as a result of gratuitous subventions by her relatives. There is evidence that the plaintiff's elderly mother attends on most days and it is said that she contributes help on an average of two hours per day or fourteen hours per week. The tasks that the evidence is that she undertakes include cutting the plaintiff's finger and toenails, doing the ironing and helping with some preparation of the cooking. I gather that from time to time the plaintiff's daughters also assist her. I am satisfied that the attention to the plaintiff's nails would be beyond her physical capacity, and I accept her evidence that she is not really fit to do the ironing. It should be borne in mind, particularly in relation to the latter, however, that damages would only flow in respect of the fulfilment of needs of the plaintiff, and not the family generally. Before any such award can be included the plaintiff must first pass the test enunciated by the High Court in Griffiths v
Kerkemeyer, that is that there exist services which are being fulfilled by gratuitous subvention, but which would be reasonable to fulfil at cost.

Apart from the attention to manicure and pedicure and the ironing, I am unpersuaded that the evidence does demonstrate tort induced needs which it would be reasonable to fulfil at cost.

There is, however, a second barrier which the plaintiff must overcome, and that is put in place by <case> of the Motor Accidents Act. Before any such damages can be awarded, even at the rates limited by that provision, I must be satisfied that there is a need to be fulfilled extending at least six hours per week. Having regard to the description of the assistance given I am unpersuaded that that period of time has been exceeded. I also observe that even were I to be of a contrary opinion and did extend the time beyond the period of six hours, the statute provides in effect that the first six hours must be subtracted from any award.

By reason of the combination of the requirements of the authority to which I have referred and the statute, the plaintiff's claim in this regard cannot be sustained. I reject this item as claimed.

I turn, however, to the issue of economic loss. I am satisfied that the plaintiff has a total incapacity for work and that but for the accident she would have exercised that capacity as a nurse, trained as she is to post graduate standard.

I have for assistance some detail of the pay rates at the Kelowna General
Hospital. I regard those rates as an appropriate guide to be used for these purposes. The exhibit also conveys the information that nett pay is approximately 70 per cent of gross pay. I will therefore assume for the purpose of damages award that the taxation element upon the figures given is per cent.

As is conventional, I propose to award damages for economic loss in two portions, the first represented by economic loss to the present time and the second for future economic loss, as it may be conveniently termed.

The rates of pay at the Kelowna General Hospital for nurses such as the plaintiff are stepped in accordance with years of service. As at the time that the plaintiff departed for Peru she had reached step four. The highest rate is at step six. It appears, however, that she required to work only another forty hours in order to move from step four to step five, and for present purposes I propose to ignore the fine distinction.

If the accident had not intervened it is clear that it was not the plaintiff's intention immediately to return to work in Kelowna. Had the accident not intervened, and also in later years, the divorce, the best prediction I could make is that the plaintiff would have been likely to have remained in Peru for at least the period of her husband's contract, and then it is likely that she would have returned to exercise her earning capacity in some fashion, most likely at Kelowna, but in any event, using the wages there paid as a guide, I regard that as an appropriate yardstick for damage.

The progress from step five to step six requires a nurse to work 1957.5 hours.
In very round terms, that is about a year's work. For the purpose of past economic loss I have concluded that it will do justice between the parties to presume that up to the present time, the accident not intervening, the plaintiff would have exercised her earning capacity for a period of one year at step five rates.

This calculation can be done in this fashion. Her rate of pay would be $3,882
Canadian per month. Taking 30 per cent for tax, she would have a nett wage of $2,717 Canadian per month; so on the exchange rate that I have postulated, $2,880 Australian per month. For one year this amounts to $34,560. I propose to include that amount in the plaintiff's damages.

I turn to the future. As I have already indicated, I accept the evidence in the medical opinion and confirm it as my own judgment that the plaintiff has totally lost any practical residual earning capacity. I propose for the purpose of this ingredient of award to assume that after one year's work the plaintiff had progressed to step six rates, which involved payment to her of $4,029 Canadian per month. 30 per cent to reduce this to a nett free of tax figure produces $2,820 Canadian per month, or $2,989 Australian per month, converted on to $35,868 per annum or, in round figures, $690 nett per week.

The plaintiff's next birthday will be her forty-fifth. I regard it as a reasonable measure of her economic incapacity induced by tort to assume that this loss extends over the next twenty years. On the 5 per cent tables a loss of $690 per week capitalises at $459,816.

I note the contradictory submissions of counsel for the plaintiff and the defendants that I should apply a discount for an assumed preponderance of adverse over beneficial vicissitudes, less or more than the common 15 per cent. It seems to me that a figure of 15 per cent in this particular case, although almost conventional, would do substantial justice between the parties and I propose to apply it. That application produces a figure for this component of award of $390,843.

This leads to the final ingredient to be included in the damages. This is described by statute as non-economic loss. It is broadly comparable with previous common law notions of general damages. However, I am constrained by the statute to take a notion of a most extreme case, which is tabulated at $235,000, and proportion the plaintiff against that. It is inevitably a distasteful task to talk in such terms of gross and permanent injury. These are necessarily matters of impression. I am conscious that the statute provides the maximum figure for a most extreme case, as distinguished from the most extreme case.

Nevertheless, doing the best I can and having regard to my knowledge of other cases, it seems to me that the appropriate figure for the plaintiff in this case, bearing in mind that she does have not inconsiderable residual abilities for leading a handicapped but fulfilling life, should be 65 per cent. 65 per cent of the maximum involves my inclusion, within the damages, of $152,750.

The ingredients of the damages which I propose then, therefore, are as follows, and for convenience I will tabulate them: 
Out of pocket expenses $ 2,945 
Future medical expenses 56,914 
Cleaning services 21,014 
Past economic loss 34,560 
Future economic loss 390,843 
Non-economic loss 152,750 
A total of $659,026 
I propose to round that sum. I direct entry of judgment for the plaintiff for $660,000 against each of the first and second defendants. I order the first and second defendants to pay the plaintiff's costs of action.

I order judgment for the cross-defendant on the cross-claim. I order the cross-claimant to pay the cross-defendant's costs of the cross-claim.

If you gentlemen would like to check any of that arithmetic, I will give you liberty to apply and I will correct it. You will see that I have chopped off cents and odd decimal points where they have turned up, and I have rounded them.
 * * * 
