

W D and H O Wills (Australia) Limited versus State Rail Authority of New South
Wales; State Rail Authority of New South Wales versus Tnt Management Pty Limited
Matter Nos Ca 40577/95; Ca 40663/95 [1998] NSWSC 81 (3 April 1998) 
Last Updated: 21 April 1998 
W D & H O WILLS (AUSTRALIA) LIMITED versus STATE RAIL AUTHORITY OF NEW SOUTH
WALES 
STATE RAIL AUTHORITY OF NEW SOUTH WALES v TNT MANAGEMENT PTY LTD 
CA 40577/95 
CA 40633/95 April 1998 
Mason P, Priestley JA, Beazley JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: COMMON LAW DIVISION - NEWMAN J 
FILE NO/S: CA 40577/95; CA 40633/95; CLD 17121/87 
DELIVERED: 3 APRIL 1998 
HEARING DATE/S: 19 NOVEMBER 1997, 20 NOVEMBER 1997 
PARTIES: WD & HO WILLS (AUST) LTD V STATE RAIL AUTHORITY 
STATE RAIL AUTHORITY V TNT MANAGEMENT PTY LTD 
JUDGMENT OF: MASON P; PRIESTLEY JA; BEAZLEY JA 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: P KING/ M WATTS (WILLS) 
R A VINCENT (SRA) 
Respondent: J SEXTON (TNT) 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: WITHNELL & CO (WILLS) 
SPARKE HELMORE (SRA) 
Respondent:EBSWORTH & EBSWORTH 
CATCHWORDS: 
Negligence - theft of goods from storage shed - existence of duty of care - breach of statutory duty - general reliance - actual reliance - duty arising from control and ownership of premises - bailment 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
NO OF PAGES: 60 
HEADNOTE 
Negligence - theft of goods from storage shed - existence of duty of care - breach of statutory duty - general reliance - actual reliance - duty arising from control and ownership of premises - bailment 
W.D. & H.O. Wills (Australia) Ltd ("Wills") consigned a container load of cigarettes to TNT Management Pty Ltd ("TNT"), the carrier being State Rail
Authority ("SRA"). Following delivery by SRA to TNT, the container was put in
TNT's shed. This stood in SRA's rail terminal yard where other freight forwarders also had depots. The container was then left overnight in TNT's shed which was locked but unstaffed. From there it was stolen in the early hours of the morning. The thieves unloaded the cigarettes from the container in the general area of the Terminal.

Wills accepted that the contract between it and TNT had the effect that Wills must bear all but an insignificant fraction of the loss. Accordingly, Wills sued SRA in negligence for failing to provide appropriate security services for the Terminal. SRA denied the claim and filed a cross-claim against Wills and TNT. Newman J rejected the claim that SRA was a bailee of Wills' goods. He further ruled that SRA did not owe a duty of care to Wills as Wills had failed to establish sufficient proximity with SRA. Judgment was entered for SRA against Wills and for TNT against SRA.

HELD, dismissing each appeal: 
A person could not become bailee or sub-bailee of goods in the absence of possession, consent or knowledge on their part.

Buchanan & Co Ltd versus Hay's Transport Services [[1972] 2 Lloyd's Rep 535], considered. 
There was no assumption of responsibility on SRA's part. Further, there was no known reliance or dependence on the part of the freightforwarders or their customers, including TNT and Wills.

Bryan versus Maloney (1995) 182 CLR 609; Kondis versus State Transport Authority <case>; [(1984) 154 CLR 672], considered. 
Being a lessor confers no special immunity, but neither is it sufficient to establish tortious liability. There was no duty on SRA as lessor of the shed to provide appropriate security services.

Sutherland Shire Council versus Heyman <case>; [(1985) 157 CLR 424], considered. 
There is no general duty on occupiers to take reasonable care to prevent others from entering their property and using it as a springboard for stealing from a neighbour's property.

Perl (Exporters) Ltd versus Camden LBC <case>; [[1984] 1 QB 342], considered. 
Parties can no longer resort to the concept or fiction of general reliance to found a duty of care in negligence.

Pyrenees Shire Council versus Day [[1988] HCA 3], considered. 
ORDERS 
Wills' appeal dismissed with costs.

SRA's cross appeal dismissed with no order as to costs.

SRA's appeal dismissed with costs.

JUDGMENT 
MASON P: Two appeals and a cross appeal were heard together. They arise out of the theft of a container load of cigarettes belonging to W D & H O Wills (Australia) Ltd ("Wills") that had been consigned through TNT Management Pty Ltd ("TNT") from Melbourne to Sydney. When stolen, the container was inside a locked building leased by the State Rail Authority ("SRA") to TNT. The building ("the Alltrans shed") was used by Alltrans Australia, a division of TNT, as part of its Australia-wide freight forwarding business. Those leased premises were part of the Cooks River Rail Terminal. Wills' capacity to recover damages from its chosen freight forwarder TNT was strictly limited in amount by the conditions of the relevant consignment note. Accordingly, Wills sued SRA in negligence claiming that it owed Wills a duty of care in relation to the management of the Terminal. In particular it was alleged that SRA was negligent in failing to provide appropriate security services for a Terminal it had chosen for some years to leave unguarded. 
PROCEEDINGS BELOW 
Wills sued SRA claiming damages for negligence. SRA denied the claim and filed a Cross Claim against Wills and TNT. In that Cross Claim SRA pleaded that it was a sub-contractor in the contract for carriage between Wills and TNT and that it was entitled as beneficiary under a trust to claim the benefit of an exemption clause and promise of indemnity in that contract for carriage.

Newman J held that SRA and TNT stood in the relationship of landlord and tenant with respect to the Alltrans shed. Accordingly he rejected the claim that SRA was the bailee of Wills' goods. On the question of the existence of a general duty of care the learned trial judge held that the mere relationship of landlord and tenant did not in itself preclude the existence of a duty of care. He rejected the submission that Cavalier versus Pope <case>; [[1906] AC ] stood in the way of such conclusion. In the light of the recent decision of the High
Court in Northern Sandblasting Pty Ltd versus Harris [(1997) 188 CLR ],
SRA was correct in withdrawing this submission on appeal.

Newman J indicated that he considered that the contractual relationship between TNT and SRA was relevant in determining whether SRA owed a duty of care to Wills. He noted that Wills had, by virtue of its contract of carriage with TNT, expressly accepted the risk of loss when its goods were being gratuitously stored by TNT, save for the minimal amount recoverable pursuant to the exemption clause in that contract. Although Wills would, he held, properly have relied upon SRA to take reasonable care in the transportation of the goods from Melbourne to Sydney, there was no suggestion that Wills relied upon SRA to store its goods safely when they reached the terminal: "It relied upon TNT through its Alltrans division so to do. The fact that in so doing it contractually allowed TNT to limit its liability for loss does not mean that it relied upon the SRA to take care of its goods." In these circumstances
Newman J ruled that Wills had failed to establish sufficient proximity with
SRA to establish that SRA had assumed a duty of care.

It therefore became unnecessary for the judge to consider breach or whether
SRA had a right of indemnity from TNT arising out of the contractual relations between them. Judgment was entered for SRA against Wills and for TNT against
SRA.

The first appeal, by Wills, challenges the finding that SRA owed it no duty of care. SRA filed a defensive appeal and cross appeal, asserting inter alia the claims previously made in its Cross Claim.

It was common ground that the existence of a duty of care was problematic in the sense that the relationship between SRA and Wills was not one where directly applicable precedent has identified a "bright line" category, such as exists as between employer and employee or between the occupier of land and lawful entrants upon it. It is therefore necessary to examine the facts in detail before addressing legal principles. The references in brackets are to the pages of the appeal book.

FACTS 
The Cooks River Rail Terminal 
In 1985 the Terminal was vested in fee simple in SRA and administered by it and its employees in accordance with the Government Railways Act 1912. The
Terminal consisted of rail sidings, roadways, areas of "open space" and areas leased to freight forwarding companies. About 50 per cent of the Terminal was leased (243) to various freightforwarders, including TNT, Mayne Nickless and Sadliers (359). SRA also did freight forwarding of its own in and out of the Terminal. In this activity it was a competitor of the private freightforwarders.

The Terminal is close to the Princes Highway at Sydenham and access could be obtained through two road entrances, one off Talbot Street and the other off
Canal Road. In 1985 there was a gate at the Talbot Street entrance, but it was always open (232, 235, 244, 259). There had once been a gate at the Canal Road entrance, but it had been taken away some time earlier. The entrance was open.
Indeed, access was regulated by street lights (235, 238, 244, 259). The north eastern end of the Alltrans shed, where its main vehicular door was located, abutted onto a roadway that led directly to the Canal Road entrance, which was little more than 60 metres away (45, 328). The whole Terminal was surrounded by a perimeter fence, except where rail tracks entered. However, contemporaneous photographs reveal the fence in poor condition, with large gaps.

In 1985 a train used to arrive from Melbourne and a second train left for
Melbourne each weekday (82, 258-9). Likewise, to and from Brisbane (82).
Sometimes the rolling stock was leased on annual leases from SRA to TNT. SRA personnel had control of the train during the long haul and whilst shunting operations were taking place within the Terminal. When SRA transported privately-owned containers, this was done pursuant to General Conditions regulating charges, overloading etc (360). The SRA station master had the general management of the terminal and control over SRA staff such as shunters . However, individual containers were under the exclusive control of the freight forwarder concerned, which made all of the arrangements with respect to the loading and unloading of the container and the consignment of its contents to their ultimate destination.

The TNT Contrans and TNT Alltrans areas 
Since the 1970s, TNT's Contrans Division had occupied (as lessee) a covered area to the east of the Talbot Street entrance (276-305). A rail track went inside this building, and this enabled a gantry crane to lift large containers from SRA rolling stock and place them directly onto trucks which drove out of the Terminal, or onto trailers controlled by TNT whose employees would move the container elsewhere within the Terminal, usually into the Alltrans shed (96, 268). It was common ground that SRA relinquished any control over individual containers when they were unloaded at the Contrans site (83).

A little to the southeast of the Contrans site, within the Terminal, was a substantial shed occupied by Alltrans Railfast ("Alltrans") another division of TNT. It was over 30 metres wide (78). The Alltrans shed had been built in mid-1982 (232) and had been occupied since that time by Alltrans. It was used by Alltrans for freight forwarding, which involved the consolidation and deconsolidation of loads put into or taken from large containers (259). There were times when consigned goods were locked in the shed overnight, although this was not TNT's normal practice (123). If possible, the containers or their contents would be placed on trucks and removed as soon as practicable (93).
The shed was made of aluminium or similar material (105). It was locked up at night (107). Access to the Alltrans shed was obtained by using roads and paths within the Terminal. Wills' counsel made much of the "landlocked" status of the shed in his address. However, it should be noted that the main door of the shed faces Canal Road along an internal road. Since Canal Road was only about metres from the shed, the door was easily observable by and accessible to traffic on that road (see 45, 484).

TNT staff had access to the site at all times, both day and night (94, 113, , 237). On the night of the theft, the Alltrans building was locked up at .30 pm, but the last TNT employee left the site at 12.08am (483). This practice of unlimited access would have been reinforced by legally enforceable rights of access stemming from the technically "landlocked" location of the leases granted to TNT and their obvious purpose: cf Dowse versus Wynyard
Holdings Ltd [[1962] NSWR 252.] There is evidence that SRA recognized that the equivalent of an easement of necessity existed, giving unrestricted access to Canal Road (see 354, 355). During the -1985 period when there was no security at the terminal, TNT and others had entered at will. In the words of Mr Gill, who was SRA's Chief Operations
Manager in 1985, "there was nothing to stop them; the public went through it.
They had public access to Cooks River through Canal Road and through Talbot
Street on the other end so there was no reason why security couldn't have gone through there". (I will deal later with an issue concerning access by security staff.) 
In February 1985 TNT occupied the Alltrans site pursuant to a monthly tenancy coupled with an agreement for lease for 25 years. This agreement was consummated by a memorandum of lease which was executed in August 1985 and registered in 1989. Letters passed between SRA and TNT on 30 July (307) and 21
August 1980 (309) recording the agreement of SRA to provide TNT with a 25 year lease of that part of the Terminal which became the Alltrans site. A short time later an Agreement to Let or Take (No T81/210) was entered into between the parties. It provided TNT with a monthly tenancy commencing on 20 May 1981 at a rent of $5679. The prohibition on the use of the site for any purpose other than site preparation reveals that it was intended by the parties to cover the period until TNT obtained the necessary approvals and constructed the site which it would occupy under the agreed 25 year lease. TNT began to pay monthly rent. On 13 October 1981 this Agreement was replaced by another in nearly identical form (T81/257). There was a slightly larger area (1.176 hectares) with a correspondingly higher rental ($5879) per week (326, 329).
From that time onward this monthly rent was paid (330-332, 335).

Although the building was completed by mid-1982 and thereafter occupied by TNT , the formal 25 year lease was not executed until 6 August 1985, which was after the theft. The Lease was registered four years later, but was backdated to commence in November 1981. I am prepared to assume that Wills is correct in its submission that the long-term Lease cannot be taken into account as against it as at February 1985. But nothing turns on this, because it is clear that TNT occupied the Alltrans site at the time of the theft under a monthly tenancy and with the benefit of an enforceable contract to give it a year term. That, coupled with the bailment to TNT of the stolen container of tobacco goods, gave it and it alone both possession and the right to possession of the goods at the time when they were stolen.

Wills' use of the Terminal 
Wills' employees in Sydney, notably Mr Sirimanee the acting superintendent at
Kensington, were familiar with the Terminal in 1985. Frequent loads of cigarettes were delivered there to be stored in TNT containers for rail transportation interstate, or were picked up from there by Wills' drivers in
Wills' trucks (119). Each load had its own TNT consignment note, the variable details of which were negotiated between Wills and TNT employees. Rates were negotiated periodically (319-320). Like other TNT customers Wills could arrange for storage overnight in the TNT premises if the need arose (119-20, , 270.2).

It is clear that Wills relied primarily upon TNT in relation to the particular shipment. The consignment was arranged (probably in Sydney: see 449) between employees of Wills and employees of TNT. TNT Alltrans issued the relevant consignment note. TNT assumed the entire control of the container after it was offloaded from the rolling stock in the Contrans building. Discussions between employees of Wills and TNT culminated in arrangements whereby the container was left within the locked Alltrans site. TNT employees assumed responsibility for the safety of the container and took steps to back it against a wall so that access to it was blocked, and to lock it in the confines of the Alltrans building.

Wills obviously intended that the long haul between Melbourne and Sydney would be by rail. But, in a real sense, this was a matter to which it was indifferent provided that the goods arrived at their intended destination at the contracted price. TNT reserved the right to transport the goods by "road, rail, sea or air" (clause 7). Doubtless it would have been open to Wills and
TNT to have negotiated for TNT employees driving a TNT truck to have carried the container from Cooks River to Kensington when it emerged that Wills was unable to arrange this on the Friday afternoon.

Wills' Mr Sirimanee was asked what he would have done in relation to leaving goods overnight if he had been told that after hours and on weekends there was no security whatsoever in the terminal, either on its perimeter or inside the terminal. He said that he would not have left valuable goods at the terminal (120-1). Wills relied upon this evidence to challenge the finding that there was no suggestion (in the evidence) that Wills relied upon SRA to store its goods safely when they reached the Terminal. However, Mr Sirimanee's answer was entirely equivocal as to whether it represented any reliance upon SRA as distinct from TNT. When pressed in cross examination by counsel for TNT to specify the factor that influenced him in deciding to leave the goods overnight on the occasion of the theft, Mr Sirimanee said that "We knew that
TNT used to take a lot of care with our product because of the value of the commodities" and that he "thought it was their [TNT's] responsibility to make sure there was (sic) adequate methods applied"(124) (emphasis added)." In the light of this evidence, the trial judge was correct to conclude that Wills consciously relied upon no one apart from TNT to protect its goods from theft at the relevant time.

After the theft, Wills claimed the cost of the stolen goods from TNT (110).
However, the exemption clause in clause 6 of the consignment note meant that the claim was limited to $500, which was the sum paid in full settlement by
TNT (402).

Security at the Terminal 
Until late July 1982, SRA provided security services at the Terminal in the form of manning the guard gates at the two entrances 24 hours a day and checking vehicles coming in and out (169, 183-4, 212, 265, 336, 486) as well as providing occasional patrolling security checks (189, 212, 265, 486). In
September 1981, SRA calculated the annual cost of maintaining a patrolman at the Terminal at $90,619 (336). Until August 1981, 65 per cent of this considerable cost was met by the freightforwarders and car manufacturers that occupied parts of the Terminal, with the remaining 35 per cent being defrayed by SRA (191, 196, 306, 311-8, 337, 358, 486). In 1980-81 there were four freightforwarders plus SRA (337). TNT Contrans participated in these arrangements pursuant to annual agreements (311, 312, 318).

The various users ceased to contribute towards costs in August 1981, and SRA responded by withdrawing the guardpost security in July 1982 (101, 203-4, 352, ). Two factors were involved: (a) cost, and (b) the transfer of the car transporting work from Cooks River to the Enfield terminal. The removal of cars from the open areas of the Terminal eliminated a particular temptation to thieves (180, 214, 215-6, 228, 274-5). Factors (a) and (b) were linked in the sense that the withdrawal of the car freightforwarders also removed a group that had hitherto contributed towards SRA's security costs in the Terminal. By
July 1982 SRA had formed the policy that it was "user pays" for security (57, , 352). The users were aware of this, but they decided not to pay.

I have already described the open access to the Terminal at the relevant period. It would have been quite apparent to occupiers and regular users of the Terminal that the guards had been withdrawn from the gatehouses. (See also , 126, 166-7, 169-70.) Indeed the withdrawal of the SRA security arrangements provoked several responses from those freightforwarders who remained after the transfer of the car forwarding businesses.

TNT in particular complained to SRA security people (116, 196) about losses through theft and vandalism of equipment and freight (90, 97-8, 108, 117-8, , 196, 200, 241-2). SRA was unmoved, at least until after the 1985 theft.
An internal TNT Security Division memorandum dated 14 January 1985 described the Terminal on weekends as "a popular place with some members of the criminal element, who appear to roam the area at will" (373). SRA management took the position that (after the removal of the cars) the major risk was to freight, as distinct from carrying equipment, and that it was the responsibility of the freightforwarders to use their own securely locked premises for storage of freight and other valuables (188, 241-3). It was suggested by SRA that TNT could have one of its employees stay in its building overnight to keep it under observation (188, 200, 217). I have already recorded that the rights secured to TNT under the leasing arrangements at the time gave TNT authority to do this. In addition this had been suggested by Mr
Henderson, who occupied senior positions in SRA's security service at the relevant time.

It was obvious to all parties that security arrangements were costly and that there were a number of options open to respond to what counsel for Wills described as SRA's "studied indifference". These would have included alarm systems. (There were, however, none in the Alltrans shed: see 136.) It is not irrelevant that SRA was itself a freight forwarding competitor in a highly competitive industry (210). Indeed SRA was a common carrier at the time (205).
TNT had its own security division, which was available as a source of advice and staffing.

These events make it clear that, as between SRA and TNT, SRA was (to TNT's knowledge) assuming no responsibility for the safety of TNT's freight, especially during the period 1982-1985: see also 117-8, 204-5. Throughout that period, SRA was not privy to the contents of individual containers (91, 235, -241, 265), requiring disclosure of the contents of containers carried by rail only when dangerous goods were in them (239). This policy obviously contributed to the security of particular valuable shipments.

At some stage in the discussions during this period TNT raised the issue of having TNT security personnel patrolling generally in the Terminal, outside the areas leased to TNT. There was SRA resistance to this, and the precise reason and timing is a matter of dispute. Newman J held that the difficulties were related to safety issues arising from the movement of TNT personnel around the Terminal, and that the difficulty was satisfactorily resolved after discussion. Although this finding was challenged on appeal, it was clearly correct for reasons which I shall demonstrate. At the outset, it should be observed that the discussions demonstrate that TNT and the other freightforwarders using the Terminal knew that the SRA had withdrawn security and that the reason was the refusal of the freightforwarders to contribute to what was seen by all as an expensive exercise.

It is best to set out the evidence on this matter in detail. Mr Teasel was a senior investigator at TNT Internal Investigations in 1985. His role included the inspection of terminals and liaison and advice on security at terminals . He was concerned at the lack of security at the Cooks River Terminal and was aware that this matter had been raised by Mr Heasman, his general manager at TNT Australia, with Mr Arantz, who had been retained as a consultant by SRA (114-116). His evidence makes plain that TNT was fully aware of the withdrawal of security services by SRA in the period between 1982 and (See also 117-118.) 
Mr Chambers was the General Manager of TNT's Contrans Division in 1984 and
He said that it was his understanding that TNT was not permitted to have its security men anywhere in the Cooks River Terminal, apparently drawing a distinction between the general area of the Terminal and the leased areas (269-70). He said that this understanding came from his membership of a security committee that was formed by the freightforwarders after the removal of security guards by SRA (269). He spoke of discussions having taken place with the ARU and the SRA on this issue and that they indicated that SRA did not want TNT guards on Cooks River land (270.1).

Counsel for Wills submitted that there was a meeting in December 1984 between
TNT (Twining and others) and SRA (Arantz and another) when TNT sought approval to operate its own security service , which was refused because of (a) SRA's concern about union issues,[1] and (b) SRA's desire to make a substantial profit from contributions by users of the Terminal.[2] 
The submission overstates the evidence. Mr Twining was general manager of TNT
Security between 1975 and 1990. For him, thefts had "always been a problem from the time I joined" (98). In late November or early December 1984 he met with SRA representatives including Mr Arantz. He complained about TNT losses suffered in the previous twelve months. "We wanted some security. For them to provide some security or allow us to use ours"(101). The SRA representatives explained that security had been cut for economic reasons a couple of years beforehand, and that they did not believe it would be reinstated. They indicated that the railway unions would not allow "outside commercial security companies to be policing railway staff on railway property" (102, emphasis added. See also 103). Mr Twining was told to put his request "on paper at a senior level" (101). I infer that the letter dated 8 February from the Executive Director of TNT addressed to the Chief Executive of the SRA was the contemplated request. Its timing and content are significant, as I shall explain after referring to the SRA evidence on the topic.

To the limited extent that the evidence from TNT witnesses located the time of
SRA opposition to the use of TNT security patrolmen in the period before the theft, this evidence was disputed by SRA witnesses. Mr Harvey, who was a
SRA shunter at the Terminal, said that he first remembered seeing TNT security patrols in the general area of the Terminal after February 1985 (167), and that there was a difficulty involving the Union at Cooks River which arose from this (168). That difficulty was finally resolved after a period of time . In cross-examination he reiterated that this difficulty involving the use of private guards arose after the theft (and that it was related to the actions of the security people) (173). Later he explained that the Union objection was due to the manner in which the TNT security guards were moving around the yard, the fact that they carried arms, and the risk of accidents that they posed to shunting staff (176).

Mr Gray, who had been the General Freight Operations Manager for SRA at the
Terminal between 1982 and 1990, said that in the period between mid-1982 and
February 1985 there had been an offer made to TNT and the other freightforwarders to have security in the yard so long as they paid for it. He said that this offer had been rejected by TNT (236). Mr Gray was not aware of any objection by SRA Unions to the provision of security by TNT prior to
February 1985 (236). He also said that such objection as there was to TNT security people related to the manner in which they conducted their activities. He said that "they were brandishing guns in the yard and some of the staff had been stopped and questioned. There were lights - they were driving around with their lights on high beam, and what have you, and they were virtually blinding the staff while they were shunting" (237). He was clear that this occurred after 1985 (237). In cross-examination he adhered to his evidence that his response to TNT's (Mr Ryan's) request for SRA to provide security again after 1982 was that it was "user pays; if you want it, you pay for it" (243). He said that Mr Ryan refused to contribute to the cost of providing Terminal security (245). He denied that there were concerns about private security guards coming into the Terminal, other than those related to "the guns on the hips and the accosting of the staff while they were shunting" (245, See also 246-7).

The internal TNT Security memo dated 14 January 1985 (written by Mr Sadlier) which has already been referred to stated inter alia: "I have made enquiries from other companies within the Cooks River Railyard and have been informed by Railex, Brambles and Sadliers Transport, that they are all losing goods from Containers and equipment from vehicles on an almost continuous basis.

Mr Henderson, Assistant Superintendent of the Railway Security was contacted and given the above facts, and he informed me that there are no patrols or security of any sort at the Cooks River Railyard. In view of this I asked him would it be permissible to make our own patrols of the Contrans area, as now we have no conflict of interest with Railway security. He promised to make enquiries concerning this and will contact us as soon as he has the information." 
On 8 February 1985, Mr Cutler who was an Executive Director of TNT Australia responsible for the Contrans Division wrote to the Chief Executive of SRA drawing attention to the non existence of security patrols and the losses suffered due to the open access of the Terminal. The letter continued: "I propose that TNT companies supply their own guards to patrol the complex, this patrol would be utilised during the night and week-ends when most of the vandalism and thefts take place.

We have been in contact with Phil Aranz, Security Section of the State Rail
Authority who advised us to contact you by mail.

We are seeking permission to operate our own security guards on Rail
Authority property.

Discussions have also been made with other companies within the complex towards the same goal." 
The author of this letter, Mr Cutler, said in evidence that there was a problem with the State Rail Union which meant that TNT was not allowed to have its own security at the Terminal (85). However, when pressed, he agreed that this was something he had been told (94-5).

It is significant that this letter was received by the SRA Chief Executive on February 1985 (377), which was two days before the theft. It is also significant that the letter does not speak of prior refusals to let TNT security staff patrol within the Terminal. The letter was referred to the
Industrial Relations Division of SRA (226), a fact which corroborates the presence of union concern. Mr Hills' response to Mr Cutler was sent on 30
April 1985. He indicated that there was no objection to TNT operating its own security guard on SRA property. The letter also noted that such a procedure had been in operation for some time (406).

In my view, these facts demonstrate that the trial judge was correct in holding that there was no withholding of permission to TNT with respect to providing security over the shed itself. The evidence also shows that such difficulties as existed in relation to the movement of TNT security personnel through the general areas of the Terminal were reasonably based on safety issues and were satisfactorily and promptly resolved when they arose. This was the substance of SRA's Answer to Interrogatory 16B which was apparently tendered at trial by Wills.

I do not draw the inference that SRA was endeavouring to make a "substantial profit" from contributions by freightforwarders to the cost of providing security services at the Terminal, but it is clear that there was a stand off over "user pays". To my mind that shows no more than the obvious fact that adequate security services would be expensive for the Terminal as a whole, and that this was known by all key players.

The theft 
On Friday 16 February 1985 the daily train arrived at the Terminal from
Melbourne. Its freight included a 40-foot TNT jumbo container filled with 26 pallets of cigarettes and cigars belonging to Wills. It was agreed at trial that the value of the contents was $347,307.12. Wills had consigned the tobacco products from its Melbourne factory using the services of Alltrans.
The consignment note (449) issued from Alltrans Railfast. The consignor was designated as Wills (at the address of its administration centre in East
Bentleigh, in Melbourne); and the consignee as Wills (at the address of its administration centre in Kensington, Sydney). However, the termini of the carriage by TNT were "depot to depot" (320) in the sense of TNT depot to TNT depot. Wills transported the tobacco to and from the TNT depots.

In accordance with earlier practice, the particular container was to be picked up at the Alltrans site by Wills employees coming from Wills' Kensington premises when contacted by TNT (382). Mr Petchell, who was the foreman of
Alltrans at the Terminal, notified Mr Sirimanee of Wills of the arrival of the container from Melbourne. It was very late in the afternoon and, because
Wills' drivers and trucks were otherwise occupied, Mr Sirimanee asked whether
Mr Petchell would keep the container until it could be picked up first thing the following morning (119, 123). The container load had to be "broken down" so that the pallets could be loaded onto the Wills' truck and that procedure would obviously take some time. An offer by Mr
Petchell to unload the container and deliver its contents to Wills' warehouse on TNT vehicles was declined by Mr Sirimanee on the ground that it might have created an industrial dispute with Wills' own Transport Union members (383).

At trial, Wills and SRA agreed that the theft occurred on 16 February 1985, prior to 5 am, when unknown persons entered the Terminal and broke into the
Alltrans warehouse (33, see also 483). The site had been secure when the last
TNT employee left at 12.08 am (483). The thieves entered the Terminal unchecked and forced open a pedestrian fire door in the Alltrans shed. They started up an unlocked prime mover within the shed, towed away an empty container, and hitched the prime mover to the container full of Wills' tobacco that had been placed with its door jammed against a wall. The door facing and near to Canal Road was then jammed open. The container was driven through the door and onto the western side of the shed at a spot inside the Terminal out of view of Canal Road. There the tobacco was unloaded onto a vehicle which was driven away by the thieves. The loading operation would have taken between 1 and 11/2 hours. (See 106, 120-1, 125-6, 328, 379-83, 483-4.) 
There was evidence that supported the conclusion that the thieves would probably have been foiled in their endeavours if there had been SRA guards at the gates of the Terminal or regular patrols within the Terminal (160, 195, -200, 243, 485, 488). I have little difficulty in accepting that the theft was foreseeable (by anyone familiar with the set-up between 1982 and 1985) as a risk involved in an unguarded Terminal; and that the coming home of that risk was contributed to by a lack of security.

After the theft 
It was common ground at trial, as between Wills and SRA, that after the theft
TNT was able to and did put in place security measures which if taken prior to February 1985 would have prevented the theft (33-4: Statement of Agreed
Facts). These arrangements apparently started the day after the theft (172).
See also the evidence, already recounted, about the initial union difficulties with TNT security personnel at the Terminal, until (at least according to the
SRA witnesses) after the arrival of TNT security people, which occurred after the theft.

APPELLANT'S LEGAL SUBMISSIONS 
The appellant submitted that a relationship of proximity existed between itself and SRA. Counsel relied upon (1) bailment or sub-bailment (2) a general duty of care to exercise statutory powers reasonably (3) actual reliance and/or assumption of responsibility (4) SRA's control of its premises (5) "general dependence" or reliance in the sense referred to by Mason J in
Sutherland Shire Council versus Heyman ("Heyman") <case>; [(1985) 157 CLR 424] at 464.

I shall explain how the appellant's counsel developed these submissions when I address them in turn.

APPLICABLE LEGAL PRINCIPLES: SOME GENERAL REMARKS The High Court has, in recent years, repeatedly emphasised the need to find something more than reasonable foreseeability before a duty of care will arise outside the "more settled areas of the law of negligence concerned with ordinary physical injury to the person or property of a plaintiff caused by some act of the defendant": Bryan versus Maloney (1995) 182 CLR 609 at 617-8. See also Jaensch versus Coffey <case>; [(1984) 155 CLR 549], 293 (1962): "Everyone can foresee the commission of crime virtually anywhere and at any time. If foreseeability itself gave rise to a duty to provide 'police' protection for others, every residential curtilage, every shop, every store, every manufacturing plant would have to be patrolled by the private arms of the owner. And since hijacking and attack upon occupants of motor vehicles are also foreseeable, it would be the duty of every motorist to provide armed protection for his passengers and the property of others. Of course, none of this is at all palatable.

The question is not simply whether a criminal event is foreseeable, but whether a duty exists to take measures to guard against it." 
See also P Perl (Exporters) Ltd versus Camden London Borough Council <case>; [[1984] 1 QB 342] at 357-8 per Oliver LJ.

Until very recently proximity was favoured by the High Court: "as a touchstone and control of the categories of case in which the common law will adjudge that a duty of care is owed. Given the general circumstances of a case in a new or developing area of the law of negligence, the question what (if any) combination or combinations of factors will satisfy the requirement of proximity is a question of law to be resolved by the processes of legal reasoning, induction and deduction." 
Thus spoke Deane J in Heyman at 498 in a passage which was approved by
Mason, Wilson, Deane and Dawson JJ in Cook versus Cook <case>; [(1986) 162 CLR 376] at 381-2. Latterly, doubts have been expressed by several justices about the value of proximity as a touchstone. In Romeo v
Conservation Commission of the Northern Territory [1998] HCA 5 at SS63
Gaudron J suggested that "the notion of `proximity' is not without its difficulties". (She cited passages from recent judgments of Brennan CJ,
Dawson, McHugh and Gummow JJ. See also Swanton and McDonald, "The Reach of the Tort of Negligence" [(1997) 71 ALJ 822.)] However Gaudron J added: "It is a useful term indicating that a duty of care depends on some definite relationship, some assumption of responsibility or some significant feature of the position of one person in relation to another, and not simply the foreseeability of injury to that person." 
Kirby J (at SS241) was not so sanguine about the future of this much assailed concept. He referred to the recognition by four justices in Hill versus Van
Erp [(1997) 188 CLR 159] at 177-8 (Dawson J) 188-9 (Toohey J) 210-11 (McHugh J) and 237-9 (Gummow J) that there were limitations in the usefulness of the notion of proximity in determining whether or not a duty of care arises.
Noting that Brennan CJ had also been a persistent critic of proximity for a decade, Kirby J concluded that "it is tolerably clear that proximity's reign in this Court, at least as a universal identifier of the existence of a duty of care at common law, has come to an end". Having published this dutiful obituary, Kirby J later suggested that it was relevant to enquire as to the sufficiency of "proximity factors" (see at SSSS247, 250). One is reminded of
Mark Twain's famous aphorism about reports of his death.

If proximity is an unhelpful notion, more focussed concepts need to be considered. The search for factors such as assumption of responsibility, control, and reliance concentrate upon the positive side of the judicial equation. The High Court has also enunciated a number of policy considerations which tend to limit or exclude a duty of care: see the cases discussed by
Beazley and Stein JJA in CSR Ltd versus Wren, CA unreported 18 December 1997 at pp25-33. Among such "control mechanisms" (Pyrenees Shire Council v
Day <case> at SS126 per Gummow J) are:-
There is concern that the imposition of liability "in an indeterminate amount for an indeterminate time to an indeterminate class" will have a chilling effect upon human activity: Ultramares Corporation versus Touche [(1931) 174 NE 441] at 444 per Chief Judge Cardozo. See Bryan at 618. A particular instance involves what is termed "pure economic loss", where the loss suffered by the plaintiff is a concomitant of the defendant's successful pursuit of personal gain by lawful conduct in a free enterprise society: see
Jaensch at 578; Heyman at 502-3.
Arising out of (1) there is particular concern that the needs of commerce require some limitation on the extent to which those who engage in commercial activity are liable for foreseeable negligent acts lest activities considered to be beneficial or necessary to society might be foregone.
At times the law of negligence has restrained itself simply out of deference to policies reasonably presumed to inhere in well-established principles of law to be found in other universes of discourse. Thus, in
Hill Dawson J said: "It is ... important that the tort of negligence should not be regarded as providing an all-enveloping remedy, supplanting `other torts, contractual obligations, statutory duties and equitable rules in relation to every kind of damage including economic loss'."  CLR at 179, citing Downsview Ltd versus First City Corporation Ltd [1993] AC 295 at 316.
In the case of public authorities a distinction has sometimes been drawn between policy and operational decisions, with the intent that courts should sometimes refrain from imposing a duty of care where a public authority has made a considered decision not to enter a field of endeavour for budgetary or other "policy" reasons. This is an aspect of the separation of powers, and a recognition of the fundamental constitutional proposition that it is
Parliament that decides how public money is to be spent. Nevertheless, in
Pyrenees Shire Council (at SSSS181-187) Gummow J was critical of the policy/operational classification as a touchstone of duty of care.
The traditional view is that the fact that a party is insured is irrelevant in determining the rights inter se of parties: see Lister v
Romford Ice and Cold Storage Co Ltd <case>; [[1957] AC ] at -7 (Viscount Simonds); Caltex Oil (Australia) Pty Ltd versus The Dredge "Willemstad" <case>; [(1977) 136 CLR 529] at 580-1 (Stephen J). See, for example the principles stemming from Bradburn versus Great Western Railway Co <case>; [(1874) LR 10 Exch 1] that treat many insurance benefits received by injured plaintiffs as not operating in reduction of the damages awarded against the defendant. Latterly, proponents of the "realities of insurance" like Lord
Denning and the late Professor Fleming have challenged these views. They have contested the notion of tort liability as an indicator of the moral fault of the particular defendants found responsible. It is argued that, since the twentieth century expansion of tort law has been a partial product of liability insurance, it is only just and rational that patterns and practices of insurance might suggest limits to liability in new fields. In Pyrenees
Shire Council (at SS256) Kirby J thought that one indicator against the imposition of a duty of care was the fact that owners and occupiers of property commonly protect themselves by fire insurance. Citing Stovin v
Wise <case>; [[1996] AC 923] at 944, he added that "the law should encourage self- reliance because it tends to promote greater economic efficiency".

There are, however theoretical and empirical difficulties with such arguments: see generally Jane Stapleton, "Tort, Insurance and Ideology" [(1995) 58
Mod L Rev 820.] For example, is it the plaintiff's or the defendant's insurability that is relevant? There is also the danger of assuming that insurance is readily available in some fields, because (if it is not) the courts cannot further assume that the increased cost of an extension of liability can be spread among the clients of the service-provider held liable in tort: see Esanda Finance Corporation Ltd versus Peat Marwick Hungerfords [(1997) 188 CLR 241] at 282-3 (McHugh J). Notwithstanding my sympathy for taking some account of insurance practices, the judicial and academic warnings about the relevance of insurance should be heeded. I shall therefore resist the temptation to pay regard to Wills' capacity to insure goods it chose to consign through a freightforwarder at a price that presumably reflected the latter's "all care but no responsibility" policy.

The particular bases of liability suggested by the appellant will now be addressed.

Bailment or sub-bailment 
Relying on The Pioneer Container <case>; [[1994] 2 AC ], the appellant contended in its written submissions that the trial judge had erred in not finding that SRA was bailee or sub-bailee of Wills' goods. It is unclear whether this submission was pressed, but I shall address it. It appears to be the case that the appellant accepts that any possible bailment to SRA consequent upon the carriage of the container by rail from Melbourne to
Sydney came to an end when SRA relinquished control over the container that was unloaded at the Contrans site. Thereafter TNT was the sole bailee, at least initially. However, a bailment or sub-bailment to SRA is said to have arisen when Mr Sirimanee agreed with TNT for the goods to remain overnight at the Terminal. I would reject this submission. The arrangement simply constituted or confirmed TNT as bailee (cf Hobbs versus Petersham Transport Co
Pty Ltd <case>; [(1971) 124 CLR 220] at 237-8), but SRA was a stranger to that arrangement. The goods in the container were placed under TNT's exclusive control and locked in its shed.

Alternatively, Wills submitted that SRA became bailee or sub-bailee when (as is likely) the container was driven out of the shed in the middle of the night and parked in the general area of the Terminal as the thieves unloaded its contents. It is true that a finder can become a bailee without an antecedent relationship with the owner of goods, but it is quite unrealistic to regard
SRA as being in an equivalent position simply because the land it occupied was the place where the goods were transferred from the container by the thieves.
The latter activity took less than 11/2 hours. It is unlikely that the cigarettes ever touched the ground as they passed from the container to the thieves' own truck. In any event, the necessary handing over of control to the putative bailee or sub-bailee was absent, as was any assumption of such control: cf Buchanan & Co Ltd versus Hay's Transport Services [[1972] 2
Lloyd's Rep 535] at 542.

It is one thing to conclude that it is not a prerequisite of a bailment that the bailor should have consented to the bailee's possession of the goods. It is something entirely different to hold that a bailment or sub-bailment can come about in the absence of possession, consent or knowledge as regards the alleged bailee or sub-bailee. Proof of bailment may reverse the onus of proof as regards negligence, but the bailment itself must first be established. It was not established here.

Breach of statutory duty by SRA 
Wills submitted that SRA was liable in damages for breach of a statutory duty arising under provisions of the Government Railways Act 1912 (now repealed).
Section 16(1)(d) empowered the Public Transport Commission to appoint places as depots to receive or deliver goods. (The Public Transport Commission's functions were vested in SRA by the Transport Authorities Act 1980.) Section
B permitted authorised officers to stop and detain vehicles within the
Terminal. Section 33 provided: . The Commissioners shall maintain the railways and all works in connection therewith in a state of efficiency, and shall carry persons, animals, and goods without negligence or delay; and in respect of the carriage of persons, animals, and goods, the Commissioners shall be common carriers.

Section 36 stipulated that the Commissioners "shall afford all reasonable, proper, and equal facilities for ... receiving, forwarding, and delivery of passengers and goods ...." 
In the upshot, Wills did not invoke any of these provisions as the foundation of a statutory cause of action against SRA. The necessary conditions for a duty sounding in damages were absent: see Byrne versus Australian Airlines
Ltd [(1995) 185 CLR 410] at 459; Northern Territory versus Mengel (1995) 185
CLR 307 at 343-4. Nevertheless the sections were relied upon as supporting a general duty of care at common law, reinforced by SRA's position as a monopoly rail carrier. I shall not overlook these provisions when I deal with the general duty of care.

The case based upon actual reliance and/or assumption of responsibility 
Speaking in Bryan versus Maloney (1995) 182 CLR 609 at 619 in the context of special cases of mere economic loss, Mason CJ, Deane and Gaudron JJ said that: 
Commonly, but not necessarily, they will involve an identified element of known reliance (or dependence) or the assumption of responsibility or a combination of the two.

These principles apply to public authorities and property damage: see
Kondis versus State Transport Authority <case>; [(1984) 154 CLR 672] at 687, noting however that Mason J spoke there of a "special duty" arising because: "the person on whom it is imposed has undertaken the care, supervision or control of the person or property of another or is so placed in relation to that person or his property as to assume a particular responsibility for his or its safety, in circumstances where the person affected might reasonably expect that due care will be exercised."(emphasis added) 
The appellant relied upon the statutory responsibilities of SRA and the
Railway Commissioners under the Government Railways Act 1912 as the background to this aspect of its case against SRA. However, the principal matter said to give rise to a reliance-based duty of care was SRA's former practice of providing security services at the Terminal. The appellant invoked Mason J in
Heyman (at 461) where he said that: "... there are situations in which a public authority, not otherwise under a relevant duty, may place itself in such a position that others rely on it to take care for their safety so that the authority comes under a duty of care calling for positive action. Such a relationship has been held to arise where a person, by practice or past conduct upon which other persons come to rely, creates a self-imposed duty to take positive action to protect the safety or interests of another or at least to warn him that he or his interests are at risk" 
See also Esanda Finance Corporation Ltd versus Peat Marwick Hungerfords [(1997) 188 CLR 241] at 263-4.

This part of Wills' case did not turn on the now rejected notion of "general reliance" (see below). But the distinction between actual and "general" reliance is critical because the facts in this appeal do not support a case based on assumption of responsibility or particular reliance. I have already explained why Mr Sirimanee's evidence shows that Wills placed reliance upon
TNT, not SRA.

But even if Wills could in some way stand in TNT's shoes, the evidence recounted earlier in this judgment makes it very clear that from July 1982 onwards (until after the theft) SRA withdrew security services at the
Terminal. The freightforwarders were aware of this. They were unhappy, and protested, but were unwilling to contribute to a "user pays" regime. The cost of providing appropriate security services was significant. It did not form part of SRA's obligations under the various leases with the freightforwarders.
And earlier arrangements for annual contributions by freightforwarders (who were SRA's competitors) had been abandoned. In these circumstances all stakeholders were aware that they had to rely upon their own security resources, and to build the cost of doing so (or failing to do so) into the charges they set their several customers in what appears to have been a highly competitive market: cf Trade Practices Commission versus TNT Management Pty Ltd & Ors [(1985) 58 ALR 423.] 
What Wills complains of as "studied indifference" by SRA to the requests from the various freightforwarders to upgrade security services after 1982 is really the open withdrawal of any assumption on its part of (non-contractual) responsibility. This happened long before the theft. Between 1982 and 1985 there was no such assumption of responsibility on SRA's part. The factual corollary is that there was no known reliance or dependence on the part of the freightforwarders or their customers. A fortiori, it was not reasonable to expect that care would be exercised by SRA.

I have already explained why Wills' case that SRA "prevented" TNT from patrolling in or around its leased premises failed on the facts.

SRA's duty said to stem from its ownership and control of the Terminal 
The appellant submitted, correctly, that it is well settled that when statutory powers are conferred they must be exercised with reasonable care:
Caledonian Collieries Ltd versus Speirs <case>; [(1957) 97 CLR 202] at 220; Heyman at 435-6, 458, 484. But the mere existence of statutory powers or duties does not in itself create a statutory duty sounding in damages. No such duty was pressed in the present case.
Rather, the appellant relied upon SRA's statutory ownership and statutory rights to control activities within the Terminal as a basis for establishing requisite elements of proximity, control and reliance.

The fee simple of the Terminal was vested in SRA under the 1912 Act. That Act also conferred on SRA specific powers that enabled it to manage rail activities taking place on the Terminal. This ownership, occupation and control of the general areas of the Terminal doubtless gave rise to a duty of care to prevent injury to persons or property brought onto those general areas of the Terminal in the normal course of its operations so long as they were there: see Buckle versus Bayswater Road Board <case>; [(1936) 57 CLR 259] at 286-7; Voli versus Inglewood Shire Council <case>; [(1963) 110 CLR 74]; Heyman at 460-1; Pyrenees Shire Council at
SS103. In Burnie Port Authority versus General Jones Pty Ltd <case>; [(1994) 179 CLR 520] at 555 Mason CJ, Deane, Dawson, Toohey and Gaudron JJ said that: "The relationship of proximity which exists, for the purposes of ordinary negligence, between a plaintiff and a defendant in circumstances which would prima facie attract the rule in Rylands versus Fletcher is characterized by such a central element of control and by such special dependence and vulnerability. One party to that relationship is a person who is in control of premises and who has taken advantage of that control to introduce thereon or to retain therein a dangerous substance or to undertake thereon a dangerous activity or to allow another person to do one of those things. The other party to that relationship is a person, outside the premises and without control over what occurs therein, whose person or property is thereby exposed to a foreseeable risk of danger." 
Wills invoked these principles to found its case of a duty of care relating to the goods that were stolen. The specific content of that duty was said to be one requiring care to be taken to prevent the thieves breaking into the shed or using the area outside the shed as the point of transfer of the stolen goods from the container which had been towed from the shed. One way in which
Wills advanced its case was to focus on SRA's duty as landowner with respect to the TNT Contrans shed from which the goods were stolen. Alternatively,
Wills addressed SRA's situation arising from its ownership, occupation and control of the area adjacent to the TNT Contrans shed. The functional connection between the Terminal as a whole and particular leased area was emphasised.

In Hargrave versus Goldman <case>; [(1963) 110 CLR 40], [1976] 1 AC 645 both the High Court and the Privy Council approved a dictum from Scrutton LJ's dissenting judgment in Job Edwards Ltd v The Company of Proprietors of the Birmingham Navigations [[1924] 1 KB ] at that "a landowner has a duty to take reasonable care not to allow his land to remain a receptacle for a thing which may, if not rendered harmless, cause damage to his neighbours". (See <case>; [(1963) 110 CLR 40] at 50-1, 73 (HC); <case>; [(1966) 115 CLR 458] at 463-4 (PC).) 
Hargrave rejected conclusively the distinction between things brought onto land by an occupier and things such as fire which came "naturally". The possibility of extending this principle to noxious weeds such as prickly pear (see Hargrave at 70 per Windeyer J; Cf Sparke versus Osborne <case>; [(1908) 7 CLR 51)] was countenanced. Does it matter that the fire is lit by a malevolent stranger rather than "act of God"? Are thieves any different? Why should there not be a duty of care in such situations, albeit one which may be easy to discharge? 
Assuming for the moment that an occupier has the capacity to control or detect thieves' activities, the imposition of any duty to do so remains exceptional.
The law is reluctant to impose a duty that entails controlling the conduct of another person for whom the defendant has no primary responsibility. In
Smith versus Leurs <case>; [(1945) 70 CLR 256] at 262 Dixon J noted that: "It is...exceptional to find in the law a duty to control another's actions to prevent harm to strangers. The general rule is that one man is under no duty of controlling another man to prevent his doing damage to a third." 
This principle has been applied in the particular context of one neighbour's alleged duty to take care to prevent the land occupied by that neighbour from facilitating the activities of vandals who light fires or thieves who break in and steal using one property as a means of access to another. I shall refer to the cases below.

Being a lessor confers no special immunity: Parker versus Housing Trust [(1986) 41 SASR 493]; Northern Sandblasting Pty Ltd versus Harris [(1997) 188 CLR .]
But neither is it sufficient to establish tortious liability. The lessor who has given up possession of premises to a tenant has significantly relinquished capacity to control activities taking place within them. A landlord offers a lease on terms which a prospective tenant may choose to take or reject. The level of services provided will be reflected in the rental. A luxurious block of flats may have a concierge or doorman, but such services do not come cheaply. Beyond this, "the duty to provide police protection is foreign to the history of the landlord-tenant relationship": Goldberg versus Housing
Authority [186 A 2d 291], 296 (1962) per Weintraub Ch J. See generally [10 ALR 3d .] Not even an occupier is generally liable for the loss of a visitor's property by theft, unless the occupier has become a bailee. In Tinsley versus Dudley [[1951] 2
KB 18] at Jenkins LJ remarked on the complete absence of any authority suggesting such liability. Such a principle would, in his view, produce "a liability of a most comprehensive and sweeping character, and would have entered into a very great number of cases if it existed". See generally Palmer, Bailment nd ed pp426-9.

What difference does it make that the lessor retains possession and control of areas adjacent to the leased premises? Generally speaking, I would have thought that such lessor is no different to an adjoining freehold neighbour unless some contractual obligation has been assumed through the lease. One hesitates to be categorical. For example, the owner of a shopping mall may assume a duty of care through the practice of excluding after hours entrance to all persons (including the lessee of an individual shop) while maintaining a security patrol. But the duty in such a situation derives from a conscious assumption of responsibility, known reliance and preclusion of the tenant's own right to take his or her own security measures for the individual shop. It is not a mere incident of the landlord/tenant relationship.

The existence of a duty of care owed by an adjoining owner for the criminal conduct of entrants to a neighbouring property was discussed in two English cases. In Perl (Exporters) Ltd versus Camden LBC <case>; [[1984] QB 342](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1984%5d%201%20QB%20342 "View LawCiteRecord" ), the plaintiff occupied the basement of the defendant's premises pursuant to a lease. It used the basement for the storage of garments which it retailed.
The defendant also owned the adjoining premises. Those premises had a broken lock on the front door. Unauthorised persons were often seen on those premises and burglaries had taken place there, but the defendant had done nothing about complaints regarding the lack of security. During a weekend intruders entered the defendant's premises, knocked a hole in the common wall in the basement and stole garments from the plaintiff's basement. The English Court of Appeal held that the defendant owed the plaintiff no duty of care. It was recognised that the general rule at common law was that a person was not liable for the acts of an independent third party: Smith versus Leurs <case>; [(1945) 70 CLR 256] at 261-2 and Dorset Yacht Co Ltd versus Home Office <case>; [[1970]
AC 1004.]
Perl did not fall within any exception to that general rule, notwithstanding the foreseeability of loss occurring and the plaintiff's prior complaints. Waller LJ pointed out (at 349) that cases where the exception applied - such as parents being held responsible for their children, Borstal staff held responsible for Borstal boys on an exercise, and a football club held responsible for invited spectators - all involved defendants who exercised or had the ability to exercise control over the third party. Oliver
LJ stressed (at 352) that Perl was a case of pure omission, in which the defendant's omission to keep and maintain an effective lock on its premises "merely enabled some unknown third party over whom the defendants had no control to effect an unlawful entry upon the defendants' premises and thence to effect an equally unlawful entry upon the plaintiffs' premises". The forseeability of damage to property was not in itself sufficient to establish a duty. Foreseeability, he held (at 357-8) "is not, by itself, sufficient to raise the duty for which the plaintiffs contend. Indeed the contrary proposition would, I think, lead to the most startling and far-reaching consequences. Not only would every owner of a semi- detached or terrace house have a duty to every adjoining owner to secure his premises against entry but the extent of the duty would depend upon the use that the adjoining owner chose to make of his premises. The more valuable the contents, the greater the temptation and the greater the risk of entry. The greater the risk of entry, the higher the standard of reasonable care." 
Goff LJ also gave policy-based reasons for rejecting a duty of care. He returned to the topic in fuller detail in the House of Lords case I am about to discuss, so I shall refrain from summarising his judgment in Perl.
(In Pitt Son & Badgery Ltd versus Proulefco <case>; [(1984) 153 CLR 644] at 648 Perl was cited with apparent approval. However, it was distinguished from the bailment situation on the basis that Perl involved the circumstances in which one person is liable in negligence for the wrongdoing of another.) 
In Smith versus Littlewoods Ltd <case>; [[1987] AC 241] the House of Lords emphasised that the occasions when an occupier of property owed a duty of care to adjoining owners in respect of acts of trespass to the occupier's property were exceptional. Vandals had started a fire in a disused cinema and it spread to adjoining properties causing serious damage. Since the defendant had not known of the previous acts of vandalism in its cinema and since the cinema had not otherwise presented an obvious fire risk no duty was held to exist.

Some of the speeches in the House of Lords emphasised the factual situation, and the absence of reasonable foreseeability in the particular case. Others demonstrated that mere foreseeability was insufficient as a matter of principle and discussed what, in the event, was the discrimen of liability in cases involving the spread of fire lit by vandals.

Lord Mackay appeared to favour a test of probability as distinct from possibility as the basis of a duty of care to protect against fire-caused damage: see at 258-9, 261-2, 265-6 See also Perl at 351-2 per Waller LJ.
This approach does not run counter to the case law stemming from Wyong
Shire Council versus Shirt <case>; [(1980) 146 CLR 40], since the crucial issue is whether it is appropriate that the law should impose a duty of care that would involve the taking of positive steps. Nevertheless, I confess to difficulty in seeing that the existence of duty turns upon the level of probability of harm ensuing. There may be a very high probability that criminal activity causing harm may take place in certain areas of Sydney, but non constat that the occupier or adjacent neighbour has a duty of care to those who suffer. The mechanism of foreseeability is ultimately an unsatisfactory touchstone of a duty of care in this area: see also Smith at 279 per Lord Goff.

Lord Mackay approved Perl. He also (at 267-8) distinguished cases where a thief uses a neighbour's premises to gain access from cases involving the spread of fire lit by vandals. In the former, the neighbour's property merely serves to give access to the thief, whereas in the latter the hazard actually starts on the neighbour's property. And, "there is also a sense in which neighbouring proprietors can, independently, take action to protect themselves against theft in a way that is not possible with fire".

Lord Keith agreed with each of Lord Mackay and Lord Goff. Notwithstanding, I read Lord Goff's speech as proceeding upon a sharper, policy-focussed basis for negating a duty of care than that suggested by Lord Mackay. He emphasised the lack of general duty as between neighbours to protect against theft caused by third parties. He stated (at 271) that: "There is no general duty upon a householder that he should act as a watchdog, or that his house should act as a bastion, to protect his neighbour's house". His Lordship explained why this was so, starting from the fundamental reason that the common law does not impose liability for what are called pure omissions. He pointed out that liability in negligence for harm caused by the deliberate wrongdoing of others cannot and is not (on the cases) founded simply upon foreseeability of loss.
Some special relationship, such as that based on contract or assumed responsibility of control of another is required.

Lord Goff (at 272-4) distinguished the cases where a defendant was held liable for having created a source of danger (eg, Haynes versus Harwood [[1935] 1 KB .]
See [1987] AC at 272-4) or for failing to take reasonable steps to prevent the spread of fire caused by the deliberate wrongdoing of a third party in circumstances where the defendant knew or had the means of knowing of the risk. He held that the theft cases were different and he affirmed the correctness of Perl. Lord Goff saw nothing objectionable in an occupier warning its neighbours of a situation known to give rise to an invitation to thieves, in effect informing the neighbours to "look to their own defences against thieves": [1987] AC at 277. See also Ward versus Cannock Chase
Council [[1986] Ch 546] at 572 D-E. That being so, it made no difference in principle that an occupier carelessly left a front door open, giving thieves an opportunity to gain access to the occupier's home and thereby to the neighbour's premises. His Lordship was horrified at the prospect of indeterminate liability falling upon the old lady who left a window open for her cat; or the elderly gentleman who left his french windows open when weeding at the bottom of the garden, so that he could hear the telephone. In emphasising that there was no general duty to prevent third parties from causing damage to others Lord Goff concluded (at 278): "But there is no general duty to prevent third parties from causing damage to others, even though there is a high degree of foresight that they may do so. The practical effect is that everybody has to take such steps as he thinks fit to protect his own property, whether house or flat or shop, against thieves. He is able to take his own precautions; and, in deciding what precautions to take, he can and should take into account the fact that, in the ordinary course of life, adjacent property is likely to be from time to time unoccupied (often obviously so, and sometimes for a considerable period of time) and is also likely from time to time not to be lockfast. He has to form his own judgment as to the precautions which he should take, having regard to all the circumstances of the case, including (if it be the case) the fact that his premises are a jeweller's shop which offers a special temptation to thieves. I must confess that I do not find this practical result objectionable." 
In Smith versus Scott [[1973] Ch 314] at 322 Pennycuick
VC rejected a submission inviting him to hold that a landlord owed a duty of care to neighbours when selecting tenants. He observed that the relationship of landowner, tenant and neighbour is of the most widespread possible occurrence, and that the introduction of a duty of care in this connection would have far reaching implications in relation to business as well as to residential premises. I respectfully agree. This approach is nothing more than a particular application of judicial restraint based upon the fear of creating "liability in an indeterminate amount for an indeterminate time to an indeterminate class".

To similar effect, McHugh J recently said in Pyrenees Shire Council at
SS102: "Absent consideration or its equivalent, the common law generally imposed no obligation on a person to protect or help another. As Windeyer J pointed out in Hargrave versus Goldman <case>; [(1963) 110 CLR 40] at 66, `the common law does not require a man to act as the
Samaritan did'. For that reason in most cases, the occupier of property owes no duty to a neighbour to secure the property so as to prevent thieves gaining access to the property for the purpose of robbing the neighbour's premises.
The `general rule' said Dixon J in Smith versus Leurs <case>; [(1945) 70 CLR 256] at 262, `is that one man is under no duty of controlling another man to prevent him doing damage to a third'." 
In my respectful opinion, the speech of Lord Goff in Smith is not only persuasive. It is correct in principle. To impose a general duty on occupiers to take reasonable care to prevent others from entering their property and using it as a springboard for stealing from a neighbour's property would offend several precepts. It would be a classical case of indeterminate liability owed to an indeterminate class. It would create an unprecedented and unprincipled duty to take positive steps to control third persons, in the absence of special circumstances such as consideration or assumption of responsibility. It would impose an unreasonable curb upon the ordinary enjoyment of a defendant's own property. And it would tend to encourage those having the capacity to take precautions for their own property, to decline to do so.

The passage from Burnie Port Authority (at 555) which is relied upon by
Wills addresses the situation of the person in control of premises "who has taken advantage of that control to introduce thereon or to retain therein a dangerous substance or to undertake thereon a dangerous activity or to allow another person to do one of those things". This cannot be applied to the unauthorised activities of the casual thief.

The learned trial judge was correct to hold that SRA owed no duty of care to
Wills. Although Wills attempted to formulate the proposed duty in conventional terms, it needs recognition that the real complaint is the failure to provide adequate security services (at SRA's expense). Any such protection is costly.
To throw that burden on an adjoining landowner and freightforwarding competitor is neither fair, just or reasonable: cf Pyrenees Shire
Council at SS247 (Kirby J).

Does it make any difference that Wills' goods were "on" the land occupied by
SRA for the 1-11/2 hours it required to unload the container in the middle of the night? In my view it does not. SRA did not assume possession or control over the goods during this period. To my mind it is unthinkable that a landowner should assume a duty of care to look after goods on his or her land simply because a thief brings them there for a short period during the night in order to transfer them from one vehicle to another.

The appellant is critical of a passage in the judgment below which held that the contractual relationships between TNT and SRA (the leases) and between
Wills and TNT (the contract of carriage) were relevant in considering the proximate relationship between the parties in terms of duties owed. Newman J added: "Here, the plaintiff, by virtue of its contract of carriage with TNT, expressly accepted the risk of loss when its goods were being gratuitously stored by that legal entity, save for a minimal amount which represented no more than a token." (The latter remark was addressed at an exemption clause in the consignment note which limited TNT's liability.) In my view it is relevant to have some regard to those factors in determining whether there was a duty of care stemming from known assumption of responsibility. These contractual relationships are not determinative, but they were negative indicators of reliance upon SRA by Wills. They are also relevant to the assessment which I have already made, to the effect that it is neither reasonable nor just in the circumstances of this case, to throw the costly burden of providing security services upon SRA when they were no part of negotiated risk allocation between the parties that had primary responsibility for the safety of the shipment (TNT and Wills).

The case based on "general reliance" 
An alternative basis of the appellant's case was to rely upon the concept of general reliance, coupled with reference to the statutory obligations of SRA which have already been discussed. Unfortunately for the appellant, the law took a fairly dramatic shift after the appeal was argued. The refining judicial fire which snatched Cavalier versus Pope from the respondent's lips between trial and appeal was to do the same for the appellant while judgment stood reserved.

The concept of general reliance as developed by Mason J in Heyman (at ) and McHugh JA in Parramatta City Council versus Lutz [(1988) 12 NSWLR ]
at 330 was challenged by the appellant in Pyrenees Shire Council.
Judgment was delivered on 23 January 1998. Those justices who approved the concept (Toohey J and McHugh J) emphasised that it depends on proof of particular vulnerability: see [[1988] HCA 3] at SSSS78 (Toohey
J), 108 (McHugh J). For example, McHugh J said (at SS108) that the doctrine applies "only in those situations where individuals are vulnerable to harm from immense dangers which they cannot control or understand and often enough cannot recognise". But the majority of the Court went further. The concept of general reliance was categorised as a fiction and rejected by Brennan CJ,
Gummow J and Kirby J. In doing so, the majority of the High Court followed the majority of the House of Lords in Stovin versus Wise <case>; [[1996] AC ] at 954.

It follows that this alternative basis of the appellant's case must be rejected. I would add that, even if resort to the concept or fiction of general reliance were still permissible, the facts of this case would not invoke it. Wills was under no particular vulnerability to immense danger that called for publicly-funded protection.

ORDERS 
I propose the following orders:
Wills' appeal dismissed with costs.
SRA's cross appeal dismissed with no order as to costs.
SRA's appeal dismissed with costs.
 (The costs order referable to the dismissal of SRA's cross appeal reflects the fact that virtually no time was taken in dealing with the issues it raised.) 
PRIESTLEY JA: Both the facts and the law in this case are thoroughly discussed in the reasons of Mason P. 
So far as the law is concerned, Mason P shows that when the law of negligence is required to deal with cases whose facts either fall into, or are on the margin of, a category conventionally accepted as showing actionable negligence, the formulas which have been much analysed in recent years for deciding whether a plaintiff should or should not succeed, have reached a very fluid state.

One proposition that seems to be generally accepted at present is that foreseeability is not enough. Something more is required. Whether that something more is present in a particular case depends, first, upon an examination of the facts and the relative positions of the plaintiff and defendant to one another in connection with those facts, and second, upon considering those facts against some criterion or formula additional to that of foreseeability. What this criterion or formula should be will depend on the view the court takes of the position reached by the line of High Court authority leading cases in which are Sutherland Shire Council versus Heyman <case>; [(1985) 157 CLR 424], Bryan v
Maloney (1995) 182 CLR 609 and Pyrenees Shire Council versus Day <case>; [72
ALJR 152.] 
The facts of the present case are that, (using Mason P's abbreviations), Wills had consigned its tobacco to TNT, the carrier being SRA. Following delivery by
SRA to TNT, the tobacco, in a container, was put in TNT's shed. This stood in
SRA's rail terminal yard where other freight forwarders also had depots. The tobacco was left overnight in TNT's shed which was locked but unstaffed. From there it was stolen in the early hours of the morning. Wills accepted that the contract between it and TNT had the effect that Wills must bear all but an insignificant fraction of the loss. Wills therefore claimed SRA was liable, saying that the theft was contributed to by SRA's not having proper security in the rail terminal yard. SRA had been in discussion with all the freight forwarders concerning provision of security on condition that the freight forwarders contributed to the cost. No agreement had been reached about this at the time of the theft. SRA was at that time providing no security in its terminal yard, and was objecting to TNT using its own private security service in the terminal yard. There was however no legal reason why TNT should not have had its own staff remain in its shed overnight, if it so chose.

In these circumstances, unless some clear legal rule imposes liability upon
SRA for Wills' loss, I see no reason why Wills, which had made its own commercial arrangements with TNT concerning the holding of the goods, pursuant to which it bore the substantial risk of loss in the event of theft, should be able to look to SRA to compensate it for its loss when that was due primarily to the practice of TNT of leaving its shed unstaffed at night.

Mason P has dealt with each of the legal rules on which Wills claimed SRA should be liable to it. I agree with his reasons for not accepting any of the proposed grounds of liability, in the circumstances of the present case.

I agree with the orders proposed by Mason P.

BEAZLEY JA: I agree with Mason P. [1] See Appellant's Chronology, citing Mr Twining's evidence at 100 L-V, 102
K, 102 O. See also Appellant's Submissions para 13.
 [2] Appellant's Submissions paras 6, 15.
 * * * 
