

Ophix Finance Corporation Pty Ltd versus Fletcher Matter No 3131/97 [1997]
NSWSC 268 (22 July 1997) 
Ophix Finance Corporation Pty Limited versus Jennifer Fletcher /97 July 1997 
Bryson J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division OF 1997 OPHIX FINANCE CORPORATION PTY LIMITED v JENNIFER FLETCHER 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff Ophix claims an injunction restraining the defendant Jennifer Fletcher from communicating to officers of the State of South Australia matters relating to litigation between officers of the State and Ophix in which Jennifer Fletcher is, at least potentially, a source of relevant information and a witness. 
In the principal litigation 1394/94 in the Supreme Court of South Australia
Ophix is plaintiff and the Minister for Environment and Natural Resources of that State and a State officer named Ingerson are defendants. The State granted Ophix a lease on 16 January 1989 of land in the Flinders Ranges
National Park, the site of the Wilpena resort. The controversy is about whether the State lawfully terminated the lease or whether the State wrongfully asserted that Ophix had repudiated it. Trial of issues in the case will involve consideration of whether there was a breach of the lease by failure to complete works described in it, circumstances that led to the failure and Ophix' financial capacity to perform obligations under the lease.
The Defence and Counterclaim directly raise allegations of Ophix' lack of financial resources. The Supreme Court of South Australia is to hear the issue of liability in a hearing commencing on 15 September 1997 in Adelaide.

Port Jackson Capital Limited is a merchant bank which Ophix at one time engaged to seek investors and financiers to fund its project of developing a tourist resort on the leased land, and Jennifer Fletcher was then manager of
Port Jackson Capital. The financial resources available to Ophix were, of course, at the heart of the business on which Port Jackson Capital was engaged, and it must be that Jennifer Fletcher has information about those resources. The parties to the principal litigation have given discovery, and
Port Jackson Capital has also been required to give third party discovery, under the practice of the Supreme Court of South Australia. There have been discovery lists and inspection of Port Jackson Capital's documents relevant to
Ophix' financial position by the parties to the principal litigation. Ophix has discovered all documents containing information relevant to its financial position.

Port Jackson Capital has brought proceedings in the Commercial Division of the
Supreme Court of New South Wales against Jennifer Fletcher, and Ophix is cross-defendant to her Cross-claim.

Ophix, in evidence of its solicitor speaking on information, has expressed the fear that unless Jennifer Fletcher is restrained by injunction she will disclose confidential information of Ophix to the State Crown Solicitor of
South Australia. In correspondence before action Ophix' solicitor expressed its concern that she may be considering divulging confidences to the State of
South Australia in breach of obligations of confidentiality in consultations which it was thought she was proposing to hold with officers of the South
Australian Crown Solicitor. There was a call for a written undertaking not to communicate to officers of the State of South Australia information acquired as an officer of Port Jackson Capital in the course of acting with regard to
Ophix' venture, other than pursuant to an order of a court. Through her solicitors Jennifer Fletcher declined to give that undertaking and pointed out some matters including her obligation to give evidence if subpoenaed. I infer that she regards herself as entitled, if she so wishes, to communicate with legal representatives of the State in relation to the principal litigation, although she has made no specific threat to do that.

The claim in the Summons is for an injunction restraining Jennifer Fletcher from communicating to State officers "any information or knowledge ...
relating to the affairs of the plaintiff in so far as they concern the agreement between the plaintiff and the Minister ... for the leasing to the plaintiff of land in the Flinders Ranger for the construction of a tourist resort and the financing of the construction of development of a tourist resort." An alternative form of order put forward by Ophix' counsel would restrain communication of "... any knowledge of the defendant concerning proposals for finances of development of the Wilpena Station project being knowledge obtained by the defendant in the course of her acting as a director or employee of Port Jackson Capital Limited or as a financial adviser to the plaintiff other than pursuant to an order of the court." 
This general formulation was given by Gummow J in Smith Kline & French
Laboratories (Aust.) Ltd & Ors v. Secretary, Department of Community
Services and Health <case>; [(1990) 22 FCR 73] at 87: "A general formulation apt for the present case of an equitable obligation of confidence has four elements: (i) the plaintiff must be able to identify with specificity, and not merely in global terms, that which is said to be the information in question, and must be able to show that: (ii) the information has the necessary quality of confidentiality (and is not, for example, common or public knowledge); (iii) the information was received by the defendant in such circumstances as to import an obligation of confidence, and (iv) there is actual or threatened misuse of that information, without the consent of the plaintiff. The authorities from which these elements are drawn are collected in Corrs Pavey Whiting & Byrne v. Collector of Customs (Vic) <case>; [(1987) 14 FCR 434] at 443. In addition, it has been suggested that the breach must inflict or be likely to inflict `detriment' ..." 
The first element is of great importance and it is a recurring difficulty for plaintiffs: see O'Brien v. Komesaroff <case>; [(1982) 150 CLR 310] at 327-8 (Mason J). See also the particularity required by
Templeman J in John Zink Co. Ltd v. Lloyds Bank Ltd & Anor [[1975] RPC .] An injunction if made must be expressed with specificity; it would be wrong to make an order which had the practical effect of forbidding all communication on any subject, or an order which left it to the defendant to work out what she was forbidden to do and what she was allowed to do. An order which had the practical effect of forbidding Jennifer Fletcher from talking to others who, like her, are opposed to Ophix in litigation would be very oppressive. The need for specificity in an injunction has at least its ordinary importance in this case. On the form of orders see also Lawrence David v. Ashton [[1991] 1
All ER 385.] 
As a general proposition there is a relationship of confidence between a customer and a bank (including a merchant bank) with respect to information communicated by the customer relating to the customer's financial affairs, and officers of the bank to whom the information comes, by direct communication or indirectly, are within the relationship of confidence. See Winterton
Constructions Pty Ltd v. Hambros Australia Ltd & Anor <case>; [(1992) 39 FCR 97] at 115 (Hill J). However, it is not a consequence that an injunction will be granted to prevent any communication of information of that kind furnished by a customer to a bank. It is necessary for the customer to prove what confidential information was communicated and circumstances which call for its protection by injunction. The court will not grant an injunction as of course but will assess the confidential information and the circumstances before acting, as information communicated to a bank may be not in reality confidential, not significantly detrimental, publicly known, not important, or may have become unimportant, and there may be reasons in the public interest why the court's protection should not be extended. There may be reasons of other kinds why there should not be an injunction, as there is a discretionary element in granting an injunction, and injunctions preventing the communication of information can very readily cause conflicts between the interests of the person entitled to the confidence and other interests to which the court must pay regard. For this reason it is necessary that a person seeking an injunction should establish in a clear and detailed way by evidence what the confidential information is and the circumstances which warrant protection by injunction. It may be that such evidence should itself be given under circumstances which protect the alleged confidential information, and the court can be asked to modify its ordinary practices.

In the present case no evidence whatever is offered to establish what the communicated information was; the evidence is: "I am informed by Ophix that Ms
Fletcher obtained information and knowledge concerning the affairs of Ophix and its potential investors and financiers and gave advice to Ophix in connection with Ophix' engagement of Port Jackson Capital Limited". The alternative forms of injunction reflect this generality and would not, if ordered, tell the defendant in a clear way what it is that the court would be forbidding her to do; except in the sense that they are blanket prohibitions and would have the practical effect of preventing her from making any communication with officers of the State in relation to the principal litigation.

In this case the question whether there should be an injunction could not be addressed or considered on a proper basis without giving consideration to and deciding between Ophix' claim for protection of confidentiality and the impact on the administration of justice of preventing Jennifer Fletcher as a potential witness from speaking to the representatives of a party in the principal litigation. The considerations for the Court were described by Lord
Diplock in D. v. National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children <case>; [[1978] AC 171] at 218:- "The fact that information has been communicated by one person to another in confidence, however, is not of itself a sufficient ground for protecting from disclosure in a court of law the nature of the information or the identity of the informant if either of these matters would assist the court to ascertain facts which are relevant to an issue upon which it is adjudicating: Alfred
Crompton Amusement Machines Ltd. V. Customs and Excise Commissioners (No. 2) [[1974] A.C. 405], 433-434. The private promise of confidentiality must yield to the general public interest that in the administration of justice truth will out, unless by reason of the character of the information or the relationship of the recipient of the information to the informant a more important public interest is served by protecting the information or the identity of the informant from disclosure in a court of law." 
Without knowledge of what the information sought to be protected is, the adjudication between the public interests involved to which Lord Diplock referred could not begin and could not be carried out. It is not, I suppose inconceivable that an injunction would be made restraining a person from giving evidence as a witness in litigation, but it is extremely unlikely in view of the fact that a subpoena can be used and might actually be used to impose on a witness a legal duty to give the evidence. If any confidence were to be protected in such a case, the means of protection would as a matter of practicality have to be determined by the court of trial, which might decide that it was appropriate to protect the confidentiality of information by restricting the use to be made of it and by keeping it secret in some special way, but which would, it seems to me, be very unlikely to protect its confidentiality by preventing relevant evidence from being given at all. These considerations weigh against a decision to prevent a potential witness from giving information to the legal representatives of a party in advance of giving evidence; there are disadvantages in making an injunction which has no ultimate effect except to protract the elucidation of evidence in the court of trial. There are significant circumstances calling for appraisal before the injunction asked could be made; but that consideration cannot begin.

Order: The Summons is dismissed with costs. 
Smith Kline & French Laboratories (Aust.) Ltd & Ors v. Secretary,
Department of Community Services and Health <case>; [(1990) 22 FCR 73] at 87 
Corrs Pavey Whiting & Byrne v. Collector of Customs (Vic) <case>; [(1987) 14 FCR 434] at 443 
O'Brien v. Komesaroff <case>; [(1982) 150 CLR 310] at 327-8 
John Zink Co. Ltd v. Lloyds Bank Ltd & Anor [[1975] RPC 385] 
Lawrence David v. Ashton [[1991] 1 All ER 385] 
Winterton Constructions Pty Ltd v. Hambros Australia Ltd & Anor <case>; <case>; [[1978] AC ] at 218 
Alfred Crompton Amusement Machines Ltd. V. Customs and Excise Commissioners (No. 2) [[1974] A.C. 405], 433-434.
 * * * 
