

Regina versus L I Whiteley [1998] NSWSC 1052 (14 December 1998) 
REGINA versus LAWRENCE IAN WHITELEY /95 
Friday 1 November 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
STUDDERT J, HIDDEN J 
JUDGMENT 
STUDDERT J: The applicant, Lawrence Ian Whiteley, seeks leave to appeal against the sentence imposed upon him by Judge McGuire on 17 November 1995. The applicant had earlier, on 16 October 1995, pleaded guilty before his Honour to a charge of receiving. The sentence imposed was a minimum term of four years, backdated to commence on 14 December 1994, and an additional term of one year and four months commencing on 14 December 1998.

The offence was in a category for which <case> of the Crimes Act provides a maximum penalty of ten years penal servitude, although, since the value of the goods did not exceed $5000, the offence could have been dealt with summarily.

For reasons which I shall outline, because of other sentences to which the applicant was subjected in the period since 14 December 1994, the penalty imposed for this receiving charge was effectively an extra minimum term of two years and three months and an extra additional term of one year and four months.

The facts relating to the receiving charge were outlined in a statement of facts tendered, not challenged, and incorporated in his Honour's reasons for judgment: "At about 11pm on Thursday 6 October 1994 premises of Gordon Webb at 30
Frederick Street, East Gosford were broken into and a quantity of property stolen. A neighbour saw a motor vehicle in the vicinity and two (2) men. He gave police a detailed description of the vehicle and later identified a vehicle belonging to Alan Kelly as that vehicle.

A search of Kelly's premises on 9 October 1994 located some of the property stolen from Mr Webb's premises. Kelly claimed that he left his car in possession of Jonathan Muir on the night of 6 October 1994 and that the property found by police was not his and belonged to either Muir or Don
Bryant.

Muir was apprehended by police on 9 October 1994 and charged in respect of the
Break and Enter after admitting his involvement.

Following the interview of Muir, police went to a caravan at Wyoming where they saw the accused. A search of the van ensued and the property subject of the charge was found. The accused claimed he paid $250.00 for the property which he bought from Muir. The accused said, 'I only get $260.00 a fortnight and $210 of that goes on renting this place. I just try to make a bit of money on the side selling stolen gear.'" 
The applicant was originally charged in relation to this matter with break enter and steal but he pleaded guilty promptly to the lesser offence of receiving once the Crown was prepared to accept such a plea in relation to the subject offence.

The applicant has an appalling record. He was born on 23 June 1959, so that he is now thirty-seven years of age. His record began as a juvenile and he has committed many, many offences involving dishonesty, including breaking entering and stealing, larceny, robbery in company, and goods in custody. It is necessary only to look closely at offences which had been relatively recently committed at the time when Judge McGuire was called upon to sentence him for this receiving charge because this affords an insight into the course his Honour adopted in his difficult and very complex sentencing task.

There were three matters before his Honour in November 1995. In addition to the receiving charge, his Honour heard two appeals against sentences imposed in the Local Court. The first of these was for a charge of break enter and steal and the offence was committed on 4 August 1994. It is unnecessary to refer for present purposes to the detail of that matter but for that offence the applicant had been sentenced in the Local Court to twenty months with a minimum term of fifteen months to date from 14 December 1994. The second appeal from the Local Court was following a conviction in that court for larceny. This crime was committed on 18 November 1994, when the applicant took a saw of some sort and some spanner sets from a K-Mart store. Following his conviction for that matter, he was sentenced to a fixed term of three months to be served cumulatively upon the sentence for the earlier break enter and steal offence so as to date from 14 March 1996 and to expire on 13 June 1996.

His Honour dismissed those appeals, confirming the convictions and sentences.
So it was that for those offences the applicant was to be in custody for the cumulative minimum terms from 14 December 1994 to 13 June 1996. Moreover, his
Honour was made aware of yet further sentences for driving whilst disqualified, and in respect of those matters his Honour was informed that the
Local Court sentences of six months, to be served cumulatively upon the sentences for the offences which came before his Honour under appeal, were to expire on 13 December 1996. This Court has been informed that his Honour was misled and it is now common ground that the driving offences were dealt with by way of sentences that have now expired, the expiry date being 13 September
If his Honour had considered the matter in this way, he would have regarded the period of imprisonment he was adding for the receiving offence comprised of a minimum term of two years and an additional term of one year and four months. From what this Court has now been told, of course, his Honour would have been misled if he had been assessing the matter in that way, because the added minimum term would have been two years and three months.

It is of significance that at the time the receiving offence was committed the applicant was on bail for both the offences the subject of the appeals from the Local Court. Moreover, he was on a recognisance as well for an unrelated matter, which recognisance he had been extended by the sentencing judge in
These circumstances aggravated the seriousness of the receiving matter which his Honour, to my mind, properly observed was an offence which warranted severe punishment.

Before turning to consider Mr Nicholson's submissions on this application, I refer briefly to other subjective features, all of which the learned sentencing judge expressly referred to in his remarks on sentence. The applicant has, in the past, been a heroin addict but the sentencing judge was informed that he successfully embarked on a methadone programme. That period of addiction though may well have gone some distance to explain, whilst not excusing, many of the earlier crimes that he committed.

Much of the applicant's adult life has been spent in custody but, at one stage, he conducted his own business supplying firewood until that venture was disrupted by his sustaining an injury. He is qualified as a second class welder and has some skill in carpentry. The judge was told by the applicant that, following sentence, he would be reclassified and would become eligible for work release. He expected to work at the Blayney Abattoirs, where he hopes to obtain work on a regular basis following his eventual release.

One further matter to which his Honour adverted, which is relevant, is that the applicant gave some assistance to the authorities some years ago and knowledge of that assistance within the prison system has resulted in his having been assaulted more than once and has also resulted in his presently serving his sentence under protection.

There was also a disturbed family situation to be considered. As I have observed, his Honour paid specific regard to those various matters.

Mr Nicholson has challenged the sentence imposed on a number of grounds. The first of these is that his Honour said: "When considering the prisoner's overall criminality, I will take into account the breach of that bond and it will not be necessary for any call-up in respect of such breach." 
His Honour was there referring to the bond to which I have made earlier mention.

Mr Nicholson submitted that it was not appropriate for his Honour to deal with the breach of the bond in that way and that submission, with respect to the sentencing judge, is well-founded. Section 556B of the Crimes Act provides for the procedure where there is a breach of a recognisance and, upon call-up, it is for the Court then to deal with the offender for the offence to which the recognisance related: see Ho versus DPP [(1995) 37 NSWLR 393] and, in particular, the judgment of Kirby P (at 399 to 400) where the President said: "...it is clear that where such a breach [that is a breach of a recognisance] is established, it is not the function of a sentencing judge to sentence the offender for the breach: See, e.g., R versus Champion ((1992) [64 A Crim R ] at ); R versus Kerr (Court of Criminal Appeal, 12 November 1993, unreported).
The breach is simply the occasion which brings the matter back before the court to resentence the offender in the way that <case> of the Crimes
Act contemplates." 
Whilst it is easy to understand why the learned judge in the present case endeavoured to deal with the matter in the way in which he did, I regard Mr
Nicholson's submission about the procedure adopted to be strictly correct. If the breach of the bond was being considered by the learned judge, then the applicant was entitled to know precisely what action was being taken and to what extent he was being punished for it. It seems to me then that the learned judge fell into an error, understandable though the reason for such error was, in the approach that he took to the breach of recognisance.

Of course, the inevitable consequence of this matter being raised in this way on appeal is that the applicant indirectly invites a separate call-up for breach of the recognisance. If and when that occurs, it will be for his
Honour, or some other judge of the District Court, to determine what action is appropriate, having regard to the breach, in respect of the offence for which the recognisance was fixed.

Mr Nicholson has next submitted that the learned judge fell into error in taking into account the total criminality involved in the matters the subject of the appeals and the matter charged on indictment, together, of course, with the breach of recognisance. He has submitted rather that it was for the judge to confirm the existing sentences, having decided they should not be disturbed, and then to accumulate a further penalty. It seems to me that there is substance in that submission.

The original sentences on the appeal matters were imposed pursuant to the [Justices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ja119/), which provided a statutory maximum sentence for indictable offences dealt with in the Local Court. For each of those matters under appeal, the maximum penalty that could have been provided in the Local Court was one of two years but the effective maximum penalty that could have been provided if the sentences were to be accumulated was a penalty period of three years.
Different ranges, of course, applied if the matters were being considered in the District Court, not hindered by the limited jurisdiction in the Local
Court.

His Honour did refer to the manner in which the magistrate dealt with the applicant and in relation to the larceny offence commented that the magistrate may have erred "on the side of excessive leniency".

It was, of course, necessary for his Honour to look discretely at the receiving offence. It seems to me that once the learned judge dismissed the appeals for the two offences that came to him from the Local Court and confirmed the sentences that had been imposed for those matters, that was the end of it so far as those offences were concerned, and that it was then necessary for his Honour to embark upon a consideration of what was appropriate for the offence of receiving, dealing with the latter as a discrete sentencing exercise.

With the greatest respect to the learned sentencing judge, and whilst acknowledging his very considerable experience in this area, in the respects I have indicated I am persuaded by Mr Nicholson's arguments that his Honour fell into error. In the result, it seems to me this Court should intervene.

The applicant has placed before the Court today some material, which it is asked to consider in the event of resentencing. This material indicates that the applicant is progressing satisfactorily within the prison system. There are a number of industrial officers' assessments of his progress. The Court has also been informed of the applicant's successful completion of a number of courses.

In resentencing the applicant, in my opinion the very fact of the accumulation of the penalty for the larceny offence, coupled with the prospects of rehabilitation and the need for some supervision, constitute special circumstances warranting a somewhat extended additional term.

I referred earlier to his Honour's assessment of the gravity with which he regarded the receiving charge. In my opinion this was a serious offence, having regard to the circumstances in which it was committed, that is to say, whilst on a recognisance and whilst on bail for two other matters. I propose, in all the circumstances, that for the receiving charge the applicant be sentenced to a term of two years, with a minimum term of one year and an additional term of one year.

The formal orders then that I would propose are these: that leave to appeal be granted; that the appeal be allowed; that the sentence imposed be quashed and that in lieu therefor the applicant be sentenced to a total sentence of two years, with a minimum term of one year, to commence on 14 September 1996 and to expire on 13 September , and an additional term of one year commencing on 14 September 1997. I would, therefore, direct the release of the applicant on parole at the expiration of that minimum term as specified.

HIDDEN J: I agree.

STUDDERT J: The orders of the Court will then be those that I have proposed.
 * * * 
