

James Hardie and Coy Pty Ltd versus Newton; State Rail Authority of NSW v
Newton Matter Nos Ca 40650/97; Ca 40671/97 [1997] NSWSC 673 (22 December 1997) 
Last Updated: 3 March 1998 
James Hardie & Coy Pty Limited versus Arthur Austin Newton 
CA 40650/97 
State Rail Authority of NSW versus Arthur Austin Newton 
CA 40671/97 December 1997 
Handley JA, Cole JA, Stein JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: DUST DISEASES TRIBUNAL - Maguire J 
FILE NO/S:CA 40650/97; CA 40671/97; DDT 63/97; SC 12479/86 
DELIVERED: 22 December 1997 
HEARING DATE/S: 5 December 1997 
PARTIES: James Hardie & Coy Pty Limited versus Arthur Austin Newton and State Rail Authority of NSW versus Arthur Austin Newton 
JUDGMENT OF: HANDLEY JA, COLE JA, STEIN JA 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant 1: DMJ Bennett QC and TGR Parker 
Appellant 2: C Hoeben SC 
Respondent: D Jackson QC and A Katzmann SC 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant 1: Allen Alllen & Hemsley 
Appellant 2: Dibbs Crowther & Osborne 
Respondent:Turner Freeman 
CATCHWORDS: [Workers' Compensation (Dust Diseases) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wcda1942388/)- interrelationship of dust diseases pension with common law damages- whether damages awarded for Griffiths versus Kerkemeyer or general damages were excessive - inclusion of Health Insurance Commission charges for home care 
EXTEMPORE/ RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: ALLOWED in part 
NO OF PAGES: 26 
JAMES HARDIE & COY PTY LIMITED 
V 
ARTHUR AUSTIN NEWTON 
AND 
STATE RAIL AUTHORITY OF NSW 
V 
ARTHUR AUSTIN NEWTON 
The Respondent was employed by the State Rail Authority (SRA) from 1941 to which was supplied by James Hardie with asbestos products. The Respondent contracted mesothelioma and at the time of the trial had a life expectancy of weeks. He died before this appeal and his widow was substituted as administrator ad litem. Neither the SRA nor James Hardie dispute liability.
Both companies contribute to a fund from which the Respondent was paid pension benefits.

On appeal:
Can the weekly pension awarded to the respondent under the [Workers'
Compensation (Dust Diseases) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wcda1942388/) (the
DD Act 1942 ) be deducted from his damages where the respondent is making no claim for loss of past earnings or of future earning capacity?
To what extent are the benefits available to the respondent under the DD
Act in respect of home care to be taken into account in calculating the respondent's Griffiths versus Kerkemeyer damages?
Was the award of damages for past Griffiths versus Kerkemeyer excessive?
Were the general damages awarded by Maguire J excessive?
Were charges of $932.30 by the Health Insurance Commission (the HIC) improperly included in the damages award? 
Held:
The pension payments should be deducted from the appellant's damages.
The benefits for home care payable under the DD Act are substitute for
Griffiths versus Kerkemeyer damages. The appellant was not entitled to benefits under the Act because his doctor did not `direct' that the services be provided. Accordingly he is entitled to the benefits at common law.
Additionally, there was no failure to mitigate damages.
Past Griffiths versus Kerkemeyer damages were not excessive, and within the discretionary range.
General damages were not excessive and were within the discretionary range. (Handley JA, contra)
The Health Insurance Commission charge would be part of the respondent's entitlements under the Act and should not have been included in common law damages.

CSR versus Bouwhuis  <case>; <case>; [(1982-1983) 151 CLR 117] 
Van Gervan versus Fenton <case>; <case>; [(1961) 105 CLR 569] 
Harris versus Commercial Minerals Ltd (1995 - <case>; <case>; [(1961) 105 CLR 569] distinguished 
ORDERS . Appeals allowed in part.
 . Verdict and judgment of Dust Diseases Tribunal set aside and substituted by a judgment for $157,803.50. . Appellants to pay the respondent's costs of the appeal.

JAMES HARDIE & CO PTY LTD versus NEWTON 
STATE RAIL AUTHORITY OF NSW versus NEWTON 
JUDGMENT 
HANDLEY JA: In these appeals I have had the benefit of reading, in draft form, the reasons for judgment of the other members of the Court. I agree with their conclusions except on the issue of general damages, but will add some brief additional reasons on the claim by the appellants to deduct past and future dust diseases pension payments in assessing the damages due to the plaintiff. 
Mr Newton had a single cause of action for damages for the personal injuries he suffered as a result of contracting mesothelioma. See Brunsden versus Humphrey [(1884) 14 QBD 141] and Cartledge versus E Jopling & Sons Ltd [[1963] AC ] at 780.
At common law, which applies without modification in this case, these damages must be assessed once, and once only, by the award of a single capital sum to compensate the plaintiff for all his losses, past, present and future. The appellants seek allowance, in the assessment of that capital sum, for a statutory benefit received, and to be received, by the plaintiff as a result of sustaining the injuries for which he is to be compensated.

In my opinion the arguments for the appellants are correct in principle, and I agree that the appeals should be allowed on this issue. There are also other and narrower grounds which, in my opinion, lead to the same result, but I prefer to base my judgment on the broad principle I have identified.

I also agree that the decision in Public Trustee versus Zoanetti <case>; [(1945) 70 CLR 266] does not require this Court to reject the appeals on this issue. In that case there were two separate causes of action, one for a solatium for the loss of the husband, and the other for the loss of financial support consequent on his death. The causes of action provided compensation for distinct injuries, and there was no reason in principle why one recovery should extinguish or diminish the other.

The trial Judge awarded $130,000 for general damages, and on this issue I have the misfortune to differ from the other members of the Court. The plaintiff was born on 13 July 1926. He first experienced symptoms in March 1997, at the age of 71. He was not informed of the diagnosis and the inevitable progress and result of his mesothelioma until 5 May 1997. He recovered judgment on 25
September and was then expected to live for another 2 months. On this basis he would have experienced symptoms for a total of 9 months and would have been aware of his diagnosis for 7 months. That is not all. The truly awful feature of mesothelioma is the extreme and unremitting pain which it can cause which cannot be satisfactorily controlled by pain killing drugs. In that respect this plaintiff was "fortunate" because he did not experience severe pain until July (CAB 169S), when he had an attack which lasted for 7 hours and led to his admission to hospital.

On 5 May, Dr Despas recorded that the plaintiff was "quite well" (CAB 141U), on 19 May Dr Clarke recorded that the plaintiff has been feeling "pretty good" but is getting breathless and is finding it difficult to start the lawnmower (CAB 143U). On 17 June Dr Despas reported that "he experiences an intermittent ache over his chest" (148M) and he again reported complaints of chest ache and a cough on 30 June (149L). On 10 July Dr Clarke reported that his right sided chest pain is present and constant (150S) but he had not lost weight since his previous visit and had not deteriorated dramatically. He thought that some of his present symptoms were related to an intercurrent viral illness (141).

The plaintiff himself said (167U) that by July, when he went on his daily walk, he could no longer walk up hills or any inclines without suffering severe breathlessness, but even when walking on the flat, he had to stop every -75 metres to regain his breath. By September he had been forced to give up his daily walks (167U-W). In his affidavit sworn 17 September, he said, "My chest pain has been increasing and it is now a persistent dull pain" (169N), for which he was taking 2-4 Panadeine Forte tablets a day.

The plaintiff said in an affidavit sworn shortly before the trial (CAB 170G-J) that he knew that his pain would get worse and that he would require more and more pain medication to control his pain levels. However he added, "I am trying not to take heavy pain medication so that I can maintain an understanding of what is going on around me. I do not want my ability to comprehend to be lessened by pain medication".

No one in their right mind would agree in advance to undergo acute pain for 4 months to "earn" the appropriate component of the total award of $130,000 for general damages in this case but that is not, and never has been, the principle which governs the assessment of general damages for personal injuries. In my judgment this award fails to properly reflect the age of the plaintiff, the short period during which he would experience the loss to be compensated, and the relatively short period during which he would suffer acute pain.

On the basis implicit in this award, one asks what one would award for a person of say, 45 or 50, who might experience acute pain for 8 months during an illness lasting 12 months or longer? Acknowledging my minority view, I nevertheless consider that $130,000 for this plaintiff was outside the range of a sound exercise of a judicial discretion. I would substitute an award of $110,000, although but for Mr Hoeben SC's concession at the trial, I would have awarded a lesser amount.

Some day the High Court will explain why awards of general damages for personal injuries should not be compared, as required by Planet Fisheries Pty
Ltd versus La Rosa <case>; [(1968) 119 CLR 118], but defamation awards can be compared with awards for general damages in personal injury cases (Carson versus John Fairfax & Sons
Ltd <case>; [(1993) 178 CLR 44)], and sentences of co-offenders must be compared (Lowe versus The Queen <case>; [(1984) 154 CLR 606]; Jones versus The Queen [(1993) 67 ALJR 376).] 
No one would wish awards for general damages to be argued and derived from an
Australian equivalent of Kemp & Kemp, perhaps in looseleaf form kept up to date by regular supplements, but in my opinion justice to litigants requires that awards for similar injuries be broadly comparable. In practice trial judges and appellate courts seek to do this, consciously or unconsciously, and judges become aware of "the range" available to a trial judge in a given case within which different awards of damages will be sustained on appeal.

JAMES HARDIE & CO. PTY LTD versus Dorothy Margaret NEWTON 
STATE RAIL AUTHORITY OF NEW SOUTH WALES versus Dorothy Margaret NEWTON 
JUDGMENT 
COLE JA: I agree with the orders proposed by Stein JA. 
Deduction of the weekly pension awarded to the respondent under the Workers
Compensation (Dust Diseases) Act, even though no claim was made for loss of past earnings or for future earning capacity accords with the approach I favoured in CSR versus D'Arcy.[1] Nothing which I there said, however, obliged the respondent to appeal from the Board's refusal to award his claim for
Griffiths versus Kerkmeyer damages. Such sum was properly included in his claim for common law damages.

James HARDIE & Coy Pty Ltd v

NEWTON and 
STATE RAIL AUTHORITY OF NSW v

NEWTON 
JUDGMENT 
STEIN JA: These appeals challenge various elements in the assessment of damages for a dust related injury by the Dust Diseases Tribunal. 
The appellant State Rail Authority of NSW (SRA) was the employer of the respondent, Arthur Austin Newton, from 1941 until his retirement in 1986. The appellant James Hardie & Coy Pty Ltd (James Hardie) supplied asbestos products to the SRA for use in the respondent's workplace. The respondent contracted mesothelioma. The first symptoms of the disease showed themselves in March 1997. At the time of the trial before the Tribunal (25 September ) it was expected that Mr Newton would have about 8 weeks to live. In fact he died on 12 November 1997. His widow, Dorothy Margaret Newton, has been substituted as the respondent as administrator ad litem. At the trial there was no real issue on liability. However, there were a number of issues on damages.

The issues of damages which arise on the appeal are:
Can the weekly pension awarded to the respondent under the [Workers'
Compensation (Dust Diseases) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wcda1942388/) (the
DD Act 1942 ) be deducted from his damages where the respondent is making no claim for loss of past earnings or of future earning capacity?
To what extent are the benefits available to the respondent under the DD
Act in respect of home care to be taken into account in calculating the respondent's Griffiths versus Kerkemeyer damages?
Was the award of damages for past Griffiths versus Kerkemeyer excessive?
Were the general damages awarded by Maguire J excessive?
Were charges of $932.30 by the Health Insurance Commission (the HIC) improperly included in the damages award? 
With respect to these issues the trial judge found:
The DD Act pension should not be deducted from the damages.
 .
 and 3. The respondent was entitled to Griffiths versus Kerkemeyer damages with respect to the past and future care by his wife and daughter.
The respondent be awarded $130,000 general damages.
The HIC charge of $932.30 should be added into the judgment.

SHOULD THE DUST DISEASES ACT PENSION BE DEDUCTED FROM DAMAGES? 
The respondent was in receipt of an award of weekly compensation under the [Workers' Compensation (Dust Diseases)
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wcda1942388/) .
Relevantly [s (1)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wcda1942388/s8.html) provides that: where the medical authority certifies that a person is totally or partially disabled for work from a dust disease and that his disablement was reasonably attributable to his exposure to the inhalation of dust in an occupation to the nature of which the disease was due, such person shall ... be entitled to an award from the board, and to receive compensation at the prescribed rates from the Fund.

The prescribed rates of compensation payable are as provided by [s (2)(a).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wcda1942388/s8.html)
The current weekly rate is $324 before tax.

In accordance with Harris versus Commercial Minerals Ltd[2] it is plain that if the respondent was making any claim for economic loss, the pension payments would have been deductible. Since no such claim was made and consistent with the Tribunal decisions in Katidis versus Meggitt (Overseas) Ltd (No 2)[3] and
Tompson versus Goodyear Australia Ltd[4], Maguire J found that the pension was not deductible from the damages awarded.

The issue of whether collateral benefits are deductible from common law damages is one which not infrequently causes difficulty. A convenient starting point for consideration is Redding versus Lee[5]. In Redding and Evans v
Muller (heard at the same time) the payments involved were invalid pension and unemployment benefits respectively. Referring back to what Dixon CJ and
Windeyer J had said in National Insurance Co of New Zealand Ltd v
Espagne[6], Gibbs CJ stated: 
The test suggested is a general one, and it requires the court to consider the nature of the benefit which the defendant seeks to set off against the damages, and to inquire whether the person or body supplying the benefit intended that the plaintiff should enjoy it in addition to whatever damage he might recover from the defendant. In the case of a benefit provided under statutory authority, the intention of the legislature, in providing the benefit, must be gleaned from the statute itself as a matter of interpretation. If the statute expressly provides (as some statutes relating to workers' compensation have done) that a plaintiff who has recovered damages shall repay the amount of the benefit it will be clear that the receipt of the benefit must be disregarded in the assessment. In many cases, however, the statute under which the benefit is provided will give no assistance of this kind. Then it will be necessary to consider closely the nature of the benefit itself. The conclusion that the benefit is intended for the plaintiff personally and not in reduction of the damages may more readily be drawn when it is seen that the receipt of the benefit is not dependent on the loss of wages or earning capacity ... and is not intended to replace the lost wages or remedy the loss of earning capacity.[7] 
Further, in the judgment of Mason and Dawson JJ: 
The subsequent decisions in this Court apply the principles expressed by Dixon
CJ and Windeyer J in Espagne. They make it clear that the issue turns on the character and purpose of the particular financial benefit which the plaintiff receives: Was the benefit conferred on him independently of any right or redress against others and so that he might enjoy the benefit even if he enforced the right?[8] 
Later their Honours stated that: ... it has been acknowledged that it would be unjust and unreasonable to reduce damages on account of benefits received by the plaintiff resulting from benevolence. Benefits of this kind spring from a desire to assist the plaintiff, not from any wish to relieve against the tortfeasor's liability . A similar comment may be made about pension and superannuation benefits whose purpose is to ameliorate the plaintiff's situation irrespective of his right to recover compensation against the tortfeasor.[9] 
The High Court revisited the issue in Manser versus Spry.[10] Building on the judgments of Dixon CJ and Windeyer J in Espagne, the Court stated that to ascertain whether a statutory benefit possessed the `distinguishing characteristic' that it be enjoyed independently and cumulatively upon the right to damages, the task of the court is to discover the legislative intention.[11] The three possible indicia of such intention are: the financial source of the benefit a provision which requires repayment of the benefit out of damages, and the nature of the benefit.

The Court observed that if all indicia of intent fail, then the `settled principle governing the assessment of compensatory damages' in Haines v
Bendall[12] must be applied. That is, the injured party should receive compensation in a sum which will put that party in the same position he or she would have been but for the tort. Further, a plaintiff cannot recover more than he or she has lost, Parry versus Cleaver.13 
More recently, the High Court had occasion to examine the question in the context of the DD Act in Harris versus Commercial Minerals Ltd.[14] The question for the court was whether future benefits payable under the Act were to be taken into account when awarding damages for future economic loss. The court applied the principles enunciated in Manser.

As to the source of the benefit, their Honours noted that the scheme set up by the DD Act 1991 was not one where employees made any contributions. The
Workers' Compensation (Dust Diseases) Fund was essentially employer funded.
The court said: 
It is difficult to conclude that Parliament intended that the employers should fund benefits paid for injuries suffered in the course of employment and at the same time have to make a payment by way of damages for those injuries. The financial source of the benefits therefore indicates that the benefits should be deductible from awards of damages in respect of injuries giving rise to the benefits.[15] 
Turning to the nature of the benefit the court stated: 
The nature of benefits conferred by the Dust Diseases Act is that of compensation for economic loss suffered as the result of work injuries falling within the scope of that Act. The benefits are a form of workers' compensation payments. Section 8 prescribes as the rates of compensation payable to a person "totally or partially disabled for work from a dust disease" the weekly payments set out in Div 2 of Pt 3 of, and Sch 6 to, the [Workers Compensation
Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) (41) in respect of workers employed "in or about a mine to which the
Coal Mines Regulation Act 1982 applies". Section 8(3) specifically applies certain provisions of the [Workers Compensation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) to awards under the Dust Diseases Act. Section 8(6) of the Dust Diseases Act also provides that a person who receives benefits under that Act cannot claim workers' compensation. The purpose of the payments, therefore, is "to remedy the loss of earning capacity" of the injured worker. That being so, the nature of the benefit enjoyed under the Dust Diseases Act does not point to a legislative intention that the benefits should not be deductible from awards of damages in respect of injuries giving rise to those benefits.[16] 
The court concluded that the benefits under the DD Act should be regarded as compensation for injury and as a substitute for wages lost. They added: 
Because the fundamental rule in an action for damages for tort is that a plaintiff cannot recover an amount more than he or she has lost, payments under that Act are deductible from any award of damages payable in respect of injuries that give rise to those benefits. Benefits receivable under the Dust
Diseases Act are therefore deductible from any common law damages otherwise payable by an employer for injuries compensable under that Act.[17] 
It is the submission on behalf of the respondent that Harris did not cover the instant situation where no claim is made for economic loss, and that
Harris should be confined to the question the court was there addressing. It is submitted that the reliance by the appellants upon Harris is taking dicta out of context.

The question for the court is, does the DD Act indicate the intention that the pension benefits be enjoyed independently and cumulatively upon damages.
According to the High Court the relevant aids to ascertain that intention are the financial source of the benefits and their nature. As to the first, the
Fund is principally employer funded and this is an indication that the benefits are not to be regarded as independent or cumulative. The fact that
James Hardie was not the employer of the respondent does not alter this conclusion. James Hardie is a contributor to the Fund. Indeed, both appellants have contributed to the Fund from which the respondent derived his pension.

The second factor is the nature of the benefits. It is true that in Harris, the High Court were looking at a situation where wages were lost, in contrast to this case where the respondent had retired 10 years earlier. However, the
DD Act makes it clear that the weekly pension is also payable to people, such as the respondent, who are no longer working and have not suffered any economic loss in the nature of past earnings or future earning capacity.

In my opinion, both factors are indicative that the legislative intention is that the weekly pension benefits received by the respondent should be taken into account in the assessment of common law damages. The pension is not independent of common law damages nor cumulative upon it. I am fortified in this conclusion by the trend of High Court authority, most recently demonstrated in Harris in relation to the subject legislation, albeit in the context of economic loss.

In concluding that the pension payments should be deducted, I reject the respondent's reliance on Public Trustee versus Zoanetti.18 In Zoanetti there were two different (and disparate) interests involved. As Johnston J pointed out in Andrewartha versus Andrewartha,[19] there were two separate heads of claim with quite separate statutory bases in Zoanetti. In the instant case, non- economic loss and economic loss are both aspects of the one claim for common law damages for negligence. I do not think that there is any justification for a `head by head' approach to set-off as held by the trial judge. There is but one award of damages which is a single or global sum, (Arthur Robinson
Pty Ltd versus Carter).[20] 
The respondent seeks to rely on a notice of contention to support the judgment on an additional ground not relied on by Maguire J. The age pension of the wife of the respondent had been reduced by approximately $165 per week as a result of her husband receiving the dust diseases pension. This is claimed to be indicative of a legislative intention that the pension payments not be set- off against the damages. However, the effect on the pension of the respondent's wife seems to me to be an extraneous consideration and not one which is indicative of the legislative intent of the DD Act. The interaction of the DD Act pension and the pension benefits payable under the Social
Security Act (Commonwealth) and other related Commonwealth enactments may produce anomalies, but this does not assist in the task of construing the legislative intention. In any event, it may be that the power of the Dust
Diseases Board under <case> of the DD Act 1987 provides a means of resolution of the issue.

GRIFFITHS versus KERKEMEYER CLAIM 
Maguire J found that the respondent had been cared for at home by his wife, and to some extent by his daughter. Mr and Mrs Newton both wanted this state of affairs to prevail, if possible, until his death. His Honour acknowledged that, at some stage, the respondent would need care, at least in part, from somebody else. He allowed 2 hours per day from 5 April to 31 July 1997; 6 hours per day from 1 August - 21 August and 10 hours per day from 22 August to the day of judgment at a rate of $16.00 per hour. His Honour allowed 8 weeks of future care, the first five at 10 hours per day and reducing thereafter to 5 hours per day.

His Honour found that the home care had not been directed by a medical practitioner.[21] The finding is of some importance to the case. This is because s 8(2)(d) of the DD Act entitles a person in the position of the respondent to `medical and related treatment' out of the Fund if it becomes reasonably necessary as a result of the dust disease. This position is cross-referenced to <case> of the Workers' Compensation Act. Section 59 defines `medical or related treatment' as including: 
Care (other than nursing care) of a worker in the worker's home directed by a medical practitioner having regard to the nature of the worker's incapacity. [emphasis added] 
Notwithstanding the finding of his Honour that there was no direction by a medical practitioner, the appellants submit to the contrary. James Hardie relies on a report dated 12 September 1997 from Dr Despas, as well as a report of Dr Clarke dated 19 May 1997 and his cross-examination. None of these constitute directions by a medical practitioner within <case>(f). His Honour's finding was open on the evidence and should not, in my opinion, be disturbed.

It appears from an examination of the DD Act 1989 and ss 59 and 60 of the
Workers' Compensation Act that the worker is entitled to receive reimbursement from the Board for costs actually incurred - in this case for home care directed by a doctor, see Coyle versus Government Dockyard, Walsh
Island.22 The award made by his Honour was not one in respect of expenses incurred under <case>. Rather, it was for the provision of gratuitous services provided to the injured worker as an act of benevolence. It was one in respect of which a demonstrated need for services had been established in accordance with the principles set forth in Griffiths versus Kerkemeyer.23 On the evidence, the respondent had a demonstrable need for such care and is entitled at common law to an award of damages having regard to commercial rates, Van Gervan v
Fenton.24 
It was argued on behalf of the appellants that the services provided by Mrs
Newton and her daughter were benefits to which the respondent had a statutory entitlement under the DD Act and his Honour's award involved a duplication of those benefits. But this ignores the finding that no direction was given by a medical practitioner in terms of <case>(f).

A further submission was made that, as to the future, there was sufficient evidence that care would be directed by a medical practitioner. His Honour did not so find. Indeed, his finding that `the relevant care has not been directed' indicates to the contrary.

Alternatively, the appellants argue that the respondent failed to mitigate his loss. He failed to ensure that a medical practitioner provide a direction under <case>(f). It is said that there would have been no difficulty in getting such a direction. Other submissions made on the failure to mitigate include the respondent's entitlement to paid professional nursing and/or domestic assistance under the DD Act. It is submitted that it was unreasonable for him to prefer members of his own family to care for him (and then make a claim under Griffiths versus Kerkemeyer) rather than be cared for by professionals for whom he would not have to pay. In other words, it was unreasonable for him not to apply for additional benefits under the Act which would likely have been readily provided.

In this regard, reference was made to the application by the solicitors for the respondent to the Board for payment of the commercial value of the care being given by Mrs Newton. The Board rejected this application on 22 September stating that the care should be carried out by appropriate professionals.
The respondent had a right of appeal against this decision.

For my part, I perceive an air of unreality in these submissions. I cannot see how the appellants, who bear the onus of proof on mitigation, have shown that the respondent's conduct was in any relevant sense unreasonable. The respondent could not direct a doctor to give a direction. His choice of his wife and daughter to provide him with home care during his last months of life is perfectly understandable, as his Honour found. The respondent was not criticised at the trial for his preference. There can be nothing unreasonable in failing to appeal from the Board's refusal of his application in late
September 1997 given his rapid deterioration at that time. The evidence reveals a very different situation from that which faced the court in CSR v
D'Arcy.25 
In Van Gervan Mason CJ, Toohey and McHugh JJ stated: ... a plaintiff should be entitled to arrange his or her affairs in the way in which that person pleases and should not be constrained by monetary considerations from dispensing with gratuitous services and obtaining outside services if they are desired.[26] 
Put shortly, the onus is on the appellants to prove that the respondent had failed to mitigate his loss and that the failure was unreasonable, Medlin v
SGIC.27 They have failed to discharge the onus.

There is an additional challenge to the quantum of past Griffiths v
Kerkemeyer damages. It is submitted that his Honour's award of 2 hours per day between 5 April and 31 July 1997 was not supported by the evidence. There was some evidence of assistance needed after the respondent was discharged from hospital on 5 April. However, it is apparent that the judge was endeavouring to effect an averaging out during a period of steady deterioration. This was open on the evidence. As the respondent's counsel pointed out, his need would hardly jump from 2 to 6 hours per day at midnight on 31 July. His Honour was endeavouring to make an estimate based on the evidence. His award in this regard was open and should not be disturbed.
Future Griffiths versus Kerkemeyer is also in issue. However, Maguire J recognised that the need for future care by his wife would reduce. The allowance made was reasonable and within the discretionary range.

GENERAL DAMAGES 
James Hardie submits that the award of $130,000 for damages for pain and suffering and loss of amenity of life should be set aside as excessive. An appropriate award, so it is submitted, would be $70,000. The SRA also challenge the award of general damages, although not resiling from a submission it made at the trial that $110,000 was appropriate. The SRA asks the court to reassess at $110,000. In fact, the submission of Mr Hoeben SC was `something in the order of $110 to $120,000'[28] and that this figure was to be discounted by reason of the `cardiac condition'. His Honour found that the `cardiac condition' was no more than a theoretical possibility. The respondent submits that the award was within the range of sound discretionary judgment.
It is submitted that the assessment has not been shown to be so disproportionate to the nature of the respondent's pain and suffering as to constitute error. I should mention that a challenge to the award of $12,500 for loss of expectation of life has not been pursued.

The principal reasons advanced by the appellants for the excessive nature of the award are Mr Newton's advanced age (71 years) and the relatively brief period of time from the first symptoms of mesothelioma becoming apparent until the likely date of death, viz. March - November 1997, a period of 9 months.
The respondent was informed of his disease and its progressive nature on 5 May
His Honour found that as at the judgment on 25 September 1997 the respondent probably had about 8 weeks to live.

Counsel for James Hardie asks the court to have regard to its decision in
Simon Engineering Pty Ltd versus Brieger.[29] In light of the decision of the court in CSR versus Bouwhuis[30] applying Planet Fisheries Pty Ltd versus La Rosa,31
I am unpersuaded that the court should have regard to the award in Brieger made in 1990. In Bouwhuis Priestley JA (Samuels JA agreeing) said: 
On any approach to the assessment of damages for personal injury, whether or not it is legitimate to look for and apply patterns established by the cases in regard to particular types of injury, attention must always be paid to the individual circumstances of each plaintiff's case. Injuries of a more or less identical kind although often they will affect plaintiffs in much the same way may also affect different individuals quite differently both in a physical sense and in the impact on family, social, artistic, sporting or other aspects of their lives. Thus, every case must be looked at on the footing that it is, as it in fact is, different from every other case. The difference in the results of similar injuries will be smaller or larger dependent on the Court's assessment of the effect of the injury on the particular plaintiff.[32] 
I agree with this statement. While the discretion is a principled one, it is still arrived at by a process of discretionary assessment, (Miller v
Jennings)33 being a matter almost entirely ` of impression and common sense'.
As Mahoney AP observed in Sullivan versus Micallef[34] `there is no market price for pain'. Nonetheless, as Mahoney AP noted, principles of proportionality have a part to play.

The respondent's written submissions contain a useful summary of his condition taken from the evidence. It is as follows: 
The respondent had to stop eight times in approximately 2 kilometres on his daily walk; 
In March 1997 1 litre of fluid was drained from around his lung; 
His breathlessness gradually worsened.

He was hospitalised during April 1997 and underwent a video assisted thoracoscopic biopsy and pleurodesis. The pleurodesis was described by Dr 
Gianoutsos in evidence tendered pursuant to s.25(3). The procedure was carried out under a general anaesthetic. After regaining consciousness following the operation the respondent was in severe pain and was on analgesics thereafter.

He was shocked and very upset when he was informed that he was suffering from mesothelioma on 5 May 1997. The Judge drew attention to this factor.

His breathlessness had continued to increase.

His appetite had decreased. He had to force himself to eat. He lost over 7 kilograms in a matter of four months.

He suffered a persistent cough which often kept him awake at night and which he found very annoying. He had difficulty sleeping. Coughing or breathlessness causes him to wake at night.

He had difficulty lying flat in bed. In later times he slept most nights sleeping in a chair in his living room.

He was upset he could not do things around the house any longer. Even bending down caused him to be breathless. So too did walking to the front of his property to retrieve the mail.

He was almost entirely dependent upon his wife.

He had a persistent tiredness and lack of motivation. After an evening bath he was frequently exhausted and needed to rest at the side of his bed for 15 minutes to get his breath back.

He had suffered increasing side and back pain over the several months before the trial. He also suffered increasing chest pain. The combination of breathlessness, tiredness and chest pain made it impossible for him to undertake any activity and robbed him of his enthusiasm.

He was taken by ambulance to Westmead Hospital on 2 July 1997 with severe side and back pain and vomiting. That undoubtedly caused him great distress.

By September his breathlessness had increased so much that he was unable to lie down. Even oxygen was of no assistance.

His knowledge of the nature of mesothelioma and its prognosis depressed him and he became depressed whenever he consider his condition. He had an overwhelming sense of disappointment, depression and frustration about his situation. His distress was amplified in his oral evidence.

Mrs Newton confirmed many aspects of her husband's evidence. In discussing the disease, his Honour referred to the evidence of Dr Clarke and also certain evidence of Dr Peter Gianoutsos tendered under <case> of the Dust Diseases
Tribunal Act . I have read the tendered extract from Dr Gianoutsos and find it relevant to an understanding of the effects of the disease on an individual. The doctor refers to the severe and unremitting pain of mesotheliama. In his reasons for judgment Maguire J referred to `the awful and all-consuming and relentless pain wrought by this disease'.[35] There is no doubt that those who contract mesothelioma suffer dreadfully.

Even allowing for the relatively short period of acute suffering and the respondent's age, I am unable to see how the award of $130,000 can be said to be so disproportionate as to constitute error. That it is within the range, even if at the top, is indicated by the submission of the SRA at the trial conceding a figure of $110,000 - $120,000, including a discount for the alleged cardiac condition found not to exist. I would dismiss this aspect of the appeal.

THE HEATH INSURANCE COMMISSION CHARGE 
James Hardie challenges the trial judge's inclusion of a HIC charge of $932.30 in the damages award. The charge was for `medical and/or nursing home care services' from 1 January to 22 August 1997. However, it is plain that the charge would be met by the Board upon his request as part of the respondent's entitlements under the DD Act. As a result, no allowance should be made in the damages.

In the result, all challenges to the quantum of damages assessed by Maguire J fail, with the exception of the deduction of the weekly pension payments (agreed at $9,026.50) and the deduction of the HIC charge of $932.30.
Accordingly, the verdict should be reduced from $167,762.30 to $157,803.50.
Although the appeals will be upheld in part, given the amount of the deduction and the overall issues determined adversely to the appellants, it is appropriate that they pay the respondent's costs of the appeal.

I propose the following orders:
Appeals upheld in part.
Verdict and judgment of the Dust Diseases Tribunal set aside except as to costs.
In lieu thereof , order that judgment be entered for the respondent in the sum of $157,803.50.
The appellants to pay the respondent's costs of the appeal.
 [1] [(1995) 40 NSWLR 721.] [2] (1995 - <case>; <case>; <case>; [(1982-1983) 151 CLR 117] <case>; <case>; <case>; <case>; [[1970] AC 1](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1970%5d%20AC%201 "View LawCiteRecord" ) at 13 <case>; [(1995-1996) 186 CLR 1] <case>; <case>; [(1967-1968) 122 CLR 649] <case>; <case>; <case>; [(1995) 172 CLR 1] at 22 [28] Appeal Book 81 [29] Unreported, Court of Appeal, 6 September 1990 <case>; [(1968) 119 CLR 118] [32] Bouwhuis at 251 - 252  <case>; [(1954) 92 CLR 190] [34] Unreported, Court of Appeal, 16 August 1994 at 6 [35] Red Appeal Book 47N * * * 
