

Collingridge versus Sontor Pty Ltd (No 2) Matter No 3360/97 [1997] NSWSC 557 (13 November 1997) ` 
Collingridge versus Sontor Pty Ltd (No 2)` /97 November 1997 
Young J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division /97 - COLLINGRIDGE versus SONTOR PTY LTD (NO 2) 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: I gave judgment in this matter on 29 October 1997 and then stood the matter over for short minutes to be brought in. Mr Bevan of counsel for the defendants has submitted that there is an error on p 26 of the earlier reasons because I there said that completion of the instant contract became impossible when on 18 July 1997 his client sold the relevant property to Mr Nicholson. Mr Bevan points out that under special condition 36 of the contract with Nicholson, the relevant defendant had the right to rescind if the plaintiff's claim for specific performance had succeeded. Accordingly, he submits that the contract with Nicholson could not have been a repudiation of the contract between the present parties. 
One has to look at the contract with Nicholson closely and when one does so, one can see, with respect, that Mr Bevan's statement is too wide. Special condition 36 of the contract with Nicholson is as follows: "36. Settlement is also subject to and conditional upon the Vendor obtaining at the Vendor's expense the withdrawal of Caveat No 2917273 within six(6) weeks from the date hereof. Provided that if the Vendor is unable to obtain a
Withdrawal of Caveat in registrable form within the said period of six(6) weeks either party may by written notice rescind this contract and such rescission shall be a rescission pursuant to Clause 19 hereof." 
It will be noted that the only way in which the defendants can escape from a contract with Nicholson is if the first defendant is unable to obtain a withdrawal of caveat within the six-week period.

The word "unable" is a strange one. I have not been able to find a case dealing with the word in the conveyancing context, but usually the word "unable" cannot be equated with "fail". See Thomas versus Associated Galvanisers (No 2) [[1971] SASR 1.] It is also clear that the word "unable" is not equivalent to the word "impossible", but means ordinarily that one cannot do something, or one has a sufficient reason for not doing something.

Accordingly, before the vendor could succeed in rescinding under a condition such as special condition 36, it would have to demonstrate that, without any fault on its part, it had not had the caveat withdrawn within the six-week period. As my reasons for judgment show, when dealing with the ninth heading, the caveat was in fact invalid because the caveator (the plaintiff) had no caveatable interest. Accordingly, the defendants could have removed the caveat had they used all possible means of doing so.

However, even if they had removed the caveat for the reasons that were set out in my decision of 29 October, the plaintiff still could have obtained specific performance. This is because the plaintiff's contract concerned the shares in the company which was the registered proprietor, not the land itself.
Accordingly, both the contract with Nicholson and the contract with the plaintiff could, at least in theory, have been enforced against the defendants.

This being so, it seems to me that I was correct in saying that the entry into the Nicholson contract was sufficient to put it out of the defendants' power to fulfil the instant contract, so that interest should run from 18 July 1997.

The next matter, concerning interest, involves a question as to whether the four-day period between 19 September 1997 when the plaintiff elected against specific performance, and 23 September when the matter came on for hearing, should be significant in the period of interest. This is de minimis and should be dealt with merely by rounding down the amount of interest.

The other matter that is left over for debate is what is the amount of wasted costs and expenses. Both parties have agreed that it is sensible, if it can be done, to agree to that figure and if there is no agreement, to have me determine it rather than go through the formal process of an enquiry before a
Master, especially in view of the small amount involved. I agree with that view.

Accordingly, although I make final orders in the proceedings in accordance with the document which I have initialled, I will reserve further consideration and stand over for mention the question of quantum of "wasted costs and expenses" until 9.30 am on 27 November 1997. I record that I have rounded down the amount of interest from $8,304.79 to $8,250.
 * * * 
