

Probiz Business Software Pty Ltd and Anor versus Magee and Ors Matter No /97 [1998] NSWSC 36 (27 February 1998) 
Last Updated: 3 April 1998 
PROBIZ BUSINESS SOFTWARE PTY LIMITED & ANOR v JEREMY OWEN MAGEE & ORS /97 February 1998 
James J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Administrative Law Division 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal from Consumer Claims Tribunal 
FILE NO: 030020/97 
DELIVERED: Friday 27 February 1998 
HEARING DATE: 18 February 1998 
PARTIES: Probiz Business Software Pty Limited & Anor versus 
Jeremy Owen Magee & Ors 
JUDGMENT OF: James J 
COUNSEL: 
PLAINTIFF - DR Parry - 2nd P 
DEFENDANT - NE Abadee - 3rd D 
SOLICITORS: 
PLAINTIFF - Ross Koffel 
DEFENDANT- I V Knight 
RESULT: Appeal dismissed 
CATCHWORDS: Consumer Claims Tribunal - appeal - consumer claim - whether claimant a consumer - whether respondent to claim a person who might have a liability to the claimant - whether claim "arose from" supply of goods or services 
Probiz Business Software Pty Limited & Anor - versus - 
Jeremy Owen Magee & Ors 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: In these proceedings the second plaintiff, George Scobie, seeks a declaration that the second defendant, the Consumer Claims Tribunal ("the Tribunal") has no jurisdiction to hear and determine a claim made against him by the first defendant, Jeremy Owen Magee, which was lodged with the Tribunal on 6 November 1996. The proceedings in this Court were brought after the Tribunal had given a ruling pursuant to s26 of the Consumer Claims Tribunals Act 1987 ("the Act") that it had jurisdiction to hear and determine Mr Magee's claim. It was accepted before me that, notwithstanding the general immunity of the Tribunal from judicial review, this Court had jurisdiction to grant the relief sought by Mr Scobie, by virtue of s12(2) and s34 of the Act. 
When the proceedings in this Court were commenced on 19 February 1997 a company, Probiz Business Software Pty Limited ("Probiz"), which had been a respondent to Mr Magee's claim in the Tribunal, was joined as the first plaintiff. However, on 1 August 1997 Probiz was deregistered pursuant to s574 of the Corporations Law and at the hearing before me Mr Parry of counsel announced that he appeared for Mr Scobie only.

Each of the first defendant and the second defendant filed a submitting appearance. Ms Abadee of counsel appeared for the Minister of Fair Trading, who exercised the Minister's right under s44 of the Act to intervene in the proceedings. Submissions in support of the Tribunal's ruling that it had jurisdiction, were made to me by Ms Abadee.

The claim lodged by Mr Magee with the Tribunal on 6 November 1996 named Probiz and Mr Scobie as respondents and incorporated a three page letter from Mr
Magee to the Tribunal. It is convenient to set out the terms of this letter in full. I will make no attempt to change the punctuation or grammar used in the letter.
 "I have been referred to you by the NSW Dept. of Fair Trading as a last resort of possibly recovering a portion of the money I paid George Scobie/Danecom Pty
Ltd/Probiz Pty Ltd. I am claiming $25,000 (your limit) out of a total of what should have been paid to me nearly 2 years ago. According to the written contract I entered into, of $39,809.80.

In Dec 93 I responded to an advertisement offering a small business `opportunity' as the NSW agent for a Victorian based firm distributing a `new' range of Australian made accounting software for small business called Probiz.
After some investigation I took up the offer. Many promises were made, a contract was signed (in Sydney on 16 Feb 94 when $45,188.00 was paid to
Danecom via George Scobie) and a lot of effort (and expense) on my part was put in. The business did not work due to the total lack of meeting undertakings or performance of what was contracted by the Victorian firm. This is fully documented and I will be more than happy to provide this documentation to you if you wish. The long and short of it was that when I attempted too terminate on 15 Aug.94 I was due for a refund for my stock of at least some $20,000 on the 14 November 94.

When I attempted to terminate my distributorship I was told to leave my stock out in stores instead of returning it as someone would be coming up from
Melbourne to look after the stores till a new distributor was found and that my refund would be processed and sent within the 90 day waiting period stipulated in the contract i.e. by November 94.

I duly waited the 90 days. I then attempted to get in contact with Scobie and had little success, when I did excuses were the order of the day. Some further months later after my continual attempts to contact Scobie sent me a schedule showing that they owed me some $11,000. A week later Scobie contacted me to make a offer of $5,000 as full settlement payable within 90 days. `Take it or leave it'. I should point out that at the time Scobie thought I was broke, unemployed and desperate. Realizing that Scobie's version of 90 days actually means never and I was obliged to sign a disclaimer before the 90 days started I refused this offer asking what had happened to the $11,000 that
Probiz had said was owed to me. The response was - `forget that, $5,000 is it' - if I didn't like it I could see him in court, or words to that effect.

Very shortly after this I found out that Scobie had resold my exclusive area - in DEC 94. Given that my exclusive distributorship had not been terminated in accordance with the contract i.e. no payout for stock or even an attempt to negotiate what this payout should have been till 3 months after this new exclusive dealership contract was signed (some 4 months after I should have received my payout/rebate) my distributorship contract was still in force.
Under my contract if the area was resold the license fee paid by the new distributor should have accrued to me. Neither I or the new distributor was informed of each others existence by Scobie. I have certainly never received any proceeds of the license fee paid by my `successor' as required by the contract.

A this stage some points need to be made.
My contract was made with Danecom Pty of which George Scobie is a director and company secretary, his wife is also a director. The contract was to distribute the Probiz line of software which, I believe, is owned by Probiz
Pty Ltd, Scobie is also a director of this firm. Probiz Pty Ltd and Danecom
Pty Ltd are creatures of George Scobie and operate as one entity.
Danecom is currently 'under Management' about to be liquidated for non payment of bills. Probiz has some form of application against it, but this has not been executed as yet. Hence my claim is against Probiz/Scobie.
Scobie has `pulled this scam' on at least 9 others in the last 3 years netting Probiz Danecom/Scobie a minimum of $420,000 (See table enclosed) paid to Danecom.
As of two weeks ago Scobie was telling another victim/distributor he was looking to get some new equity partners and distributors.
I have been in contact with the receiver/manager of Danecom who was unaware of my or the other distributors existence or the outstanding claims of myself (or David Weaver in Victoria who also terminated his distributorship, just after me, and has not yet received the contracted rebate. Apparently
Scobies records were not very good and he would not be described as cooperative. Scobie also failed to disclose the at least $420,000 he had received from distributors/victims including $30,000 he received at the end of - whether Danecom or Probiz (or one of the other companies Scobie has associated with - attached is a list of other such companies and Scobie's relationship to them) I do not know.

I have investigated (thoroughly) what legal remedies are and have been advised by my solicitor and a barrister that if I took the matter to court I would probably (given the mandatory proviso that there can never by 100% certainty in litigation) but that Scobie could (and probably would) make this course of action extremely long and expensive and at the end of the day there would probably not be any assets available to recover from, especially if Scobie initially set out without `honest intent' as it were. This would appear to be born out by the by the receiver managers lack of success in finding assets did not show up as being his during various checks that were made during my investigation process. It is for this reason that the Dept. of Fair Trading referred me to you.

You should know that both the Victorian Police and the Australian Securities
Commission have been advised in detail of this situation but to the amazement of both myself and my legal advisors neither body was prepared to take action.
I was advised that this was probably because it was too small and too complex to allow an easy `win' and so was probably consigned to the `too hard basket' with regret. I intend to take this matter further by referring it to the relevant ombudsmen as I cannot believe that these bodies do not have a statutory duty to protect the public from such operators.

MY CLAIM 
My claim is made regarding the termination clauses of the contract I signed.
According to the contract (and what Scobie said at the time and immediately thereafter) I should have received a payout to complete the termination of the distributorship within 90 days of my sending in written notice of termination.
This notice was mailed and faxed on the 15 August 1994 - Receipt of this notice was verbally confirmed by Scobie. Termination should have been executed on or by the 14 Nov 94. To date no payment has been received. Therefore my `exclusive distributorship' is still in force according to the contract.

The $25,000 I am claiming is made up of a rebate of stock returned Sect 8(a).
I either returned all stock to the Probiz Melbourne Office or left it out in stores to be taken over by my successor distributor (if he could find one) or a manager as directed by Scobie. It was agreed verbally that this satisfied my requirement to return stock under the contract by Scobie.

Cost of Stock Sect 8(b) Probiz was still issuing the same versions of the software at the time I returned mine for most programs. The Packaging had been changed (video box for envelope) however it had been agreed at the outset when
I signed up that this old packaging change would be done at no charge to myself as it was supposed to happen within `a couple of weeks' (Scobie) of me signing up. Superseded versions of software were supposed to be replaced 1 for .

The License fee obtained from the resale of my Exclusive Area of operations.
This was done without any notification or payment to myself in breach of the contract. See Assignment Sect (a) `Licensee can offer for sale...' therefore it was mine to sell and Licensors duties (H) not grant similar License. See
Schedule 4.

Total from rebate of returned stock $23,809.80 
License fee on resale of my Exclusive area $120,000.00 (it may be more to be confirmed) 
TOTAL Claimed (CCT limit $25,000) $25,000 
I believe that given the circumstances the order should be made on G. Scobie personally as I believe it is clear that Scobie used both Danecom and Probiz as vehicles to obtain money for his personal use. While I feel this would be the best solution I realize that legally Probiz Pty Ltd is probably the entity that the order should be made against. If this is not the case or you have a better option for me to take please let me know. Details of Probiz and Scobie follow.

Probiz Business Software Pty Ltd 
ACN 065 537 000 
Unit 1/120 Upper Heidelburg Rd 
Ivanhoe Vic. 3079 
George Scobie 
Unit 27/135 Parker St 
Templestowe Vic 3106 
Born Glasgow Scotland UK 15/5/38 (I am unsure if this is still current) 
I am sorry for the length of this matter but I feel you need the above information in order to be able to approach this case properly. I (and the other distributors I have been able to contact) are convinced that Scobie never intended to comply with the contract conditions and at the very least enticed us into the distributorships with commitments he knew that he could go close to meeting when he gave them. If you have any queries regarding this matter or advice as to courses of action to be taken, please contact me at the above".

It is also convenient to set out or refer to some of the provisions of the written agreement which Mr Magee signed in Sydney on 16 February 1994. The agreement stated that it was made on the date set out in the first schedule to the agreement (which was stated to be 1 March 1994) between a company named
Danecom Pty Limited, which was identified in the agreement as "the Licensor" and Mr Magee, who was identified in the agreement as "the Licensee"). In recital (a) it was recited that the licensor was the originator of a distinctive type of wholesale and retail computer software business specialising in the selling and servicing of computer software programmes and product lines. Although it is obvious that certain words which should have been included in clause 1 of the agreement were omitted from it, it is clear that by clause 1 and schedules 3 and 4 to the agreement the licensor granted a licence to the licensee to establish and operate a business as defined in recital (a) to the agreement, within a geographical area defined on a map which was attached to the agreement. The total licence fee payable by the licensee was $44,988. Clause 2 of the agreement contained a large number of covenants by the licensee. Clause 3 contained a lesser, but still extensive, number of covenants by the licensor. By clause 7 of the agreement the licensor was given a right to terminate the agreement on the happening of any one of a large number of events. There was no express provision in the written agreement for the termination of the agreement by the licensee. Clause 8 of the agreement, which is referred to a number of times in the letter from Mr
Magee which was incorporated in his claim, was in the following terms:- "Upon the termination of this Agreement for whatever reason: 
Rebate 
The Licensee shall not be entitled to receive any rebate or refund of any money paid by him pursuant to this Agreement except for any Probiz stock or merchandising materials delivered to the Licensor and which are of merchantable quality and condition and which the Licensor will purchase at the original cost to the Licensee or the current cost which other Licensees pay at such time or whichever is lower, and this cost will be subject to item (b) of this clause.

Cost of Stock 
The cost to the Licensor for Probiz stock and merchandising materials delivered to the Licensor by the Licensee will be further reduced by fifteen percent (15%) and payment to the Licensee will be made within ninety days (90) of termination.

Obligation to Pay 
The Licensee shall not be relieved of his obligation to pay any monies due by him to the Licensor pursuant to this Agreement on any account whatsoever".

I have already noted that Probiz was deregistered on 1 August 1997. Between 5
July 1994 and 1 August 1997 Mr Scobie was one of the two directors of Probiz.
The company Danecom Pty Limited, which was the licensor under the licence agreement, was ordered to be wound up on 29 February 1996 and was de- registered on 26 February 1997. The company's only shareholders were Mr Scobie and Inge Scobie, Mr Scobie's wife, and its only directors from 5 September onwards were Mr Scobie and his wife.

The respondents disputed the jurisdiction of the Tribunal to hear Mr Magee's claim and a hearing on the question of jurisdiction was conducted by a referee constituting the Tribunal on 16 January 1997. The jurisdiction of the Tribunal to hear Mr Magee's claim was disputed on the grounds that:- 
The respondents were not "suppliers" within the meaning of the term "supplier" as defined in s3 of the Act.

The claimant Mr Magee was not a "consumer" within the meaning of that expression as defined in s3 of the Act.

By clause 18 of the agreement the agreement was to be governed by the laws of the State of Victoria and hence the New South Wales Consumer Claims
Tribunals Act did not apply.

The Tribunal held that it had jurisdiction and in accordance with s34A of the
Act gave brief reasons for its ruling that it had jurisdiction. The part of the reasons which dealt specifically with the respondents' submissions was in the following terms:- "1. The claimant is not a consumer 
I am satisfied on the evidence before the tribunal, including but not limited to the agreement, that the claimant is a natural person to whom a supplier ((Danecom) agreed to supply goods and services, and has supplied certain goods and services, pursuant to the agreement. I am consequently of the opinion that the claimant is a consumer within the meaning of the Act.
The respondents are not suppliers 
The respondents submit they were not party to any agreement or collateral agreement with the claimant and that the only contracting party was Danecom.

I reiterate that I am satisfied on the evidence that Danecom was a supplier which supplied goods and services to the claimant - a consumer.

In my opinion a consumer claim as defined in the Act can clearly be one that arises from a supply of goods or services by a supplier to the claimant, i.e. it is not necessary that the respondents, or either of them, be the supplier to the claimant. Further the definition in my view makes it clear that the claim may arise `under contract or not'. It follows in my view that it is not necessary that there be a contract between the claimant and the respondent and that the definition of consumer claim makes that clear. That is to say, the jurisdiction of the tribunal is not limited to claims against one contracting by another but by the definition of a consumer claim and the width of the words `arises from' in that definition (see Fairey Australasia Pty
Ltd versus Joyce & Anor [(1981) [2 NSWLR 314])..] 
I am satisfied on the evidence before the tribunal that the claim is one that arose out of a supply of goods and services by a supplier to the consumer ie.
The claimant. The fact that there may be no contract between the claimant and respondents does not mean they may not be liable. The respondents, or either of them, might for example have a liability under the [Sale of Goods Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/soga1923128/), the [Fair Trading Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/) or in tort.
The law governing the agreement 
The respondents submit that the law governing the agreement is, pursuant to clause 18, that of the State of Victoria and that hence, because the Act is not a law of that State, the tribunal has no jurisdiction.

The agreement is between Danecom and the claimant. The agreement is not between the respondents, or either of them, and the claimant. In my opinion it is clear that neither of the respondents can rely upon its provisions as between themselves and the claimant. In any event the clause is not a submission by the claimant to the exclusive jurisdiction of the Courts of
Victoria".

The respondents to Mr Magee's claim then brought these proceedings challenging the Tribunal's ruling that it had jurisdiction. As Probiz has been deregistered, the only remaining effective respondent to Mr Magee's claim is
Mr Scobie.

At the hearing before me counsel for Mr Scobie advanced three grounds why, in his submission, the Tribunal did not have jurisdiction to hear and determine
Mr Magee's claim. These grounds were not identical with the grounds which had been relied on before the Tribunal. The ground based on clause 18 of the agreement was expressly abandoned. The concession that this ground could not succeed was properly made. Apart from the reasons given by the Tribunal why the ground should not succeed, s39 of the Act provides that the Act has effect, notwithstanding any stipulation to the contrary in any contract. The ground that the Tribunal did not have jurisdiction because the respondents were not "suppliers" was not pressed before me. The Tribunal was clearly correct in holding that it is not necessary in order for the Tribunal to have jurisdiction that the respondent to a claim be a "supplier" or that there should have been a contract between the claimant and the respondent to the claim.

The grounds which were advanced by counsel for Mr Scobie were that:-
Mr Magee was not a "consumer". This ground was the same as one of the grounds taken before the Tribunal.
It was a condition of the Tribunal having jurisdiction that the respondent be a person who might have a liability to the claimant and it did not appear, and was not even claimed, in Mr Magee's claim that Mr Scobie was a person who might have a liability to Mr Magee.
The Tribunal has jurisdiction only over a consumer claim and Mr Magee's claim was not a consumer claim, because it did not "arise from" the supply of goods or services by a supplier to a consumer.

Before dealing with each of these grounds, it is convenient to set out certain provisions of the Act.

Section 3 of the Act includes the following definitions :- "claimant means a consumer who has lodged a consumer claim in accordance with section 13 or who is joined as a claimant in accordance with section 14.

Consumer means: a natural person, * * * to whom... a supplier has supplied or agreed to supply goods or services, whether under a contract or not,...

Consumer claim means: a claim by a consumer for the payment of a specified sum of money, a claim by a consumer for the supply of specified services, a claim by a consumer for relief from payment of a specified sum of money, a claim by a consumer for the delivery, return nor replacement of specified goods or goods of a specified description, or a claim by a consumer for a combination of 2 or more of the remedies referred to in paragraphs (a)-(d), that arises from a supply of goods or services by a supplier to the consumer, whether under a contract or not, or that arises under a contract that is collateral to a contract for the supply of goods or services".

Section 3(5) of the Act provides:- "For the purposes of this Act, a person who claims to be a consumer shall be presumed to be such until the contrary is proved and, in any legal proceedings (including proceedings before a tribunal), the onus of proving that a person who claims to be a consumer is not a consumer is on the party who seeks to establish that fact".

Section 10 of the Act provides that a tribunal has jurisdiction to hear and determine any consumer claim referred to it.

I will now deal with each of the grounds advanced by counsel for Mr Scobie.

That Mr Magee was not a consumer 
It is clearly essential to the Tribunal having jurisdiction that Mr Magee should have been a consumer (see s10 and the definition in s3 of "consumer claim").

It was accepted by counsel for Mr Scobie that Mr Magee fell within the literal meaning of the words in that part of the definition of "consumer" I have quoted, which provide that "a natural person... to whom... a supplier has supplied... goods or services" is a consumer. However, it was submitted, as it had been submitted before the Tribunal, that in determining what was meant by the word "consumer" in the Act, recourse should be had to the ordinary meaning of the word "consumer" in common usage and that "consumer" should be interpreted as being limited to someone who personally consumes, uses up or expends goods or services supplied to that person and should not be interpreted as extending to a person who acquires goods or services for use in a business or for re-supplying to someone else. Reference was made to the definitions of "consumer" and "consume" in the Macquarie Dictionary. According to this submission the relevant part of the definition of "consumer" should be interpreted, as if the words "for his or her own consumption" appeared after the words in the definition of consumer which I have quoted. On this interpretation of the word "consumer", Mr Magee would not be a "consumer".

I do not consider that this argument should be accepted.

In my opinion, the words in the definition of "consumer" should be given their ordinary natural meaning and there is no warrant for importing into the definition words which are not expressed.

This conclusion is fortified when regard is had to differences between the definition of "consumer" in the Act and the definition of "consumer" in its predecessor, the Consumer Claims Tribunals Act 1974. The definition of "consumer" in s4 of the Consumer Claims Tribunals Act 1974 was as follows:- "'consumer' means a person, not being a corporation who buys or hires goods otherwise than for re-sale or letting on hire or than in the course of, or for the purposes of, a trade or business carried on by him, whether alone or in partnership with one or more other persons; or for whom services are rendered for fee or reward otherwise than in the course of, or for the purposes of, a trade or business carried on by him, whether alone or in partnership with one or more other persons;" 
It can be seen that limitations of the sort which it was submitted should be imported into the definition of "consumer" in the Act were expressed in the definition of "consumer" in the earlier Act. I would infer that the limitations which had appeared in the earlier Act were deliberately removed when the Act was drafted, so as to give the Act a wider operation than its predecessor had had. This inference derives some support from a passage in the second reading speech of the responsible minister, when moving that the Bill which became the Act be read a second time. The minister said:- "The tribunals have until now been open only to private consumers who had not purchased or hired the goods or services for resale or for use in business.
The expansion of the tribunals' jurisdiction will enable farmers and small business and community and charitable associations to have their small claims resolved". (Hansard 18 November 1987 Proceedings of the Legislative Council ).

I note also that an express requirement is included in that part of the definition of "consumers" which is set out in subparagraph (ii) of s4B(1)(a) of the Commonwealth Trade Practices Act, that- "the goods were of a kind ordinarily acquired for personal, domestic or household use or consumption... and the person did not acquire the goods, or hold himself or herself out as acquiring the goods, for the purpose of re- supply or for the purpose of using them up or transforming them, in trade or commerce, in the course of a process of production or manufacture or of repairing or treating other goods or fixtures on land".

The definition of "consumers" in subparagraph (i) of s4B(1)(a) is an illustration of a legislature in consumer protection legislation adopting a definition of "consumer" which is at variance with the ordinary meaning of the word.

I reject this ground for holding that the Tribunal did not have jurisdiction.

That it was a condition of the Tribunal having jurisdiction that the respondent be a person who might have a liability to the claimant and it did not appear, and was not even claimed, in Mr Magee's claim that Mr Scobie was a person who might have a liability to Mr Magee.

This submission was based on a passage in the judgment of Yeldham J in
Fairey Australasia Pty Limited versus Joyce [(1981) 2 NSWLR 314.] In
Fairey Yeldham J dismissed an application for prerogative relief by a respondent to a consumer claim, who was of course the plaintiff in the proceedings before Yeldham J. The plaintiff had not been a party to a contract the claimant had made with another person for the supply to the claimant of an air conditioner and it was argued on behalf of the plaintiff that the Consumer
Claims Tribunal had jurisdiction only in respect of claims made by a consumer against another party to the contract pursuant to which goods or services had been supplied to the consumer.

Fairey was a case decided on the 1974 Consumer Claims Tribunals Act. In the 1974 Act "consumer claim" was defined as follows:- "'consumer claim' means a claim by a person for the payment of money or the performance of work or for the payment of money and the performance of work, being a claim arising out of a contract for the supply of goods or the provision of services or for the supply of goods and the provision of services between that person as a consumer and a person who in relation to those goods or services, or those goods and services, is a trader".

There are some obvious differences between this definition and the corresponding definition of "consumer claim" in the Act. However, it was not suggested that these differences or any other differences between the two Acts affected the applicability of the part of Yeldham J's judgment relied on by counsel for the plaintiff.

At page 321 Yeldham J said:- "In my opinion the Act should not be construed in the narrow fashion contended for on behalf of the plaintiff. Although it is concerned only with the rights of consumers of goods and services, no reason in principle exists for confining claims which may be determined by a tribunal to those which are made by one party to a contract against the other contracting party. The words `arising out of a contract' are of considerable width. They have been considered on countless occasions in connection with other statutes, but it is not instructive to refer to any such authorities. Plainly, if the legislature had intended that the only claims in respect of which a tribunal might have jurisdiction were those where one contracting party sues another, it could, and no doubt would have said so in express words. It is, of course, plain that the person against whom an order is made must be one who has a legal liability to the consumer. The Act is not concerned with `palm tree justice' But provided the person who is not a party to the contract between the consumer and the person engaged in a business activity (which contract must exist in order to give the tribunal jurisdiction) but who is joined as a party to the claim might have a liability, whether under [s64(5)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/soga1923128/s64.html) of the [Sale of Goods
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/soga1923128/) or in tort, in my opinion a tribunal does have jurisdiction".

The part of Yeldham J's judgment on which counsel for the plaintiff relied was the part where his Honour said "but provided a person who is not a party to the contract between the consumer and the (other) person.... who is joined as a party to the claim might have a liability... a tribunal does have jurisdiction". It was submitted on behalf of the plaintiff that he was not a party to the contract between Mr Magee and Danecom Pty Limited but had been joined as a respondent and that it did not appear, and was not even claimed, in Mr Magee's claim that he, Mr Scobie, was a person who "might have a liability" to Mr Magee. It was submitted that the only claim made in Mr
Magee's claim form was a claim made by Mr Magee against the other party to the contract, Danecom Pty Limited, pursuant to clause 8 of the agreement.

Counsel for the Minister did not submit that I should not apply what Yeldham J said in Fairey, and indeed submitted that I should apply it, and I consider that I should proceed on that basis.

In determining whether Mr Scobie "might have a liability" to Mr Magee, I consider that I should apply some observations made by judges in other cases dealing with appeals from the Tribunal, which I consider are clearly correct.
In WD & HO Wills (Australia) Limited versus Consumer Claims Tribunal (unreported Ireland J 19 October 1995) Ireland J said at p9:- "It is not for this court to ask itself anything more than whether the
Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear the claim. This court is not concerned with questions of fact which relate to whether or not Dr Hodson's claim can be substantiated before the Tribunal. Nor is it the place of this court to look to the merits of the claim".

In Archcom Pty Limited versus Consumer Claims Tribunal (unreported Simpson J 29
September 1995) her Honour said at p9:- "Whether jurisdiction exists must be determined by reference to the claim made by the claimant. The alternative meanings of the word `claim' were considered by Hunt J, as the Chief Judge then was, in Thompson versus Consumer Claims
Tribunal [[1981] 1 NSWLR 68.] His Honour rejected the proposition that `claim' was to be equated with the existence of the legal right itself which is asserted by the claimant. So to interpret `claim' would amount to finding that the jurisdiction of a tribunal depended upon the outcome of the dispute. `Claim' is to be equated with what is asserted by the claimant; that is, what the claimant, rightly or wrongly asserts. Jurisdiction depends upon the correct analysis of the assertion made by the claimant in the claim form".

It is correct that in the three page letter incorporated in the claim form Mr
Magee propounded a claim against Danecom Pty Limited pursuant to clause 8 of the agreement between Danecom Pty Limited and Mr Magee. However, I am of the opinion that in the claim form Mr Magee does make assertions which could give rise to a legal liability in Mr Scobie to Mr Magee and does make a claim or claims against Mr Scobie. Numerous complaints are made in the claim form about the conduct of Mr Scobie. It is alleged that Probiz and Danecom were merely creatures of Mr Scobie. It is alleged that Mr Scobie made representations which were not true or which were not fulfilled and gave undertakings which were not fulfilled. It is alleged that Mr Scobie never intended that the agreement should be performed by Danecom Pty Limited. If these assertions or some of them were established, then Mr Scobie, as the Tribunal found, might have a liability to Mr Magee, for example under the [Fair Trading
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/).

In the claim form Mr Magee does make a claim against Mr Scobie. Mr Scobie (and
Probiz), and not Danecom Pty Limited, is named as a respondent to the claim.
In the claim form Mr Magee says "I believe that given the circumstances the order should be made on G Scobie personally as I believe it is clear that
Scobie used both Danecom and Probiz as vehicles to obtain money for his personal use", even though Mr Magee expresses some doubt about whether this is legally correct.

I do not consider that I should hold that the Tribunal did not have jurisdiction, because the claims which Mr Magee might have against Mr Scobie on the basis of the facts asserted by him in the claim form, have not been formulated with legal precision.

I would reject this ground.

That the Tribunal has jurisdiction only over a consumer claim and that Mr Magee's claim was not a consumer claim because it did not "arise from" the supply of goods or services by a supplier to a consumer. 
It was submitted on behalf of the plaintiff that a claim arises from a supply of goods or services, only if the claim is based on alleged defects in the goods or services supplied.

I have already referred to the decision of Yeldham J in Fairey and the terms of the definition of "consumer claim" in s4 of the 1974 Act, which in part required that a claim be "a claim arising out of a contract for the supply of goods or the provision of services (or both)". In Fairey Yeldham
J observed that the words "arising out of a contract" are words of considerable width and held that a claim could be said to "arise out of a contract", even though it was brought by a person who was not a party to the contract, to enforce a liability arising otherwise than under the contract. At p322 his Honour said that he had arrived at the view "that a claim may be one `arising out of a contract for the supply of goods or the provision of services' if it has a reasonable relationship to and exists in consequence of a contract between the consumer and another person...".

The words (a claim) "that arises from a supply of goods or services by a supplier to the consumer whether under a contract or not" in the definition of "consumer claim" in the present Act are at least as wide as the words considered by Yeldham J in Fairey. In my opinion, applying what was said by Yeldham J in Fairey, there is no justification for limiting the definition of "consumer claim" in the Act in the way suggested by counsel for the plaintiff. In my opinion, the claims made by Mr Magee in the claim form can be said to have a reasonable relationship to and to exist in consequence of the agreement between Danecom Pty Limited and Mr Magee and hence to satisfy the test propounded by Yeldham J in Fairey. Of course, some of the complaints made by Mr Magee are based on alleged defects in what he was supplied with.

I would reject this ground.

As I have rejected all of the grounds on which the ruling by the Tribunal was challenged, I dismiss the proceedings and order the plaintiff to pay the
Minister's costs of the proceedings.
 * * * 
