

Hirsch Rees and Associates Pty Ltd versus The Trustees of the Moriah College
Building Fund and Ors Matter No 55029/91 [1998] NSWSC 471 (2 June 1998) 
Last Updated: 6 November 1998 
HIRSCH REES & ASSOCIATES PTY LTD versus THE TRUSTEES OF THE MORIAH COLLEGE BUILDING FUND & ORS /91 June 1998 
Rolfe J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
Construction List 
Name of Case: HIRSCH REES & ASSOCIATES PTY LTD versus THE TRUSTEES OF THE MORIAH COLLEGE BUILDING FUND & ORS 
Proceedings: 55029/1991 
Date of Hearing of Motion: 29 May 1998 
Date of Judgment: 2 June 1998 
Solicitor for Plaintiff: Mr K J Tapsell 
Solicitors for Plaintiff: Watkins Tapsell 
Counsel for Defendants: Mr M D Young 
Solicitors for Defendants: Cowley Hearne 
Whether there was an agreement for the settlement of litigation.

Held that on the facts the parties did not intend that there should be an agreement until a Deed of Settlement was executed and exchanged.

Application for declaration that there was an agreement dismissed.

I N D E X 
Page 
Introduction 1 
The Asserted Agreement 4 
Conclusions Thus Far 12 
The Subsequent Conduct Of The Parties 13 
The Result Of The Subsequent Conduct 19 
Orders 22 
HIRSCH REES & ASSOCIATES PTY LIMITED versus THE TRUSTEES OF THE MORIAH COLLEGE BUILDING FUND & 6 ORS 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
Introduction 
By a Notice of Motion filed on 20 May 1998 the plaintiff, Hirsch Rees &
Associates Pty Limited, ("HRA"), for which Mr K.J. Tapsell, solicitor, appeared, sought declarations that on 20 March 1997 HRA entered into an agreement to settle certain litigation with the defendants, The Trustees of
The Moriah College Building Fund, ("the Trustees"), for whom Mr M.D. Young of
Counsel appeared, in terms of the Deed attached to the letter from Messrs
Cowley Hearne, ("Cowley Hearne"), to Messrs Connah, Steed & Co, ("Connah
Steed"), dated 20 March 1997. A further declaration was sought that the agreement was subject to a condition, being the consent of the second defendant, Pacific Indemnity Pty Limited, ("Pacific Indemnity"), which was at all material times the professional indemnity insurer of HRA, and that that condition, in so far as it was for the benefit of the Trustees, was fulfilled on the filing of Terms of Settlement in proceedings 440024 of 1997 in the
Construction List of the Common Law Division of this Court on 19 December .

A declaration was also sought that the condition, in so far as it was for the benefit of HRA, was waived by it on 20 March 1997 or, alternatively, by a letter from Mr Tapsell to Cowley Hearne of 30 April 1998, or, alternatively, of 15 May 1998.

A further declaration was sought that the agreement is "now enforceable" as between HRA and the Trustees, and that they be ordered to execute and exchange the Deed of 20 March 1997.

The principal issue, accordingly, was whether the parties evinced an objective intention to create contractually binding obligations, which obligations were contained in the Deed of 20 March 1997, notwithstanding that the Deed was never executed nor exchanged. Mr Tapsell submitted that by the time of the preparation of that Deed all terms had been agreed and, notwithstanding the failure to execute and exchange it, the parties were none-the-less bound by those terms. Mr Young submitted that viewed objectively the facts pointed unequivocally to an intention on the part of the parties that the Deed should be executed and exchanged prior to there being any binding agreement between them and, in this regard, he submitted that the case fell within the third category in Masters & Anor versus Cameron <case>; [(1954) 91 CLR 353], as being one in which the intention of the parties was not to make a concluded bargain at all unless and until they executed a formal contract: p.360.

HRA, at all material times, carried on its profession as an architect. It was retained by the Trustees on or about 12 June 1986 to provide certain architectural services to them in relation to the construction of the Moriah
College High School at Queens Park. The building work was carried out by Reed
Constructions Pty Limited, which, in due course, brought proceedings against
HRA and the Trustees and, subsequently, HRA and the Trustees cross-claimed against each other. Ultimately, on 19 December 1997, the proceedings between
Reed Constructions Pty Limited, on the one hand, and HRA and the Trustees, on the other, were settled.

Over a long period there were negotiations between HRA and the Trustees for the settlement of their dispute. The Trustees take the view that the proceedings have not been settled and in the continuing proceedings, in which
HRA is suing them, they have sought security for costs. When that application came before me it seemed sensible, before determining it, to decide whether
HRA's contention that there was a settlement could be made out because, if it could, there would be no utility in pursuing the application for security for costs.

The interest of Pacific Indemnity is that it has paid out moneys in the defence by HRA of the proceedings brought against it by Reed Constructions Pty
Limited and, in the event of any settlement between HRA and the Trustees, it is asserting an entitlement to recover from the settlement sum paid to HRA the amount of such costs.

The Asserted Agreement 
HRA's claim, accordingly, is one against the Trustees for the payment of architectural fees. The question as to whether there was a concluded settlement agreement requires a detailed consideration of various correspondence and documentation. Initially the solicitors acting for HRA were
Connah Steed. At all times the solicitors acting for the Trustees have been
Cowley Hearne.

By letter dated 28 November 1996 Connah Steed wrote to Cowley Hearne in relation to the settlement stating, inter alia, that it:- ".. will be conditional upon our client receiving the unconditional approval of its insurer to the Settlement. We wish to submit the Terms of Settlement to the Insurer's solicitors immediately upon their terms being agreed in a final form between our respective clients." 
On 10 December 1996 Connah Steed wrote to Cowley Hearne referring to earlier discussions and to a Deed which had been prepared by Cowley Hearne. On 12
December 1996 Connah Steed wrote to Cowley Hearne stating that HRA was most concerned that the Trustees wished to re-draft the terms:- ".. in the form of a Deed and that these developments are now prejudicing settlement before Christmas".

The letter set out a fairly peremptory timetable to achieve settlement before
Christmas, which involved the preparation of a Deed, consideration of it by the various parties, including the then solicitors for Pacific Indemnity, and, on 23 December 1996, the signing of "Final Terms". By that point it was apparent that Connah Steed contemplated that a Deed would be entered into and executed.

On 13 December 1996 Cowley Hearne sent a draft Deed to Connah Steed and, on 16
December 1996, Connah Steed responded by suggesting certain amendments and, in paragraphs 8 and 9, stating:- "8. Our client has been and remains willing to have the proceedings discontinued and to enter into a general release to ensure no further proceedings are brought by either party. However, your client now seeks to raise an issue estoppel by having a verdict and judgment entered.

Our client will only agree to a verdict and judgment being entered if clause 7(a) of the Deed is amended to provide for a verdict and judgment for the Plaintiff on the Plaintiff's claim. If that proposition is not acceptable our client will only settle on the basis of the proceedings being discontinued and general releases being entered into.
 . Neither our client nor, we suspect, its insurers will agree to clause 7(c) of the Deed in its present form. That clause should reflect a mutual position so that the Architect is also not estopped from any cross-claim that it may have or may wish to bring against the Trustees in the Reed proceedings." 
On 18 December 1996 Cowley Hearne sent a facsimile transmission to Connah
Steed stating that the Trustees would not agree to a number of changes, as they were matters which were HRA's requirements and were agreed "some considerable time ago". They confirmed that certain other changes would be made.

On 10 January 1997 Cowley Hearne sent a further draft of the Deed to Connah
Steed, noting certain amendments and raising the issue of a press release. It concluded:- "Please let us know whether the Deed is acceptable to your client and what is likely to be involved in obtaining your client's underwriter's approval." 
Connah Steed responded on 15 January 1997, dealt with various matters, and concluded:- "We await your advices and in the meantime we confirm that an earlier draft of the proposed Deed (on the basis that any further changes would not unduly impact on our client's insurer) has been forwarded to Messrs Minter Ellison for the approval of our that (sic) insurer. Such approval has not yet been received." 
On the same day Cowley Hearne advised Connah Steed of the instructions in relation to the requests in the letter of 15 January 1997.

There was further correspondence concerning the nature of the press release and, on 5 February 1997, Cowley Hearne asked Connah Steed to advise "whether the Deed can now be finalised".

On 19 February 1997 Connah Steed responded, relevantly for present purposes, reserving HRA's position concerning a heading for the press release and the inclusion of the word "fees" in clause 4 of the Deed.

On 20 February 1997 Cowley Hearne sent "a further draft of the proposed Deed" to Connah Steed, upon which was stamped in a number of places the word "draft". They stated:- "We assume that the Deed is now in a form which, subject to the approval of the settlement by your client's insurer, can be executed by our respective clients." 
On 12 March 1997 Connah Steed responded, once again raising the question of the press release, and stating that HRA reserved its position regarding that matter and that:- ".. we are instructed that our client requires agreement on this matter and for such agreement to be inserted in any Deed of Settlement that may be finally signed." 
By a facsimile transmission of 14 March 1997 Cowley Hearne advised that the
Trustees did not agree to the matters relating to the advertisement and, on 20
March 1997, Connah Steed responded stating:- "Thank you for your facsimile transmission of 14th March, 1997, the contents of which have been considered by our client.

Please forward to us an engrossed copy of the Deed of Settlement for final approval by our client and execution.

Our client is desirous of exchanging the signed Deed of Settlement on Monday 24th March 1997." 
I shall pause at that point because by then a number of matters had become clear. Firstly, contrary to the submission made by Mr Young, I am satisfied that the letter of 20 March 1997 from Connah Steed indicated that HRA was not pressing to have its requirements about the press release inserted, and that
HRA was content to proceed on the basis for which the Trustees contended.
However, the communication made clear that the Deed was required "for final approval" and "for execution", and that it was the contemplation of HRA that the executed Deed would be exchanged. In my view, in so far as these matters needed to be made any plainer, this communication achieved that, and it would take very strong evidence to show that it was not the intention of the parties, viewed objectively, that there was only to be a concluded agreement between them upon the exchange of an executed Deed. There is no such evidence.

On 20 March 1997 Cowley Hearne sent a facsimile transmission to Connah Steed stating:- "We refer to your facsimile transmission dated 20 March 1997 and enclose an execution copy of the Deed between our respective clients.

We have advised our clients of your client's wish to exchange executed Deeds on Monday 24 March 1997 but are as yet unable to confirm that all of the Trustees will have been able to execute a counterpart Deed by that date. As soon as the situation regarding this matter is clear we shall advise you." 
Once again that makes it abundantly clear that the anticipation of the
Trustees, as with HRA, was that the contract would be made when the Deed was executed and exchanged.

It is now appropriate to consider the terms of the Deed.

The recitals set out certain of the history, and Recital E stated:- "The parties are desirous of resolving the outstanding disputes between them, in the Proceedings in accordance with the provisions of this Deed but without affecting the Cross-Claims made by the Architect and the Trustees against each other in proceedings number S55024 of 1994 brought by Reed Constructions Pty Limited (Scheme Manager Appointed) against the Trustees and the Architect (Reed proceedings)".

It was submitted, in my view correctly, that the opening words of the recital make it clear that the parties were desirous of resolving the outstanding disputes by the execution and exchange of the Deed. The operative parts of the
Deed confirm this. Clause 2 dealt with the execution of authorising documents and other matters in relation to money "upon exchange". Clause 4 provided for a press release within seven days "of the exchange of this Deed". Clause 6 provided a covenant by the Trustees that within six months "of the exchange of this Deed" they would erect a plaque. Clause 7 stated:- "Upon exchange both parties covenant each with the other to use their best endeavours to have the Proceedings concluded on the following basis.

Proceedings discontinued with no Order as to Costs.

The claim in paragraph 19 of the First Cross Claim discontinued with no Order as to Costs.

Note the agreement between the parties that nothing in this agreement operates to estop bar or waive any Cross Claim that either the Trustees or the Architect may have or wish to bring against each other in the Reed Proceedings." 
Clauses 8 and 9 provided for releases. Accordingly the exchange was provided as the trigger for the carrying out of a number of obligations under the Deed, all of which were essential to settlement. There was no suggestion that there should be any exchange before execution.

Subsequently, on 20 March 1997, Cowley Hearne sent a further facsimile transmission to Connah Steed stating:- "We refer to your facsimile transmission dated 20 March 1997. An execution copy of the Deed has been forwarded to you by courier. We are awaiting advice from our clients as to whether all of the Trustees will have been able to execute the Deed by next Monday and we will advise you in due course.

We assume that your client's insurer has provided whatever `approval' was necessary for your client to be able to execute and exchange the Deed and would be pleased if you would confirm this for us.

We have spoken to Mr Justice Bainton's Associate who has advised that His Honour will deal with the matter on a mention basis at either 10 am or 2 pm one day next week. On the assumption that the Trustees will be able to execute the Deed by Monday we suggest that we meet outside Bainton J's Court at 1.45 pm next Monday to exchange the Deeds and then mention the matter.

We look forward to your response." 
Various matters arise from this letter. Firstly, the copy of the Deed was sent for the purpose of execution. Secondly, it was obviously contemplated that all the Trustees would execute the Deed. Thirdly, the question of Pacific
Indemnity's approval, which had been stated by Connah Steed to be essential to the entry into the agreement, was expressly raised. Confirmation of that approval was sought. Fourthly, on the assumption that the Trustees had executed the Deed, a proposal was put forward to meet to exchange the Deeds and to mention the matter. Thus, in my opinion, it is clear beyond argument that the parties were proceeding on the basis that executed Deeds would be exchanged as a condition to the making of the orders, all of which was part and parcel of the settlement.

On 21 March 1997 Cowley Hearne sent a facsimile transmission to Connah Steed noting advice that Pacific Indemnity had "neither approved nor disapproved of the proposed settlement between our clients". It continued:- "From the commencement of negotiations we had understood that the final settlement of this matter was contingent on your client's insurer's approval. Our clients see that approval as being for their benefit as well as for the benefit of your client.

Our clients apprehend that if these proceedings are settled without such approval your client's insurer will treat that as a breach of the policy by your client and will terminate the policy. The effect of this will be to leave your client, and by extension, our clients, without the benefit of that insurance policy in defending the claims by Reed Constructions. From our clients' point of view that is a most undesirable position.

Accordingly, we have been instructed to advise you that unless the settlement is approved by your client's insurer, there will be no settlement. We reiterate that our clients have no objection to the correspondence which forms the negotiations between our clients being disclosed to your client's insurer." 
This communication is of significance. After referring to the failure to obtain the approval of Pacific Indemnity, it proceeded on the assumption that the proceedings may be settled, and advised that if that approval was not forthcoming there would be no settlement. If, as is now suggested, there was a concluded agreement as at 20 March 1997, this letter was completely contrary to it and one would have expected, having regard to Connah Steed's insistence that the matter be settled as soon as possible, a rapid and forthright reply asserting that irrespective of the matters raised in Cowley Hearne's facsimile transmission of 21 March 1997, the matter had been resolved. However, according to the evidence, it was not until 30 April 1997 that Connah Steed wrote to Cowley Hearne stating:- "By way of an update report we confirm our telephone advice to Mr McKinn that (although there is no express requirement under our client's insurance policy to do so) we forwarded to Messrs Minter Ellison on 2nd April, 1997 material from our file relating to the settlement negotiations between our respective client's (sic).

No response has been received from the insurer to date and we have this day again written to Messrs Minter Simpson seeking a prompt reply.

We shall keep you advised of developments." (My emphasis.) 
There was no suggestion in that letter of a concluded settlement. Rather, the reference was to "settlement negotiations" and, as had been the position for a long time, the consent of Pacific Indemnity was still being sought.

Conclusions Thus Far 
In my opinion the material to which I have referred, and there was no other relevant material, indicates that it was the intention of the parties that their agreement was to come into existence upon the execution and exchange of the Deed, which never occurred, and that until that occurred, there was no agreement. After the execution and exchange of the Deed orders were to be sought from the Court. However, that did not occur. The significance of the
Deed was made clear not only from the correspondence to which I have referred, but also from the terms of the Deed itself and, in my opinion, the submission that the parties had reached a concluded agreement in the absence of the execution and exchange of the Deed must, on the facts of this case, be rejected.

The Subsequent Conduct Of The Parties 
It was not in issue that the Court can look at the subsequent conduct of the parties to determine whether an agreement had been finalised. On 1 October Cowley Hearne sent a facsimile transmission to Connah Steed seeking to have changes made to the Deed and, on 22 October 1997, Connah Steed responded to Cowley Hearne's "advices of 21st March 1997 that unless the settlement of the fees claim is approved by our client's insurer `there will be no settlement'".

This led to a number of contentious and argumentative statements, and the letter continued:- "Our client agreed with your clients to accept a sum for damages which is considerably less than the amount it believes it is entitled to so as to bring these proceedings to an end and is not prepared to accept any further reduction in that amount to achieve any settlement. As far as our client is concerned, if it is the College's intention to walk away from the Deed submitted under cover of your letter of 20th March 1997 (`the Deed'), then it should say so now. Our client is concerned at the delays that have occurred since the terms of the Deed were reached with your clients without any settlement actually taking place. The terms of the Deed were agreed to by our client on the understanding that the matter would be resolved promptly and payment made to it promptly.

Your clients were not prepared to enter any settlement with our client without the consent of our client's insurer as your client is concerned that without such approval our client's insurer may treat the settlement as a breach of our client's insurance policy and may terminate the policy. The desirability of obtaining the insurer's consent, from your client's point of view, is that your clients may obtain, if necessary, the benefit of our client's insurance policy in a manner which is otherwise unrelated to the issues raised in the present fees case.

In view of this our client considers it should not be recompensed for these delays by payment of interest at the rates paid by the Macquarie Bank but should be compensated with interest at the Supreme Court interest rate from the date the principal sum was paid into the Macquarie Bank up to the date that any payment might actually be made.

We have made all reasonable attempts to bring a settlement to fruition. Our client has suffered further costs and losses because of these delays. It is our client's view that your clients, at the least, should involve themselves more actively in seeking to achieve a settlement which will be to the advantage of both our clients.

If this matter is not settled in the near future we anticipate receiving instructions shortly to have the matter brought back before the Court for appropriate directions and, also if appropriate, for joining our client's insurer as a party to those proceedings. If such a course of action becomes necessary we fear that the terms previously reached by the parties as set out in the Deed may be lost." (My emphasis.) 
There is no suggestion in this letter that there was a concluded agreement. It seemed to be conceded that the Trustees may "walk away from the Deed". In the next passage it was stated that the understanding was that the matter "would be resolved promptly". It was then acknowledged that the Trustees were not prepared to enter into any settlement without the consent of Pacific Indemnity and, irrespective of any prior agreement, interest at a different rate was sought. The penultimate paragraph raised the question of seeking a settlement, and the opening words of the concluding paragraph acknowledged that the matter had not been settled. Mr Tapsell placed some emphasis on the concluding sentence but, in my opinion, it went no further than stating that in so far as there had been an agreement about certain matters, that agreement would be lost if a settlement was not reached, i.e. the parties would have to re-start all their negotiations.

There was further correspondence and, by letter dated 30 October 1997, the solicitors for Pacific Indemnity advised Messrs Corrs Chambers Westgarth, ("Corrs Chambers"), who were then retained on behalf of HRA, that Pacific
Indemnity did not consent to the proposed settlement between HRA and the
Trustees.

On 29 October 1997 Corrs Chambers sent a facsimile transmission to Minter
Ellison stating, inter alia, that they had been instructed that an "in principal" agreement had been reached between HRA and the Trustees, which "in principal" settlement was a compromise.

Accordingly, on the instructions received by Corrs Chambers there was no concluded agreement and, if that required any reinforcement, it emerged in a facsimile transmission from Corrs Chambers to Cowley Hearne dated 12 November in which it was stated, inter alia:- "In or about February 1997, HRA and Moriah reached an agreement in principal (sic) for settlement of the fees dispute. The settlement in principal (sic) was subject to execution by HRA and Moriah of a Deed of Settlement. We hold a copy of what we are instructed is the finalised draft of the Deed of Settlement which was brought into existence on or about 20 March 1997 in anticipation of execution shortly thereafter. We are instructed that, on 21 March 1997, Moriah advised it was not prepared to execute the Deed of Settlement." (My emphasis.) 
There was further reference to the essence of the agreement "in principal" and it was stated:- "It is manifestly clear from the draft Deed of 20 March 1997 that not only is this not so but that the opposite is so, i.e. that the parties have agreed to bear their own costs of the proceedings. We are aware that Pacific Indemnity has sought to induce Moriah to make an admission that the settlement is one which expressly involves the recovery of costs by HRA from Moriah." 
In the next paragraph there was reference to "agreement in principal (sic) earlier reached" between HRA and the Trustees and, in the next paragraph, to instructions as to the basis upon which HRA was prepared to settle.

On 13 November 1997 Cowley Hearne sent a facsimile transmission to Corrs
Chambers setting out the history of the matter. Mr Tapsell relied to some extent on this in so far as it stated:- "2. By 20th March 1997 negotiations had reached the stage where your client and its former solicitor were satisfied with the terms of the proposed Deed and were calling for an execution copy to be sent. The copy of your client's former solicitor's facsimile transmission dated 20 March 1997 and our reply dated the same date are also enclosed.
 . We were then informed by your client's former solicitor that the approval of your client's insurer, as contemplated by its letter dated 27 November 1996, had not been obtained. Our facsimile dated 21 March 1997, to which we assume you refer in your latest facsimile, did no more than state what had been put in writing by your client's former solicitor and which had been put in settlement discussions between the parties as far back as July 1995.

Our clients reject the construction, which you have sought to put upon our facsimile dated 21 March 1997, as a refusal by our clients to execute the Deed of Settlement.

Indeed, when one considers what was put in Connah Steed's letter dated 27 November 1996 and the fact that your client was clearly aware that it had a potential liability to its insurer of $100,000 from the proceeds of the proposed settlement, it is clear that the situation which you refer to as having `occurred since 20 March 1997' is no different from the situation which existed when Connah Steed wrote to us on 27 November 1996 and which your client must be taken to have had within its contemplation in the negotiations which occurred between November 1996 and March 1997." 
In my respectful opinion, there is no substance in the submission that this facsimile transmission acknowledged any type of agreement. The reasons why the
Trustees had not executed the Deed was clear and it was never disputed that there was an obligation to execute or exchange it.

By a facsimile transmission dated 8 December 1997 from Corrs Chambers to
Cowley Hearne it was stated that an issue to be determined by HRA was whether "it settles its dispute with the first defendants on the terms of the draft
Deed of which you have a copy and with which you are familiar". There was no suggestion in this sentence that there was any binding obligation on HRA, nor for that matter the Trustees, to settle on those terms.

After referring to various matters the facsimile transmission stated:- "Against the background of the above, it will assist the Plaintiff, in making its decision, if you respond to the following questions - which assume a settlement in the terms of the draft Deed with which you are familiar ..." 
Once again it is obvious that there was no assertion being made of a concluded contract.

On 31 March 1998 HRA wrote to Cowley Hearne after both Corrs Chambers and another firm of solicitors had ceased to act for it. The letter complained about a number of matters and, at p.5, stated:- "It is self-evident that these false statements to the insurer have seriously prejudiced and delayed settlement between the College and HRA. They have seriously complicated and prejudiced the position of Hirsch Rees & Assocs. Unquestionably, these false statements encouraged the insurer to take its present position. Without these statements the action by Pacific Indemnity may not have been commenced.

It is essential for the resolution of the action by Pacific Indemnity, and the resolution of the fees case between HRA and Moriah, that these false statements be withdrawn and corrected. You are requested to do so forthwith to us, in writing." 
The letter concluded by stating that unless there was agreement as to certain matters the fees matter would proceed to litigation.

On 30 April 1998 Cowley Hearne sent a facsimile transmission to Mr Tapsell stating that there was no extant offer. Thereafter an attempt was made to waive the requirement that Pacific Indemnity should consent. I do not consider that the earlier settlement on 19 December 1997 achieved this.

The Result Of The Subsequent Conduct 
As I have said it was not in issue that the consent of Pacific Indemnity was required and was not obtained as at 20 March 1997. It was not in issue that it was a condition that it should be obtained, and the fact that HRA saw fit to seek to waive that condition puts that beyond the realm of disputation.
However, the relevant point is that as at 20 March 1997 there had not been compliance with what the parties accepted was a matter with which HRA had to deal. There never was compliance with this matter, and in so far as waiver may be relevant to any issue, once it was conceded that the requirement of Pacific
Indemnity's consent was for the benefit of the Trustees, as well as HRA, the purported waiver by HRA cannot affect the rights of the Trustees. The simple position is that the totality of the conduct after 20 March 1997 pointed unequivocally to there being no concluded agreement because, at the very least, it was not the intention of the parties that there should be until such time as the Deed of Settlement had been executed and exchanged.

Mr Tapsell, in his detailed submissions, drew my attention to the distinction between conveyancing cases, where exchange is expected, and cases where the parties have agreed to settle, but where there has been no requirement for the settlement to be reduced to writing: Geebung Investments Pty Limited &
Anor versus Varga Group Investments No 8 Pty Limited (Court of Appeal - 15
October 1995 - unreported). In that case it was found that a case had been settled by the parties orally, although there was no suggestion that there was any intention that there should be a Deed entered into or exchanged. In the opening paragraphs of his reasons Gleeson CJ said:- "In a case such as the present, there are two, sometimes related, questions which require to be considered. The first is whether the parties to the putative contract intended to make a concluded agreement.

The second is whether they succeeded in doing so. The answer to the second question may depend upon a number of factors, including whether the parties have reached agreement upon all the terms necessary, in the circumstances, to constitute a contract. In that connection, an implication of terms, or resort to considerations of reasonableness, may assist a conclusion that a contract has been made (Australian Broadcasting Corporation versus XIVTH Commonwealth Games Limited [(1988) 18 NSWLR 540] at 548).

As the decision in the Australian Broadcasting Corporation case illustrates, the fact that parties to the negotiations have agreed upon the major matter under discussion, confidently believing that the remaining matters to be decided will be sorted out later between them or their lawyers, without any difficulty, can sometimes create a misleading appearance of consensus." 
His Honour suggested that the resolution of any ambiguity may require "more detailed factual and legal analysis".

The Court was satisfied in that case that a sufficient oral agreement had been reached between the parties to allow an implication to be drawn as to any further matters necessary to effect the settlement. However, that was a very different case to the present, because it was never contemplated that the time for agreement would be when the Deeds were executed and exchanged and, of course, as at 20 March 1997, that was not to occur unless and until Pacific
Indemnity gave its consent.

I was referred to a series of cases where deeds were involved, although, most concerned deeds of release, which, in many cases, could readily enough be inferred from the terms of the settlement. In my opinion each of those cases involved facts which differed materially from those of the present case, essentially for the reasons to which I have referred. The only inference properly open on the facts of the present case is that the parties did not intend that there should be a concluded agreement until such time as the terms of the Deed, for which they were negotiating, were finalised and, thereafter, the Deed was executed and exchanged. That did not occur, nor could it have occurred until such time as Pacific Indemnity gave its consent.

Even if I be wrong about the ability of HRA to effect a waiver, which was binding on both it and the Trustees, by the time the waiver was given HRA was negotiating for an agreement containing different terms. This led Mr Young to submit, inter alia, that in those circumstances even if there was a binding agreement as at 20 March 1997, (which he did not concede in any way), the subsequent conduct indicated an abandonment or waiver of it or, alternatively, estopped HRA from asserting the existence of it.

In the view I take it is not necessary to resolve these submissions. I am satisfied, for the reasons I have given, that there was no concluded agreement for the reasons I have given.

Orders 
I order that:- 
The Notice of Motion filed on 20 May 1998 be dismissed.

The plaintiff pay the defendant's costs of the Notice of Motion.

The proceedings stand over for mention on Friday, 5 June 1998.
 * * * 
