

Sea Containers Limited versus Ict Pty Limited and Ors Matter No 50210/93 [1998]
NSWSC 474 (19 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 6 November 1998 
SEA CONTAINERS LIMITED versus ICT PTY LIMITED & ORS /93 May 1998 
Rolfe J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Commercial Division 
Name of Case: SEA CONTAINERS LIMITED versus ICT PTY LIMITED & ORS 
Application by Buquebus International Limited, the Fourth Defendant, for damages pursuant to an undertaking as to damages given by the Plaintiff in return for undertakings given by the Fourth Defendant.

Proceedings: 50210/1993 
Dates of Hearing: 11, 12, 13 May 1998 
Date of Judgment: 19 May 1998 
Counsel for Applicant/Fourth Defendant: Mr M F Adams QC/Ms C A Needham 
Solicitors for Applicant/Fourth Defendant: Michell Sillar 
Counsel for Respondent/Plaintiff: Mr B W Rayment QC/Mr G J Nell 
Solicitors for Respondent/Plaintiff: Norton Smith & Co 
Claim for damages pursuant to an undertaking as to damages given in return for an undertaking.

Held, on the facts, that no damages were proved.

I N D E X 
Page 
Introduction 1 
The Present Application 6 
The First Claim 9 
The Installation Of Forward Ride Control 21 
Orders 24 
SEA CONTAINERS LIMITED versus ICT PTY LIMITED & ORS 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
Introduction 
On 31 December 1993 Buquebus International Limited, ("Buquebus"), for which Mr
M.F. Adams of Queen's Counsel and Ms C.A. Needham of Counsel appeared on the present application and which was the fourth defendant in the principal proceedings, gave to this Court certain undertakings upon Sea Containers
Limited, ("SCL"), for which Mr. B.W. Rayment of Queen's Counsel and Mr G.J.
Nell of Counsel appeared and which was the plaintiff in the principal proceedings, giving the usual undertaking as to damages "pending final determination of these proceedings or until further order (whichever may first occur)". Buquebus' undertakings, relevantly for present purposes, were:- "A. The Court orders that the First, Second, Third, Fifth, Sixth and Seventh Defendants not enter into a construction contract for wave piercing catamaran Yard No. 033 with any person other than the Fourth Defendant and will not enter into such a contract with the Fourth Defendant unless the Fourth Defendant gives an undertaking to the Court in the form of Schedule A.

Schedule A 
A1. The Fourth Defendant will not:- 
Operate the vessel constructed and delivered to it pursuant to construction contract dated 22 June 1993 (`Vessel No 033') from any of the specified ports or a port (other than Holyhead and Dun Laoghaire for the purposes of a service between those ports) the port limit of which is within a radius of 100 nautical miles from the port limit of any of the specified ports for so long as Sea Containers Limited (`SCL') or any related company (within the meaning of the Corporations Law) of SCL is operating a ferry from such port nor sell or charter Vessel No 033 to any other person or permit any other person to operate Vessel No 033 without first obtaining from such other person a covenant in favour of SCL or an undertaking to the court in the terms of this undertaking.
 ...

C1. The Court orders that upon termination of the charter of Vessel No 031 (now known as `Stena Sea Lynx') pursuant to the charter party between the Fourth Defendant and Stena Sealink Limited (`Stena') dated 26 May 1993 or upon the introduction of Vessel No 033 into service between Holyhead and Dun Laoghaire (whichever may first occur), the Fourth Defendant not operate Vessel No 031 from any specified port or a port the port limit of which is within a radius of 100 nautical miles from the port limit of any of the specified ports for so long as Sea Containers Limited (`SCL') or any related company of SCL (within the meaning of the Corporations Law) is operating a ferry from such a port nor sell or charter Vessel No 031 to any other person or permit any other person to operate Vessel No 031 without first obtaining from such other person a covenant in favour of SCL or an undertaking to the Court in the terms of this order." 
The orders were made and entered on 31 December 1993. I shall refer to "the port limit of which is within a radius of 100 nautical miles from the port limit of any of the specified ports" as "the prohibited area". I note that there was no suggestion that SCL did not, at all material times, operate a ferry from any such port.

In the principal proceedings, which were heard by O'Keefe CJCommD and in which his Honour gave his reasons for judgment on 27 October 1994 and made a number of final orders on 11 November 1994, SCL sought relief against a number of defendants, to which I shall refer as the Incat Group; their managing director, Mr Robert Frederick Clifford; and Buquebus. The relief against the
Incat Group, put shortly, was based on allegations of breaches of a Commercial
Protection Agreement into which SCL had entered with certain companies in the
Incat Group on 19 October 1988, pursuant to which it asserted that it had certain pre-emptive and other rights in respect of large catamaran style passenger and vehicular ferries manufactured and sold by the Incat Group, which were described by his Honour thus:- "The vessels are described technically as Wave Piercing Catamarans (WPC) and are popularly known as Seacats. They are designed as car and passenger ferries, are all in excess of seventy metres in length and capable of carrying large numbers of cars and some hundreds of passengers at speeds of or in excess of 35 knots. In addition to being large and fast, the vessels the subject of the proceedings are unusual in design and operation. They do not rise with the waves or swell in the same way as conventional vessels. Because of their unusual and special design they cut through waves or swell and are thus able to proceed at high speed with reasonable stability in quite substantial seas." 
SCL's claim, essentially, was based on an allegation that the Incat Group intended to act, or had acted, in breach of the Commercial Protection
Agreement by agreeing to sell several vessels, designated as Vessel 031, ("031"), and Vessel 033, ("033"), to Buquebus, which, in turn, intended to charter, or had chartered, them to Stena Sealink Limited, ("Stena"), for use in competition with ferries owned by SCL plying particularly between Holyhead, in Wales, and Dun Laoghaire, in Ireland. By the time the hearing commenced
Buquebus had chartered 031 to Stena and she was operating on that route. It was also accepted that when 033 was completed, she would be delivered to
Buquebus, chartered to Stena and, thereafter, used by Stena on that route instead of 031. The orders were constructed to allow these operations to take place.

His Honour stated his conclusions thus:- "In my opinion SCL is entitled to relief in accordance with these reasons in respect of vessel 031 and vessel 033 and is entitled to appropriate relief in respect of future vessels in view of the threat by Buquebus and the Incat defendants that further vessels may be sold and purchased in breach of the CPA. It is also entitled to relief against Buquebus. The cross claims by Buquebus should be dismissed.

The existing injunctions and undertakings will continue until further order. I direct the parties to bring in Short Minutes of Order which give effect to these reasons for judgment and I stand the matter over for that purpose and for submissions on the question of costs until 11 November, 1994." November 1994 was the last day on which his Honour sat prior to his appointment as the Commissioner of the Independent Commission Against
Corruption. He did not determine, on that day, Notices of Motion filed by
Stena and Buquebus whereby they sought to be released from their undertakings.
They came before me on 28 and 29 November 1994 and, on 9 December 1994, I gave judgment. The matters then went to the Court of Appeal, which reversed the determinations of O'Keefe CJCommD: ICT Pty Limited versus Sea Containers
Limited [(1995) 39 NSWLR 640], and varied the orders I had made, by making those I believe I would have made had
I considered I had power to do so, viz declaring that Stena and Buquebus were discharged from the undertakings they had given: Stena Sealink Limited versus Sea
Containers Limited and Anor [(1995) 39 NSWLR 677.] Although special leave to appeal to the High Court was sought in respect of the judgment in which O'Keefe CJCommD's orders were reversed, it does not appear that any such leave was sought in relation to the judgment on appeal from me.
However, even if the latter were encapsulated in the former, the order of the
Court of Appeal, which was made on 30 May 1995 and discharged Buquebus from its undertakings, constituted a "further order", which occurred before the application for special leave was refused. Accordingly, SCL's liability for any damages, which may have arisen from events occurring thereafter, was discharged. In so far as is relevant the same applied to Stena.

The Present Application 
Buquebus was incorporated in the Isle of Man on 8 June 1993. The directors, at all material times, have been Ferruccio Del Bene, his son, Sergio Esteban Del
Bene, Juan Carlos Lopez Mena and Juan Patriccio Lopez. Mr Sergio Del Bene, who was the only witness called by Buquebus on the application, swore two affidavits on 19 March 1997 and 11 May 1998, and was cross-examined.

Buquebus now seeks damages pursuant to the undertaking SCL gave. Although there were no pleadings the bases upon which the application was made were stated by Mr Adams in his opening and, so far as the amounts claimed are concerned, appear from Annexure A to Mr Del Bene's first affidavit. I have set forth the nature of and the issues raised in the principal proceedings in summary form. The details appear in the various judgments to which I have referred and, save in so far as it may be necessary to explain my reasons, I do not propose to elaborate upon them further.

Mr Adams put Buquebus' case for damages thus. He submitted, firstly, that the consequence of Buquebus' being required to obtain undertakings from Stena was that Stena was able to extract two concessions from Buquebus, which caused it damage. The first was said to be that the daily hire rate for 031 from 26 May was reduced from $13,000 to $11,500. These amounts were in United States dollars and all amounts to which I shall refer, unless the contrary is stated, are in that currency. Buquebus alleged that by virtue of this reduction it did not earn hire charges, which it otherwise would have under a charter party made on 21 February 1994 from 26 May 1994 to 30 September 1997, of $1,834,500.

The second concession Buquebus submitted that Stena obtained was the right to instal, at the ultimate expense of Buquebus, forward ride controls on 031 and at respective costs of $975,000, of which $305,000 has been accounted for by Buquebus to Stena, and $981,000, of which Buquebus has not accounted for any part to Stena. Buquebus claimed the several sums of $975,000 and $981,000 on the basis that it has accounted to Stena for $305,000 and will have to pay or account to it for the balance.

The third head of damage claimed was for the installation of two additional steerable water jets on 033 in the sum of $450,000. The fourth head of damage claimed were legal costs in the sum of $21,719.87, being the costs of the
Notice of Motion, which was heard by me and the Court of Appeal, to release
Buquebus from its undertaking. During the hearing the third and fourth claims were expressly abandoned.

Mr Adams delivered a written submission on 14 May 1998. I was informed that a copy had been furnished to Mr Rayment, who did not wish to reply to it. Mr
Adams submitted that the proper principles to be applied, in determining the amount of damages, was that stated by Parke B in Robinson versus Harman <case>; [(1848) 154 ER 363] at p.365, and adopted by McHugh J in Commonwealth of
Australia versus Amman Aviation Pty Limited <case>; [(1991) 174 CLR 64] at p.161, viz:- "Where a party sustains a loss by reason of breach of contract he is, so far as money can do it, to be placed in the same situation, with respect to damages, as if the contract had been performed." 
Mr Adams posed the presently relevant question as being in what financial position Buquebus would have been but for the giving of the undertaking, accepting that that could not extend beyond the loss either flowing naturally from the breach or within the reasonable contemplation of the parties. He submitted that SCL saw a commercial advantage in denying Buquebus the opportunity of chartering to its competitors free from restrictions, whereby
Buquebus "lost a commercial right of real value, even though it might be difficult to assess". (My emphasis.) Mr Adams reminded me that if there was a breach mere difficulty of assessing damages will not deny the injured party a remedy.

He continued that the evidence compelled the conclusion that even if, contrary to Buquebus' primary submission, "the amount specified by Mr Del Bene would not have been obtainable by" Buquebus, "but some lesser amount would have been, the circumstances were such as to require the inference that the hire charge of $11,500 ultimately agreed was discounted to some extent by the weakened negotiating position of" Buquebus. The submission concluded:- "... with regard to the amount of damages sought in respect of the loss of hire, the Court should conclude that there was an `actual loss' (vide Amman Aviation ..) and allow an appropriate amount, though to do so involves an element of speculation. We have already submitted that an appropriate starting point is Mr Del Bene's evidence of his belief of the impact of the need to obtain the undertaking." (My emphasis.) 
The submission did not offer any assistance as to the amount, or how it should be calculated. The difficulty I have with this submission, as with the primary one, is that Buquebus has failed to satisfy me that by giving the undertaking it has suffered any damage. I shall seek to explain my reasons for this conclusion.

The First Claim 
On 26 May 1993 Buquebus entered into a charter party with Stena in respect of for a minimum period of ten months and a maximum period of twelve months "but not longer than replaced by NB033/034", at a daily rate of $13,000. On incorporation Buquebus ratified the charter party, which provided for the substitution of 031 by 033 or, perhaps, 034, although the replacement by 034 did not become a relevant consideration.

There is no doubt, on the evidence, that at any given time Stena only intended to operate one vessel on the Holyhead/Dun Laoghaire route, namely, in the first instance, 031 and, upon 033 becoming available, 033. There was no suggestion that Stena ever intended to use both vessels on that route at the same time. There is equally no doubt that between 26 May 1993 and 26 May 1994 was hired to Stena at $13,000 per day.

The relevant evidence for Buquebus was that of Mr Sergio Del Bene. No evidence was called from Stena. In paragraph 33 of his affidavit of 19 March 1997, after relating that 031 went on hire under the original charter party until about 26 May 1994 when 033 was delivered, he continued:- "031 was replaced by 033 on the Holyhead route and 031 was moved to the Rosselaire to Fishgaard route ...".

It was agreed that route was beyond the prohibited area.

In his oral evidence Mr Del Bene said, relevantly to this matter, Tp.13:- "Q. And was it your understanding of the fact in 1993 that the arrangements between your company, Buquebus, and Stena for Vessel 031, were that it would be chartered, first of all, for a ten month or twelve month period but later for a twenty four month period on the basis that, as soon as one of these other vessels, 033 or 034, became available for delivery, that other vessel would replace 031? 
A. Yes.

Q. And at that time it was the intention that 031 would be available to Buquebus to use for its own purposes? 
A. At that time, yes." 
He agreed, Tp.14, that there were no fast ferries on the Holyhead/Dun
Laoghaire route before 031, and that when 033 was built and delivered on 26
May 1994 it went onto that route and 031 left and went elsewhere.

Mr Del Bene agreed, Tp.15, that a statement in a letter from the secretary of
Stena dated 23 December 1993 that:- "The contractual position is that the existing charter for 031 will terminate when the vessel is replaced by 033/034" set out his understanding of the position as at 23 December 1993.

At Tpp.16-17, Mr Del Bene said it was his understanding that 031 would come off that route as soon as 033 became available and that, subsequently, 033 would be replaced by a newer vessel. At Tp.37 he agreed that the Holyhead/Dun
Laoghaire route was plied exclusively with 031 until 033 arrived, and that it was not the case that 031 and 033 were used between those ports at the same time.

He said, Tp.40, that the hire charge for 033 was $150 more than the hire charge for 031, both charges having been negotiated in Genoa in May 1993, and that the reason for the small differential "must have been" that Stena was prepared to pay a premium for the availability of a ferry as the first fast ferry on that route. He further agreed, Tp.41, that once 033 was delivered it was to be the fast ferry used on the route and, at Tp.42:- "Q. As we saw yesterday, under the original arrangements when Vessel 033 became available for delivery, the charter party for Vessel 031 was to terminate, wasn't it? 
A. Yes.

Q. Leaving the vessel available to Buquebus to do with as it wished? 
A. Yes." 
At Tp.44 Mr Del Bene said that the reason Stena was prepared to pay $13,150 for 033 was that it needed, as he understood it, to put a larger fast ferry on the Holyhead/Dun Laoghaire route as soon as possible.

At Tp.83 Mr Del Bene agreed again that 031 was replaced by 033, the former going to the Rosselaire/Fishgaard route, which was always intended: Tp.84.

On 26 May 1993 Buquebus had entered into a charter with Stena in respect of or 034 for a firm period of thirty months at a charter hire of $13,150 per day and, on 21 February 1994, those parties entered into another charter party in respect of 033 at a hire charge of $13,500.

On 21 February 1994 Buquebus entered into a further charter party with Stena in respect of 031 for the period 8 June 1993 to 30 September 1995, additional clause 27 of which provided:- "Daily rate will change from US$13,500 to US$12,000 as soon as Vessel 033 is delivered at Hobart Tasmania." 
The parties thus agreed, in substance, that upon 033 taking over the
Holyhead/Dun Laoghaire route, the hire charge for the use of 031 elsewhere would be reduced.

It is important to understand the way in which Buquebus sought to put its case on this point. It was based solely on reduced hire charge in respect of 031.
There was no claim for damages based on any reduced hire charge of 033. It was not in issue that between 26 May 1993 and 26 May 1994, on or about which date replaced 031, as was always intended, Stena paid Buquebus $13,000 hire per day. The claim Buquebus made was that thereafter there was a reduction in the hire charge of 031, which resulted from the giving of the undertaking. The way in which the submission was framed was that at a meeting in February 1994
Stena was able to reduce the hire charge in return for agreeing to the undertakings Buquebus had given. The initial submission was that the reduction to $11,500 had the effect of establishing the loss of $1,500 per day, being the difference between $13,000 and $11,500 per day. Thus Buquebus was contending that because it had given the undertaking, which meant that neither it nor Stena could use 031 in the prohibited area, it suffered a loss of $1,500 per day from 26 May 1994 to 30 September 1997. This also involved the proposition that the damages continued to run after 30 May 1995, notwithstanding that the undertakings were discharged by the Court of Appeal on that date. The later written submission contended for a less certain calculation of loss.

It can be assumed that there was such a reduction in the hire charge. However, there was no evidence, in my opinion, that that reduction flowed from the giving of the undertaking. Firstly, so long as 031 was being used the amount of $13,000 per day was being paid. Secondly, it was always the intention that once 033 arrived, 031 would cease to be used on the route and would go "elsewhere". Thirdly, once 031 ceased to be used on that route for which, as the evidence indicated, Stena appeared to be prepared to pay a premium, a hire charge had to be negotiated. Fourthly, the charter party of 21 February 1994 accepted that once 033 was delivered, the hire charge for 031 would be reduced from $13,500 to $12,000. This agreement was struck on the basis that 031 would not be on the Holyhead/Dun Laoghaire route and that the undertakings had already been given to the Court on 31 December 1993. There was no submission that the hire charge was reduced by $500 per day.

Against this background it was, in my opinion, incumbent on Buquebus to establish that the reason for the difference in the hire charges was that 031 had to be used outside the prohibited area, i.e. conformably with the undertakings given, and that, had it been possible to use her within the prohibited area, a fee of $13,000 per day would have been achieved. That would have required, in my opinion, Buquebus' establishing that there was a route within the prohibited area, other than the Holyhead/Dun Laoghaire route on which 031 was not intended to be used once 033 came into operation, on which could ply and which would command a hire fee of $13,000 per day. Buquebus simply failed to adduce any evidence to establish that and, accordingly, in my opinion, it has failed to demonstrate that the inability to charter 031 within the prohibited area has caused it a loss of hire charge for 031 of $13,000 per day. Thus the starting point Buquebus propounded for the calculation of damages was never established.

Mr Adams acknowledged this evidentiary difficulty and that the evidence for
Buquebus was exiguous. He made three submissions in response to it. Firstly, he pointed to the evidence in paragraph 78 of Mr Del Bene's affidavit of 19
March 1997:- "As 033 would have been constructed in March 1994 she would first have been delivered and operated by Stena (as well as 031). (031 would have remained on hire at the original hire of $13,000 per day until 034 was constructed and delivered in May 1994 when 034 would have been substituted for 031.)" 
Mr Rayment objected to the words in brackets. Mr Adams pressed them but only as evidence of Mr Del Bene's belief and not as evidence of the truth of the matters asserted, although for reasons to which I shall refer it may not have mattered if they were tendered on the latter basis. However, they were not, and I admitted them subject to relevance, it being noted at Tp.5:- "In the first sentence of paragraph 78, objection is taken to the words, `as well as 031'. Mr Adams only presses those as to Mr Del Bene's belief on that matter and I admit them as to his belief and, therefore, subject to relevance.

Objection is taken to the second sentence which Mr Adams confirms is pressed on the same basis as to the words with which I have just dealt. I note the objection and admit them subject to relevance also. All the statements are admitted as to evidence of a belief or expectation of Mr Del Bene." 
Mr Adams submitted that when paragraph 78 was read it constituted evidence that a hire charge of $13,000 per day would have been received within the prohibited area after 26 May 1994, a submission he linked with certain questions asked of Mr Del Bene by Mr Rayment at Tpp.42-43. The first submission thus conflicted with the only basis on which Mr Adams ultimately sought to tender the words to which objection was taken. I disagree with each of these submissions. If one accepts that the evidence in paragraph 78 was admitted for all purposes, rather than on the limited basis to which Mr Adams agreed, the words "as well as 031" in the first sentence do not indicate that she would have been operated within prohibited area. Indeed, as I have sought to demonstrate, the evidence was to the contrary. Further, even if those words were intended to mean within the prohibited area, there is nothing in the first sentence to indicate that the hire charge would have been $13,000 per day. This is reinforced by the second sentence, which makes it clear that the hire charge for 031 was $13,000 per day until 033 was delivered in May 1994, when it would have been substituted for 031. Therefore, on no reading of paragraph 78 can it be said, in my opinion, that Mr Del Bene was deposing to the fact that 031 would have continued, after May 1994, to operate in the prohibited area and, if it did, that it would have done so at a hire charge of $13,000 per day.

The cross-examination of Mr Del Bene, upon which Mr Adams relied, started by
Mr Rayment's obtaining his concurrence to the way in which the claim was formulated. The first question at Tp.43 also went to the formulation of the claim, and it is quite clear that the questions in themselves did not accept its validity. It is equally clear from the question commencing at Tp.43 line that Mr Rayment was seeking a concession that even if that was the claim, it was a claim or "analysis", which took no account of the fact that Vessel was "getting older".

In my respectful opinion it cannot be suggested that that line of questioning, read fairly and in the context in which I observed it to be put to the witness, meant there was some acceptance by Mr Rayment of the validity of a proposition that throughout the whole of the relevant period, being the period of the claim, the hire fee would have been $13,000 per day, if 031 could have operated in the prohibited area. This was the very case he was opposing and these questions sought to mount another attack on it, but without in any way accepting the correctness of the claim. Even if, by some tortured construction of the questions, the proposition for which Mr Adams contended could be inferred, it is not possible to determine that that hire charge was to come from a charter within the prohibited area. Therefore, to some extent, the answer was not particularly favourable to Buquebus' case because if the analysis be correct one assumption must be that the fee was being earned outside the prohibited area, with the consequence that there was no loss at all.

A second submission made on behalf of Buquebus was that it was open to SCL to call evidence of the proper hire rate. There was, in my opinion, no such obligation in the absence of evidence, which established that there was a route available in the prohibited area at a rate of $13,000, which Buquebus was precluded from earning by the operation of the undertakings. However, Mr
Rayment pointed to the affidavit of Mr David Brian Collins, a divisional general manager of SCL, sworn 23 October 1997. Mr Collins expressed the view, paragraph 7(c), that a charter rate of $13,000 or $13,500 was a high rate "then" and would still be a high rate "to-day". He said the highest rate he had ever achieved in dealing with SCL's vessels of this type was $10,000 per day, and that the vessel that achieved that rate had a higher specification than either 031 or 033 when first chartered to Stena. He said without objection, and he was not cross-examined about it:- "I do not accept that there was any justification for a reduction in the charter rate for 031 solely because of a shift in the vessel's trading area. As I have said, the trading area of a vessel itself has no relevance when it comes to fixing a charter rate for a vessel. I can, however, well understand that Stena would have wished to negotiate a reduction because of what I consider to be the original high, and above market, rate for the vessel." 
In the result I am of the view that Buquebus has failed to establish that had it been able to use 031 in the prohibited area it would have achieved a hire charge of $13,000 per day. It simply called no evidence to establish the availability of any hire charge within the prohibited area. What I have said, of course, is on the basis that 031 would not have been used, in any event, on the Holyhead/Dun Laoghaire route. It is clear that once 033 was available she was to be used on that route and, after Vessel HSS became available, she was to replace 033. Further, the depression in the hire rate for 031, once 033 was delivered, was expressly acknowledged in additional clause 27 of the charter party of 21 February 1994.

Thirdly, Mr Adams submitted there were really only two operators in the relevant area, viz Stena and SCL and, therefore, the sources of evidence were limited. Assuming this to be so no attempt was made to cross-examine Mr
Collins on this issue, although from a forensic viewpoint this may have been understandable. However, it indicated that there was no material available to
Mr Adams, which may have helped Buquebus' case. That, in any event, was clear from the failure to call evidence on the issue in its case. Of more significance no evidence was called from Stena, either to establish the existence of any other routes in the prohibited area or the hire charge which would have commanded for such a route. The problems confronting Buquebus in this regard are exacerbated by the evidence that, since May 1995, 031 has been chartered to Stena under terms that it may be operated on any route within the trade pattern of the Stena Line Group, but she has not operated in the prohibited area, including on the Holyhead/Dun Laoghaire route. This is confirmatory of the findings I have made.

Mr Adams' fundamental submission was that as the price for obtaining Stena's agreement to be bound by the undertakings, Buquebus was compelled to lower the hire charge for 031 and to allow the installation of the forward ride control.
He submitted that these obligations were foist on Buquebus contrary to its wishes. He relied essentially on the agreement said to have been made in
February 1994.

I do not accept that the decrease in the hire charge arose in the way deposed to by Mr Del Bene in paragraph 50 of his affidavit and in his statement,
Exhibit F. My reasons are firstly that it was always intended that 033, or perhaps 034, would replace 031; that it was never intended that 031, when replaced, would ply the Holyhead/Dun Laoghaire route; that it was understood that once 031 was replaced she would be used elsewhere; that it was agreed that once 033 was delivered the hire charge for 031 would decrease by $1,500 to $12,000 for the period 8 June 1993 to 30 September 1995; that after the undertakings were released Stena, which still charters 031, did not return her to the Holyhead/Dun Laoghaire route or to the prohibited area; and, so far as the evidence went, Stena, notwithstanding the suggestion, which was unsupported by the evidence, that a second vessel could be used on that route, did not acquire a vessel from another source. All these factors point unerringly to the conclusion that Stena only ever intended to use one vessel on that route and that once 031 was superseded she would go elsewhere.

At that point, as Mr Del Bene agreed, Buquebus would negotiate the best deal it could. This would have to be done in an environment where there was no longer any incentive to pay a premium, as the evidence satisfies me Stena did, to have the first fast ferry on this route.

However, in my opinion, this submission overlooked the basic requirement of
Buquebus to prove that but for the giving of the undertakings, 031 would have been chartered for use in the prohibited area at a hire charge of $13,000 per day. In the absence of proof of that the primary basis for its claim for loss of hire charge failed and, in my opinion, there was not established to be any other basis on which such a charge could be calculated.

In the result I consider that Buquebus' claim for loss of hire must fail.

The Installation Of Forward Ride Control 
There are a number of difficulties concerned with the claim for the installation of forward ride control. Firstly, save for the amount of $305,000, it has not been paid, nor in any other way accounted for by Buquebus to Stena. There was evidence that it was shown as an obligation in the books of Buquebus. However, notwithstanding that work was done some time ago Mr Del
Bene said he was not aware of any other obligation or arrangements with Stena relating to the amounts, although it would be something he would have expected to come to his attention or be within his knowledge if there was such an arrangement. He said he did not know why Stena had not claimed the amounts "and we didn't ask", "because it is something that you won't do, in any case":
Tp.90. One can well understand the reluctance to suggest to Stena that it should claim the amount. The simple fact remains that save for the sum of $305,000 the balance has not been paid. In those circumstances the damage, except, perhaps, for that amount, has not been suffered, notwithstanding that there may be shown to be a debit in the books of Buquebus. However, I do not consider that any damage has been shown.

Secondly, Mr Del Bene conceded, Tp.85, that the insertion of the forward ride control, which gives greater stability in rough seas, would increase the value of Buquebus' vessels and make them fit for charter hire in Europe. He also agreed that "to-day" fast ferries are all delivered with forward ride control for Europe: Tp.78. In these circumstances even if Buquebus is liable, at some stage in the future, to pay Stena, the evidence is that the work carried out by Stena has increased the value of Buquebus' vessels. In that evidentiary state Buquebus has not discharged the obligation, in my opinion, of establishing the loss, if any, which it has sustained. Save for the amount of $305,000 it has failed to establish any loss, because it has not paid for the work, and, in any event, it has failed to show that the improvement to the vessels has not given it assets more valuable than the work carried out.
Rather, the evidence of Mr Del Bene made clear that their value has been increased and that they have been upgraded to current European standards. Once these concessions were made, the onus was on Buquebus, in my opinion, to show the amount by which the value had been increased, (including the ability to command higher hire charges), to determine what, if any, damage Buquebus had suffered.

Mr Adams referred me to the decision in Bacon versus Cooper (Metals) Limited [[1982] 1 All ER 397] for the purpose of citing the passage from Banco de
Portugal versus Waterlow & Sons Limited <case>; [[1932] AC ] at 506, which appears at p.399. Whilst I agree, in principle, with that passage every case must be considered having regard to its own facts. In the present case there has been a betterment of Buquebus' vessels, on Mr Del Bene's concessions, which has both increased their value and upgraded them to current
European standards.

His submission was that the necessity to carry out the work was foist upon
Buquebus by the demands of Stena which, in turn, came about because Stena was negotiating the terms on which it would agree to the undertaking. In these circumstances, he submitted, Buquebus should not be saddled with the financial consequences of carrying out the work. In each case it will depend upon the particular facts and circumstances. In the present case, I am not satisfied that Buquebus has suffered any compensable loss for the reasons I have given.

I appreciate that Mr Adams submitted that it may not be necessary to have forward ride control if the vessels were used in other parts of the world, but it seems to me, with respect, that is somewhat beside the point. The simple fact is that for use in Europe, which is obviously one market in which the vessels are used, this is a distinct advantage.

In all the circumstances Buquebus has not satisfied me that it has suffered any loss in consequence of these matters.

Orders 
I order that the application of Buquebus International Limited for damages be dismissed with costs and that the exhibits be returned.
 * * * 
