

Chief Commissioner for Business Franchise Licences (Tobacco) versus Nemeruck
Matter No 10823/94 [1997] NSWSC 580 (25 November 1997) 
Chief Commissioner for Business Franchise Licences (Tobacco) v Nemeruck /94 November 1997 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /94 - Chief Commissioner For Business Franchise Licences v Nemeruck 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: These proceedings were commenced by Statement of Claim filed on 5 April 1994. During the period between 28 February 1991 to 27 January 1993, the defendant carried on the business of selling tobacco in New South Wales. He did not hold a tobacco wholesaler's licence pursuant to the Business Franchise Licences (Tobacco) Act, 1987 (the Act). Section 47 of the Act provides for payment of an amount equal to the fee that would have been payable for a licence, had the defendant held a licence under the Act. An assessment process took place and Notices of Assessment were served on the defendant. The claim is founded on non-payment of the assessed amounts. 
The defendant has not filed a Defence. The plaintiff has obtained default judgment in the sum of $1,488,785.40.

On 2 July 1997, the defendant filed a Notice of Motion seeking the setting aside of the default judgment. He has filed a number of affidavits. The plaintiff has relied on an affidavit sworn by Jane Anne Elliston. The opposed application was heard on 12 November 1997.

There is no dispute that the Court has a discretionary power to set aside the default judgment. It is exercised having regard to the relevant circumstances of the particular case and so that justice is best served between the parties.
The applicant bears the onus of satisfying the Court that an order should be made.

There had been a dispute between the parties concerning the matter of service of the Statement of Claim. The plaintiff had relied on an affidavit sworn by
James McLaren. The affidavit deposed to service of the Statement of Claim on the defendant on Friday, 8 April 1994. The plaintiff also relies on material which is recorded in a Transcript of proceedings before Mr Jackson LCM on 14
February 1995 (the Transcript). In his affidavit material, the defendant disputed the service process.

At the commencement of the hearing, the question of service was abandoned by the defendant. Thereafter, he founded his application on the change in the law that had taken place since the entry of default judgment.

On 5 August 1997, the High Court delivered judgment in the matter of Ha &
Anor versus State of New South Wales & Ors <case>; [146 ALR 355.] The majority of the Court held that section 47 was invalid on the basis that it imposed a duty of excise within the meaning of [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s90.html) of the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/).
This decision overruled previous decisions of the Court and saw a change in the law concerning relevant statutory provisions.

I should now proceed to mention some of the other relevant matters.

The Transcript contains, inter alia, the following:- "WALSH: Yes your Worship. The report makes a reference on the second page to
Mr Nemeruck claimed he presently owed approximately $100,000.00 in debts.
There is a statement of claim presently in the Supreme Court in relation to unpaid tobacco licence fees. The total amount on the statement of claim is $992,523.70, which, with interest, would effectively put it over a million dollars. That matter is in the Supreme Court. No notice of appearance for the defence has been filed by the defendant, and we will be pursuing our remedy in relation to a default judgment shortly, should Doctor Nemeruck not remedy that situation within the next -' `WALSH: Yes, I think on 2 February I sent a letter giving him 30 days, just to settle up properly, and I would envisage proceeding in early March to a default judgment. Also in relation to the tobacco that was seized, your
Worship made an order in relation to forfeiture on the last occasion. That will be sold, and I'm told that its wholesale value - and this is what's anticipated to be received for the tobacco when it is sold, is $65,868.00." 
The Court was informed that the defendant was present before the Learned
Magistrate when these submissions were made.

It seems that nothing was done about the obtaining of default judgment until the end of 1995. In December 1995, an application was made for default judgment. The judgment that was subsequently obtained was expressed to take effect on 26 February 1996. It seems that the plaintiff did not take any steps to notify the defendant that default judgment had been obtained.

During 1997, the plaintiff took steps to enforce the default judgment. In about late June 1997, the defendant was served with a Bankruptcy Notice. It was after service of this document that he first became aware of the entry of default judgment.

The defendant appears in person. Largely, he has been unrepresented in respect of these proceedings. During submissions, he did inform the Court to the effect that he had sought legal advice and that the advice had discouraged him from taking steps to defend the proceedings. The High Court judgment was delivered after he had filed his Notice of Motion.

The plaintiff has notified the defendant that he does not propose to proceed with the existing Bankruptcy Notice. However, the plaintiff contends that there is an entitlement to maintain the default judgment and that, if he is successful in defending the present application, further steps may be taken to execute the judgment.

In opposing the application, Counsel for the plaintiff has referred to three decisions (Piening versus Wanless <case>; [117
CLR 498]; Reg. v
Unger [(1977) 2 NSWLR 990] and Eggins versus Brooms Head Bowling And Recreational Club
Ltd [(1986) 5 NSWLR 521).] The Court has been urged to apply the approach taken in those cases to the present case.

In those cases, a verdict had been entered after a trial. The trial had been conducted on the basis of the law as it then stood. Subsequently, there was a change of law. The applicant unsuccessfully sought to invoke the discretionary processes of the Court for the purpose of seeking to set aside the verdict.

In Piening, at pp 509-510, Menzies J said:- "In my opinion the verdict in the trial which was conducted upon one basis cannot be set aside merely because the decision, upon which counsel presumably relied in determining how he would conduct his case, has been overruled subsequently. It is for counsel to determine whether or not he will challenge or accept a decision which stands in his way, and, having accepted it, his mistaken acceptance cannot be made the basis for setting aside any verdict which is returned by the jury upon the case submitted to them in order that a new, and in some ways, an inconsistent case - as the course of argument would seem to indicate - can be submitted to another jury." 
It is not said that the Court is bound to adopt the approach taken in those cases. The plaintiff accepts that the circumstances are different in this case and that ultimately the Court must exercise its discretion.

It seems to me that the cases are distinguishable. The Court is not confronted with a situation where a verdict has been reached on issues selected by the parties after a trial. There is a default judgment which has been obtained for want of a defence. I take into account that the default may have been due to a belief that no arguable defence was available to the defendant.

I must bear in mind that the discretionary power of the Court is to be exercised so that justice is best served between the parties. The default judgment is in a very large sum and has been obtained in respect of a claim which is founded on invalid legislation. The defendant has a good defence on the merits. I have earlier referred to some of the other relevant circumstances. There is no need to repeat those matters.

It is my view that justice is best served between the parties, in the circumstances of this particular case, if the default judgment is set aside.
Accordingly, I order that the default judgment be set aside. The defendant is to pay the costs of the Notice of Motion. Any Defence is to be filed within 21 days. The exhibits may be returned.
 * * * 
