

Varga versus Commonwealth Bank of Australia [1996] NSWSC 86 (30 April 1996) 
VARGA V COMMONWEALTH BANK OF AUSTRALIA /96 
Tuesday 30 April 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG, J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application by a mortgagor for a declaration that the [Farm Debt Mediation Act 1994](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fdma1994163/) applies to his mortgage. Consequentially he seeks to restrain enforcement of Mortgage Y913756 by the mortgagee on the basis that it is a "farm mortgage" within the meaning of that Act and mediation has not yet taken place. There is also a subsidiary issue as to whether the mortgagee is estopped from relying on a notice it issued under <case>(b) of the [Real Property Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/) in 1992.

The general significance of this case was probably not realized by the parties. Because of this the factual material placed before the Court was scanty in the extreme. It is seldom that one has had to deal with a case of this nature without the mortgage in question ever having been tendered, or to be told that the mortgagee has entered into a contract for sale of the subject property last December with appropriate rescission clauses, but never having seen the contract. Nobody was cross examined.

I am, however, able to find the vital facts from what is in the affidavits and from what I was told from the bar table without objection, and they are as follows:-
In May 1974 the plaintiff Sandor Gabor Varga and his then wife, Johanna, became registered proprietors as joint tenants of a rural property near
Adaminaby on which they ran beef cattle and cross bred wethers.
The plaintiff's marriage broke down in about 1980.
In the wash-up of the marriage it was necessary for the plaintiff to purchase his wife's interest in the property.
The plaintiff left off full-time farming about this time. He spent as much time as he could on the property, but spent at least 50% of his time in the engineering industry generating income.
The plaintiff approached the defendant Bank for money to buy out his wife's interest and in 1990 he did so with moneys provided by the Bank and the property was mortgaged by Mortgage Y913756.
Mortgage Y913756 was an "all moneys" mortgage.
The plaintiff lost his job in the engineering industry in 1991. He has worked intermittently in that industry on casual basis since that time but his only occupation has been to work on the property since March 1994.
The Bank served a notice under <case>(b) of the [Real Property
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/) in respect of the property on 23 January 1992. The amount due shown in the notice was $52,303.27. In addition to this money the plaintiff owed the Bank a further $11,338 on overdraft or personal loan.
From time to time the Bank debited the account with interest, bank fees and reimbursement for Financial Institutions Duty (FID).
The plaintiff has used the Bank's continuing facilities for operating his farm.
The plaintiff contacted the Bank and indicated that he was putting the property up for sale himself. The Bank's documents show that the Bank was content to hold its hand while this happened and probably communicated this to the plaintiff.
The plaintiff then endeavoured to sell the property. He says that he exchanged contracts on 3 September, 1993. Although a notice to complete was given in December, 1993, there was no consummation of the sale.
In August 1994 the Bank manager told the plaintiff that unless he wanted the Bank to sell the property at auction he should sell voluntarily and that if the sale did not come to fruition the Bank would reactivate realization action. At this stage the amount owing under the mortgage was said to be $72,772 and there was a fully drawn loan of about $6,000 and a personal loan of $10,335 outstanding.
On 13 December 1995, the Bank sold the property by private treaty to a private purchaser whose name is unknown to me. The contract was in the standard form but contained special conditions permitting either party to withdraw from the contract without penalty.
By January 1996, Mr Varga had come to the position that the earlier contract should be formally terminated and the property put on the market again. However, at this stage he ascertained that the Bank had already purported to sell it. Two matters were raised for determination, the first is whether the [Farm Debt Mediation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fdma1994163/) stands in the way of the Bank's proceeding with the sale. The second is whether, in the light of what is set out above, the Bank is estopped from taking any action under the <case>(20(b) notice which it had given in January 1992.

The [Farm Debt Mediation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fdma1994163/) No 91 contains in [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fdma1994163/s4.html) a series of definitions. The relevant ones include:- "farm debt" means a debt incurred by a farmer for the purposes of the conduct of a farming operation that is secured wholly or partly by a farm mortgage.
 "farm mortgage" includes any interest in, or power over, property (comprising a farm or part of a farm or farm machinery used by a farmer in connection with the farming operation, or both) securing obligations of the farmer ...
 "farming operation" means: (a) a farming, ... pastoral, horticultural or grazing operation ... .

There are other relevant definitions, but there is no doubt at all that the sale of a farm is enforcement action in relation to a farm mortgage and [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fdma1994163/s6.html) of the Act prevents enforcement action taken by a creditor, which would include the defendant, otherwise than in compliance with the Act.

The Bank says that at the time when the debt was incurred, the plaintiff was not a farmer. "Farmer" is defined in the Act as meaning "a person ... who is solely or principally engaged in a farming operation ...". The Bank says that in 1992 the plaintiff was an engineer and as the evidence would not justify me finding that he spent more than 50% of his time in farming pursuits, he was not a person who principally was engaged in a farming operation.

I do not consider that this way of approaching the matter is correct.

The word "principally" was recently construed by the Court of Appeal in
Warringah SC versus Pittwater PC [(1992) 26 NSWLR 491.] Kirby, P at p 506 (with whom Clarke, JA agreed at 523) construed the word "principally" as being a qualitative word not a quantitative word. So that when one was looking to see if an employee was principally employed in connection with certain work one did not just assess whether or not the employee spent 50% of his or her time on that work, but rather the distinctive and essential character of the work which was performed. A similar approach was taken by
Gummow, J when in the Federal Court in Universal Press Pty Ltd versus Federal
Commissioner of Taxation [(1989) 90 ALR 332.] The question before the Court on that occasion was whether a book comprising street maps indexes and editorial content dealing with points of interest in the subject geographical area was a book consisting wholly or principally of maps. The Judge found that the word "principally" was concerned with the characterization of the finished product. Even if there was less than 50% of the pages of the book occupied by maps, if the other contents were ancillary to the maps, the book would principally consist of maps.

Of course, the word may have a quantitative sense. Thus in Federal
Commissioner of Taxation versus FH Faulding & Co Ltd <case>; [(1950) 83 CLR 594] where the High Court had to consider the words "consisting ... principally of juices of Australian fruits" one looked to see whether the product was by weight or volume more than 50% Australian fruit juice.

It seems to me that the guidance given by the Pittwater Council case is far more helpful in the instant case than the decision about fruit juices. The question in the instant case is whether the person concerned is principally engaged in a farming operation. I do not consider that the word "principally" means one has to work out what percentage of the person's time is spent in farming operations and what otherwise. One has got to look at the person and say in all the circumstances is farming that person's principal activity.

It may be that from time to time that person may do something else. For instance, it is not at all unusual in our community for persons engaged in primary production to spend part of the year using their farm machinery for contract slashing or the like on someone else's property. It is not at all unusual where husband and wife are both farmers and there is a season of drought or a depressed market for one of those people to take a full-time remunerative position outside the farm so that the income can be funnelled in to the farming operation and keep it alive. Although it will be necessary to look at each case on its merits and on its facts, it would not seem to me that the mere fact that a person from time to time is involved in using the farm machinery for contract work outside the farm or is earning income outside the farm disqualifies that person from being a farmer within the meaning of the definition.

One of the problems with the present Act is the way in which it came into being. The solicitors for the parties did not do the appropriate searches to demonstrate the mischief to which the Act was directed, nor was the appropriate research done with respect to [ss ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/s33.html) and [34](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/s34.html) of the [Interpretation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/). [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/s33.html) requires a court to prefer a construction of an Act which would promote its purpose or object whether or not that purpose or object is expressly stated in the Act. [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/s34.html) permits reference to material before Parliament to be considered if the provision of the Act being considered is obscure.

Although the solicitors did not do the exercise, they were quite content that my staff and myself should do the exercise for them. That search made it quite clear from the Hansard of the NSW Parliament for the Fourth Session of the th Parliament November/December 1994, that the Act had a rather peculiar passage through Parliament. Although there was a Liberal/National Party
Government in power, the Bill was introduced by the Labor member for Mt
Druitt. It was opposed by the Government in the Lower House, but the balance of power was held by various Independents and it was clear that the
Independents would support the Bill in some form. Mr Windsor the Independent member for Tamworth in fact successfully moved amendments to the Bill which completely reworded the definition section which I am now considering. It is not at all clear where Mr Windsor obtained his wording.

The Bill then went to the Upper House where again the Government was half- hearted about it, but amendments were made by Rev Hon F J Nile, the leader of the Call to Australia Party. These amendments were agreed to by the Upper
House and were accepted by the Lower House and the Bill became law. It is clear from the speeches of the various members of Parliament that the Bill was based on legislation of the Prairie States of the United States of America, particularly the State of Iowa. The then Minister for Agriculture, in opposing the Bill, made that point at p 5225 of Hansard for 17 November 1994. The then
Minister pointed out that only two American States have this legislation, one of which was Iowa and that the problems in Iowa were not necessarily the same problems as existed in NSW and in any event there were publications from the
Iowa State University Press which indicated that the only effect of the legislation was that healthy borrowers paid a premium for borrowed funds so that inefficient farmers were protected.

My tipstaff and the Supreme Court Library have discovered a series of cases from Iowa and it is clear that the word "principally" originally derived from the Iowa Code <case>.1. That section of the Iowa Code contains a definition of "Agricultural Property" as meaning "Agricultural land that is principally used for farming". The 1995 version of the Code refers back to a definition in s
H.1 which would appear from the report in Qually versus State Federal Savings & Loan [487 NW (2d) 353] (1992) (Iowa Court of Appeals) merely to mean cultivation of land for the production of agricultural crops.

It will be noted that the Iowa Statute makes the key consideration the mortgage of land which is principally used for farming. It does not apparently focus on who is a farmer. Thus in Qually's case, Qually was an attorney who owned 23.75 acres of land, 20 acres used to raise alfalfa and the remaining 3.75 acres used for non-agricultural purposes. The 3.75 acres was by far the more valuable portion. The Court of Appeals in Iowa held that the inclusion of agricultural and non-agricultural property in the same contract did not defeat the mediation statute. In other words, the attitude that appears to have been taken in Iowa is that if one finds that one can characterize at least part of the land as agricultural land, then the farm mediation provisions prevent any enforcement action without mediation in respect of the whole of the land, at least if the agricultural land is included within the one parcel. This approach would tend to reinforce the view that I have taken about the word "principally" in the definition of "farmer".

The next matter to look at is the time when the person must be a farmer. It would seem to me that the whole flavour of <case> indicates that it is at the time when the creditor is seeking to take possession of the property or other enforcement action. It will be noted that in <case> all verbs are in the present tense except in the definition of "Farm Debt" which looks back to some previous time. However, this is not the whole of the answer to the problem because the definition of "farm debt" itself uses the word "farmer".

A "farm debt" is "a debt incurred by a farmer for the purposes of the conduct of a farming operation that is secured wholly or partly by a farm mortgage".
The question that arises is, does the definition require that the person be a farmer at the date when he or she incurred the debt? Does the farming operation have to be conducted at the time when the debt is contracted? 
One must construe the Act to fulfil its purpose. The purpose was to prevent persons being driven off their farms because of inability to pay debt where it was possible for the debt to be rearranged after a bona fide mediation process. To fulfil the purposes of the Act, one must construe it, to my mind, favourably to the farmer, and unless compelled by the language, not permit the overriding purposes of the Act to be defeated by technicalities. I cannot see any warrant for preferring the construction that the debtor must be a farmer at the time when he or she incurred the debt so long as the debt was incurred for the purposes of the conduct of a farming operation. However, there is a problem with the words "a debt". Part of the Act seems to proceed on the basis that there is one debt which is then possibly increased. Thus the definition of "creditor" refers to a person who provides financial accommodation to a farmer that creates or increases a farm debt. However, in the definition of "farm debt" the indefinite article, "a", is used rather than the definite article.

I was not shown the mortgage used in the instant transaction, but it was conceded by both solicitors that it was an "all moneys" mortgage. Thus, any moneys owing to the Bank on any account whatsoever would be secured by the mortgage.

Mr Garnsey, the solicitor for the Bank, said that only the original debt was relevant for the purpose of working out what was a farm debt. I am not convinced of this. It is quite common with farmers and graziers for a debt to be incurred to a bank and then to be completely repaid when there is a good season, but then further obligations to the Bank to build up during bad seasons or even between wool clips. It would seem to me strange that the legislation honed in at a time when the original debt was incurred and not to anything more recent. Furthermore, the definition of "creditor" as applying to a person who increased a farm debt is strange unless one has to look at accretions to the original debt. Thirdly, the indefinite article seems to steer one away from looking at merely one debt to look at any number of debts which could be a farm debt.

A person "incurs a debt when, by its choice, it does or omits something which, as a matter of substance and commercial reality, renders it liable for a debt for which it otherwise would not have been liable" per Hodgson, J Standard
Chartered Bank of Australia Ltd versus Antico [(1995) 18 ACSR 1], 57. Where a person is liable to pay interest or to reimburse a bank for financial institutions duty then there is an incurring of a debt within the meaning of this and any other statute. Accordingly, if a bank has an "all moneys" mortgage and at any stage it debits that account with an amount which the customer owes where the customer incurred that debt for the purpose of a farming operation, there is a farm debt and if that farm debt is secured, then there is a farm mortgage.

Accordingly, when, as here, there is an initial loan for the purpose of buying out a person's wife's interest in the farm, but then there are subsequent charges for interest and bank charges and FID in connection with the operation of the farm, whether or not the initial loan was a farm debt, there is in existence at the date when the Bank wishes to enforce its mortgage, a farm mortgage. Although there is little evidence, it was common ground before me that there were such charges in the instant case. Thus, no matter what the initial situation, there is a farm mortgage which the Bank cannot enforce before mediation.

However, if I were wrong on this, I would need to examine the question as to whether a bank loan for the purpose of buying a capital interest in a farm is for the purposes of a farming operation. Under the Contracts Review Act, a distinction has been drawn between moneys borrowed with the intention of investing them in a business being conducted by another in which the lender would acquire an interest and moneys borrowed as an ordinary incident of the carrying on of a particular business then being carried on or proposed to be carried on, see for instance Collins versus Parker Supreme Court of NSW, Lee, J - 11 May 1984, unreported but noted in Butterworths Conveyancing Service
Casenote [92237] and Ellison versus Vukicevic [(1986) 7 NSWLR 104], 111.

The word "purpose" is one which may have a variety of meanings. In connection with the Contracts Review Act, Lee, J in Collins' case considered it meant that the loan was an ordinary incident of the carrying out of the business in question. However, normally the word "purpose" has a wider connotation. In
Commissioner of Taxation versus Creer [(1986) 11 FCR 52], 60, Wilcox,
J said about the word "purpose" in the Income Tax Assessment At 1936, "'Purpose' may refer to the taxpayer's subjective purpose: the end to which he or she seeks to achieve by incurring the expenditure. It may mean objective purpose, the object which the incurring of the expenditure is apt to achieve."
In Ryde MC versus Macquarie University <case>; [(1978) 139 CLR 633], three Judges of the High Court (two dissented) held that where a university used part of its grounds for commercial and shopping facilities so as to generate income for the university it was using land for the purposes of the university. At 643, Gibbs, ACJ pointed out that in rating cases use of land for purposes which are a means to the fulfilment of the charitable purposes means that land is exempt from rating, but if the use is only collateral or additional to the purposes of the charity it is not; see also Salvation Army (Victoria) Property Trust versus Ferntree Gully Corp <case>; [(1952) 85 CLR 159], 169.

I repeat that we are here dealing with a statute the object and purpose of which is to protect persons who are now conducting farming operations on land from being ejected by creditors. I am of the view that the word "purposes" in the definition of "farm debt" includes a debt incurred for the purpose of acquiring the land or an interest in the land on which the farming operation is conducted.

Mr Garnsey puts that so far as the Bank was concerned, it was lending to an engineer in a Sydney suburb for the purpose of buying out his wife's interest in some property in the country. Although Mr Garnsey did not put it this way, he virtually said no creditor in its wildest dreams would have thought it was involving itself in a farm mortgage. I think there are two answers to this.
First, no-one in their wildest dreams in 1992 anticipated that this legislation would come in and be an impediment to the creditor exercising its rights under the mortgage, and secondly, the Bank knew that its security was over rural lands.

Mr Garnsey relied on the decision of Master Greenwood in Commonwealth Bank of Australia versus Ryder, 27 September 1995, unreported. In that case there were a number of contiguous blocks which were partly scrub and partly used for agricultural purposes and a third block on which the defendant's home was erected. The debt was incurred for the purpose of funding litigation as well as partly for a farm development loan. The learned Master considered on the evidence that the debt is not exclusively a farm debt and that the Act does not apply at least to that portion of the debt which is not a farm debt.
He also came to the conclusion that in removing the unfettered right of a mortgagee to enforce its loan, the legislature must clearly state that the mortgagee's right is excluded. With due respect to the learned Master, both these conclusions were in error. It seems to me for the reasons that I have given, that although the legislation is very poorly expressed, when one looks at the totality of the legislation, its background in Iowa, its purpose and its wording, one must reach the opposite conclusion. Although I have diffidence in differing from the learned Master I am comforted by the fact that almost certainly he had little time to look into these matters or give a reserved judgment.

Despite not having been given any assistance by the solicitors who appeared in the matter apart from the reference to Ryder's case, I fortunately have been able, with the assistance of my tipstaff, to make a full and hopefully thorough examination on the meaning and effect of the legislation. As by <case> of the Act it will expire early in 1997, it is to be hoped that if the Act is to be renewed, it will be expressed in more precise terms to prevent the multiplicity of actions that have been before the courts since the Act came into force.

In Iowa, the corresponding statute has been held to be one which relates solely to procedure and imposes no substantive obligations on mortgagees. See
First National Bank in Lenox versus Heimke 407 NW (2d) (1987) (Iowa). However,
In NSW it seems to have been assumed (and the contrary was not argued in the present case), that breach of the Act entitles the mortgagor to the remedy of injunction. It must be said, however, that the great majority of the NSW cases have ended in victory for the creditor (see Silkdale Pty Ltd versus Long Leys Co
Pty Ltd (Hulme, J, 16 February 1995, unreported and Young, J, 14 September , unreported), Westpac Banking Corp versus Hodgson Pastoral Co (Torry Plains)
Pty Ltd [(1995) NSW ConvR 55-765],
Underwood versus Commonwealth Bank of Australia [(1995) 56 FCR 145] and
Commonwealth Bank of Australia versus Trellis Holdings Ltd - McLelland, CJ in
Eq, 18 March 1996). I will make the same assumption in the instant case.

Accordingly, in my view, whichever way one looks at it, the defendant Bank in the instant case is taking enforcement action in respect of a farm mortgage.
This it cannot do because of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fdma1994163/s8.html) of the [Farm Debt Mediation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fdma1994163/) until there has been mediation.

The second matter which Mr Gain, for the plaintiff, raised was a contention that the Bank was estopped from relying on its <case>(b) notice because of its acquiescence in the sale of the property under the mortgagor's control. He relied principally on Commonwealth of Australia versus Verwayen (1990) 170 CLR .

It is undoubtedly true that conduct of a person may prevent that person from changing his or her position vis a vis the other person. Accordingly, if there was conduct of a mortgagee which would and did give a mortgagor the firm impression that the mortgagee had abandoned its rights under a notice, then there would be an estoppel. I dealt with the allied question of waiver of such notices in Silkdale Pty Ltd versus Long Leys Co Pty Ltd, 14 September, 1995, unreported. I finished my discussion on the question at p 26 by saying, "it must be remembered that the law requires that waiver must be clear and unequivocal and that the other party must have altered his position in reliance on it, or at least acted on it ... ".

In the instant case, I am not satisfied on the evidence that the Bank's conduct did cause the mortgagor to alter his position irretrievably. There may well have been some estoppel in the sense referred to in the High Trees case (Central London Property Trust Ltd versus High Trees House Ltd [[1947] KB ).]
Whilst Mr Varga was actively pursuing the sale under the contract of 1993 that estoppel may have operated. The type of estoppel that probably then existed was one that the Bank would not retreat from its position of permitting the sale to go ahead without due notice. However, by August 1994 it was quite clear that the Bank had informed the mortgagor that either he would have to sell and realize the property in the near future or else the Bank would do so (see Fact 13 set out above). I cannot see any conduct of the Bank on which the mortgagor relied which would estop the Bank from reactivating its statutory notice after it was relatively clear to anyone in 1994 that the sale had fallen through.

Accordingly, in my view, the principle of estoppel does not avail Mr Varga.

As I have said earlier, the Bank has purported to sell the land in question. I was disturbed that the purchaser under that contract had not been served.
Neither party seemed troubled by this, and indeed, I was not even told the name of the purchaser. However, Mr Garnsey made it clear that the contract was such that the Bank had full rights to terminate at will in the circumstances which have happened so that it was not necessary that the purchaser be joined.
I reluctantly agreed to that course, but I think that no final order should be taken out in these proceedings until after a period of 14 days has gone by from the notification by the Bank to the purchaser of the result of my decision.

As I indicated earlier, the plaintiff is entitled to succeed on the first point, but no final order should be made without the purchaser being notified of the judgment and having an opportunity to intervene. Accordingly, all I will do at this stage is to continue the order that Caveat O877845 be extended until further order. There must be an order that the defendant pay the costs of the proceedings to date with liberty to the plaintiff to enforce that order for costs forthwith. I direct the defendant within 14 days to provide the purchaser with a copy of these reasons for judgment. I stand the matter over for mention in my list at 9.50 am on 4 June next.
 * * * 
