

Modco Systems Homes Pty Ltd versus Byers and Anor Matter No 14350/96 [1997]
NSWSC 395 (11 September 1997) 
Last Updated: 27 February 1998 
Modco Systems Homes Pty Limited versus Byers & Anor /96  September 1997 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /96 - Modco Systems Homes Pty Limited versus Byers & Anor 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: On 27 November 1990, a Lease in respect of premises known as Unit 3/92 Seville Street, Fairfield was executed. The lessor was Cansdale Holdings Pty Limited. On 30 January 1991, the premises were purchased by Modco Systems Homes Pty Limited (Modco). On 14 December 1992, Modco re-entered the premises. 
On 11 June 1993, Modco (the plaintiff) commenced proceedings in the Local
Court against Robert James Byers and Wendy Diane Byers (the defendants). In those proceedings, the plaintiff claimed, inter alia, arrears of rent.

The proceedings came on for hearing before Mr Heagney LCM. One of the matters that he was asked to determine was the identity of the lessee. It was the contention of the defendants that the lessee was a company (Dedina Pty
Limited). This was a company that had been dissolved on 7 February 1992. The
Learned Magistrate found in favour of the defendants.

The plaintiff came to this Court by way of Stated Case. The matter was heard by Simpson J. She delivered judgment on 16 November 1995. She decided that the Learned Magistrate's Determination was erroneous in point of law. She remitted the matter to the Local Court for determination in accordance with law.

The proceedings again came before Mr Heagney LCM. On 12 July 1996, he made a further Determination. Again, he found in favour of the defendants.

The Learned Magistrate was asked to state a case. It was signed on 2 October
On 1 November 1996, the plaintiff commenced these proceedings by the filing of a Summons. The Summons brings a further appeal from the decision of the Learned Magistrate.

The Court has had placed before it the Stated Case (which is a document of some seven pages), certain transcript, the judgments delivered by the Learned
Magistrate and the Lease itself.

The authorities make it clear that the remedy of case stated provides a limited avenue of appeal. The Court has jurisdiction to determine only questions of law and only such questions of law as are submitted to it (Allen v Kerr & Anor [(1995) Aust Torts Reports 81-354] and The Australian Gas Light Company versus The Valuer-General <case>; [(1940) 40 SR 126).]
The matter of what is a question of law (as opposed to a question of fact) was considered in Azzopardi versus Tasman UEB Industries Ltd [(1985) 4 NSWLR ]
at 155-156. The facts stated are to be taken as the ultimate facts for whatever purpose the case is stated (Press versus Mathers <case>; [(1927) VLR 326] at p 330).

Paragraph 2 of the Stated Case contains a recitation of Facts. The Grounds of
Determination are set forth in paragraph 3. The Appellant's Contention is to be found in paragraph 4. Paragraph 3 contains the following:- "I found: that the tenant of the Premises under the Lease was not the Respondents but Dedina Pty Ltd: because, having regard to:- the use of premises by the Respondents as a printing business; the fact that the business was conducted through the corporate entity,
Dedina Pty Limited; the circumstances in which the lease was drawn up and entered into; the history of the premises in the possession of the male Respondent and members of his family; it was Dedina Pty Limited that was intended to be the lessee." 
The Lease is headed "Commercial Lease". The parties are referred to as
Landlord and Tenant. The Tenant is described as "Robert James Byers and Wendy
Diane Byers trading as Dedina Pty Limited of 8 Drayton Avenue, Castle Hill".

The Lease was executed by the lessor company by the affixation of the Common
Seal. On behalf of the Tenant, it was signed by the defendants. Their signatures both appear above the words "Signature of Tenant".

In the course of submissions, the Court was referred to many authorities (including Clark Equipment Credit of Australia Ltd versus Kiyose Holdings Pty Ltd & Ors [(1989) 21 NSWLR 160];
Scottish Amicable Life Assurance Society versus Reg Austin Insurances Pty Ltd [(1985) 9 ACLR 909] at 916 and Deeks & Anor versus Little Moreton Pty Ltd (Full
Court of the Supreme Court of WA, unreported, 10 March 1995)).

The authorities have established certain principles. I shall briefly mention certain of them. An unqualified signature on a contractual document gives rise to a presumption that the signatory has contracted personally. The task that confronted the Learned Magistrate involved the construction of the Lease as a whole in the light of the surrounding circumstances (to the extent to which evidence thereof is permissible).

In my view, it is demonstrably clear that the determination is erroneous in point of law. The Learned Magistrate has made a number of errors of law. It suffices to make brief reference to certain of them. The material reveals that he has had regard to irrelevant matters in reaching his determination and that he has given considerable weight to those matters. He does not appear to have embarked on the construction task. If it can be said that he did, the matter of the construction of the Lease was given little significance. He has misdirected himself as to the relevant law.

It may be helpful to make a further observation. It concerns a matter which was merely the subject of brief mention during submissions.

The Determination made by the Learned Magistrate appears to be inconsistent with certain of the findings of fact made by him. I refer to the facts mentioned in paragraph 2(16), which reads as follows:- "(16) Almost from the outset of the relationship between the Appellant and the
Respondents the payment of rent became a problem and arrears of rent grew steadily. At the end of 1992 the Appellant put forward a proposition for a commercial solution regarding arrears of rent which involved the Respondents providing security for the arrears in terms of a mortgage over real estate.
This was rejected by the Respondents who were trying to meet their obligations under the Lease during a period when their business was suffering a downturn." 
I should also mention another finding of fact (that Dedina Pty Limited was dissolved on 7 February 1992 - 2(13)). In the light of this finding, together with the facts found in 2(16), it is surprising that he should have made the determination that he did. By at least 7 February 1992, no relationship of lessor and lessee could have been on foot between the plaintiff and Dedina Pty
Limited.

The matter is remitted to the Local Court for determination in accordance with law. This is the order sought by the plaintiff. The defendants are to pay the costs of the Summons.
 * * * 
