

Tallglen Pty Limited versus Optus Communications Pty Limited Matter No 1898/98 [1998] NSWSC 421 (14 August 1998) 
Last Updated: 7 October 1998 
TALLGLEN PTY LIMITED versus OPTUS COMMUNICATIONS PTY LIMITED /98 August 1998 
Young J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The issue in these proceedings is whether the involvement of the first defendant, Optus Communications Pty Ltd (Optus) in a scheme whereby it issued options to take up unissued shares to encourage a purchase of shares from one of its shareholders to another, runs foul of <case> of the Corporations Law. If it does, subsidiary questions arise as to what orders should be made under <case> of the Corporations Law. 
Optus is a closely held public company. As at June 1997, it had six groups of shareholders who can be conveniently described as Cable & Wireless (C & W) 24.50%, BellSouth 24.50%, Mayne Nickless 24.99%, AMP 10.25%, NMLA .14% and AIDC 9.62%. I have deliberately not used corporate names as the shareholding was sometimes held by subsidiaries or shared by companies within groups.

On 29 June 1997, the shareholders entered into a document called an "Understanding". This has been treated as a confidential document in the evidence. However, its principal purpose was to record two understandings between the shareholders. The first was that the shareholders would proceed to float the company in due course and that they would seek an issue price of $x per share. The second was that a C & W subsidiary would purchase the
BellSouth shares and that all the shareholders consented to Optus issuing .8 million call options to C & W under certain conditions one of which was that the price on exercise was $1.75 per share. The shareholders also waived pre-emption rights and consented to any resolution that might be necessary because of <case> of the Corporations Law.

According to an article in the Australian Financial Review of 2 July 1997, C & W acquired BellSouth's shares about that date for $2 per share though the deal also involved transfer of some telecommunications assets in Columbia.
As a result of this deal, C & W took its shareholding to 49.12% (I accept this though I do not see where the extra 0.12% arises).

It is admitted for the purpose of these proceedings that C & W would not have purchased the BellSouth shares at the price required by BellSouth or on the other terms and conditions of the heads of Agreement between them unless the shareholders of Optus agreed to cause Optus to issue to C & W 298.8 million options at an exercise price of $1.75. It is also admitted that Optus, through its directors and shareholders was aware of the effect of what I stated at the commencement of this paragraph.

On 6 March 1998, Optus and C & W entered into a Call Option Deed. Clause .1 of that deed was a grant by Optus to C & W of 298.8 million options subject to the condition precedent set out in clause 2.1. This was the successful completion of the approval process set out in the Corporations Law.

Because I am considering events before 1 July 1998, I need only consider the legislation in the form it took before the Corporate Law Reform Act of 1998.
At the relevant time, section 205 of the Corporations Law, provided, so far as is relevant, as follows:- "205 (1) Except as otherwise expressly provided by this Law, a company shall not: whether directly or indirectly, give any financial assistance for the purpose of, or in connection with: the acquisition by any person, whether before, or at the same time as, the giving of financial assistance, of: shares or units of shares in the company; or shares or units of shares in a holding company of the company; or the proposed acquisition by any person of: shares or units of shares in the company; or shares or units of shares in a holding company of the company; ..." "205(2) A reference in this section to the giving of financial assistance includes a reference to the giving of financial assistance by means of the making of a loan, the giving of a guarantee, the provision of security, the release of an obligation or the forgiving of a debt or otherwise." "205(4) For the purposes of this section, a company shall be taken to have given financial assistance in connection with an acquisition or proposed acquisition referred to in paragraph (1)(a) if, when the financial assistance was given to a person, the company was aware that the financial assistance would financially assist: the acquisition by a person of shares or units of shares in the company; or where shares in the company had already been acquired - the payment by a person of any unpaid amount of the subscription payable for the shares or of any premium payable in respect of the shares, or the payment of any calls on the shares." 
Section 205(10) then provides that the section is not to apply to the situation where the financial assistance is given under a scheme which is approved by a special resolution of the shareholders. Sub-section (11) empowers the court to declare that there has been substantial compliance with sub-section (10). Subsection (12) then gives certain persons, including a creditor, the right to approach the court within 21 days of the statutory advertisement opposing the grant of financial assistance. Under sub-section , on that application the Court: "(a) shall, in determining what order or orders to make in relation to the application or applications, have regard to the rights and interests of the members of the company or any class of them as well as to the rights and interests of the creditors of the company or of any class of them; and shall not make an order approving the giving of the financial assistance unless the Court is satisfied that: the company has disclosed to the members of the company all material matters relating to the proposed financial assistance; and the proposed financial assistance would not, after taking into account the financial position of the company (including any future or contingent liabilities), be likely to prejudice materially the interests of the creditors or members of the company or of any class of those creditors or members; ..." 
Ancillary powers are set out in paragraphs (c) to (f) of sub-section (13).

In the instant case, Mr Macfarlan, QC and Mr Jackman, who appeared for Optus, by the first cross claim, sought orders under <case>(11) of the Corporations
Law declaring that Optus had substantially complied with the necessary statutory requirements so that if there was a provision of financial assistance, it was validly given. Mr Hutley, SC, who appeared for C & W, by the second cross claim, sought the same orders. Mr Jacobson, QC and Mr M
Dempsey for Publishing and Broadcasting Finance Ltd (PBFL), by the third cross claim (and by defence to the other cross claims), sought to have the transaction treated as invalid.

The plaintiff, Tallglen, PBFL and perhaps one other were persons who had lent
Optus large sums of money and had been granted Convertible Notes. In the case of PBFL, $45,000,000 was lent and, should Optus obtain listing on the Stock
Exchange and after a date in 2000, it could elect to take shares in Optus instead of repayment. The Note also contained a term that, if certain circumstances occurred, Optus could require PBFL to relinquish its debt and take up shares in lieu.

Tallglen was in the same plight as PBFL. On 31 March 1998, within the time limited by <case>(12 ), Tallglen commenced these proceedings to nullify the transaction. The first and second cross claims were filed and the matter set down for hearing on an expedited basis. On 22 June, PBFL was notified of the proceedings. It filed a third cross claim on 17 July 1998 seeking virtually the same orders as the plaintiff. This was well outside the 21 day period limited by the Corporations Law. Tallglen discontinued its proceedings. Thus,
I am only trying the cross claims.

The issues which arise for determination are as follows:-
Did the grant of the options to C & W constitute a grant of financial assistance contrary to <case> of the Corporations Law?
If the answer to question 1 is "Yes, should the Court approve of the transaction by ordering that <case>(10) applies to it? This question involves the sub-question as to whether the Explanatory Memorandum issued by Optus gave adequate disclosure.
Has PBFL standing to make an application under <case>(13) of the
Corporations Law?
Should time be extended to allow PBFL to make such application?
What, if any, order should be made under <case>(13) of the Corporations
Law?
What is the result of the litigation? 
I will deal with each of these matters in turn.
 . Has there been provision of Financial Assistance? 
It is frequently said that the purpose of <case> of the Corporations Law and its predecessors is to reinforce the doctrine of maintenance of capital. One can see this reflected even in some relatively recent authority; see eg
Skelton versus South Auckland Blue Metals Ltd [[1969] NZLR 955], 958;
Rossfield Group Operations Pty Ltd versus Austral Group Ltd [[1981] Qd R ], and Dempster versus National Companies and Securities Commission [(1993) ACSR 297], 346. Thus Nicholas AJA said when giving the judgment of the
Appellate Division of the Supreme Court of South Africa in Lewis versus Oneanate
Ltd <case>; [[1992]
SA 811], 818, "The purpose of the Legislature was to avoid that fund (ie the capital fund available for creditors) being employed or depleted or exposed to possible risk in consequence of transactions concluded for the purpose of or in connection with the purchase of its shares." 
Gower's Principles of Modern Company Law, 6th Ed (Sweet & Maxwell, London, 1997) pp 263-4 notes that the section "In fact it raises completely different issues and in no way affects `capital' in the sense of issued share capital, share premium account or capital redemption reserve; nor does it necessarily result in a reduction of the value of the company's net assets. If the assistance is in the form of an adequately secured loan it merely substitutes one asset for another of equal or greater value. Nevertheless it is a practice which is open to the gravest abuses [Particularly (but not exclusively) in relation to take-overs...]" 
The Greene Report which gave rise to the section in the 1929 English Companies
Act, confirms these thoughts. Indeed, Lord Greene MR himself said in Re VGM
Holdings, Limited [[1942] Ch 235], 239, that the section deals with the scandals of speculators finding a company with large cash reserves and arranging for the company in effect to fund its own purchase.

The purpose of the section needs always to be kept in mind when considering whether a transaction runs foul of the section: Karnovsky versus Hyams [[1961]
SA 368, (W).] This is particularly so in Australia in view of <case> of the
Corporations Law.

Section 205(1) of the Corporations Law applies to any financial assistance whether for the purpose of or in connection with a purchase of the company's shares. "Purpose" of course, means "real purpose", Saltergate Insurance Co
Ltd versus Knight [[1982] 1 NSWLR 369], and if even part of the real purpose of a transaction is financial assistance, the transaction runs foul of the section, Belmont Finance Corp Ltd versus Williams
Furniture Ltd (No 2) [1980] 1 All ER 393, 408. The section is thus cast in wide words. Technically, the provision by the company of a reply paid envelope which a shareholder could pass to a purchaser so that the latter could post the transfer to the company's registry would be financial assistance. The lesson from this example is that one must not be carried away by technicalities. On the other hand, there must be certainty in commerce, and the section cannot be interpreted to mean that whenever there is some possible slight financial assistance in connection with an apparently dodgy or artificial transaction, the section applies, but a socially acceptable transaction of the same ilk passes through the net.

There are some obvious cases of providing financial assistance in connection with the purchase of shares. However, there are also situations where the matter is not obvious and the relevant transaction needs to be considered in the light of all the surrounding circumstances. The present case is in this latter category.

Some general propositions can be made about <case>.
The court must consider what was financial assistance in the light of "the language of ordinary commerce. One must examine the commercial realities of the transaction and decide whether it can properly be described as the giving of financial assistance by the company, bearing in mind the section is a penal one and should not be strained to cover transactions which are not fairly within it." (Per Hoffmann, J, Charterhouse Investment Trust Ltd versus Tempest
Diesels Ltd [[1986] BCLC 1], 10).
The prime thrust of the section is against transactions which enable the purchaser of shares to use the company's funds to make the acquisition.
The section also reinforces the principles of maintenance of capital to prevent depletion of the capital funds available for creditors.
The section expressly covers the making of a loan, the giving of a guarantee, the provision of security, the release of an obligation, the forgiving of a debt (s 205(2).
One looks at the point of view of the company, not the recipient.

Mr Jacobson, QC puts that the shareholders' Understanding document of June was an agreement of Optus. He says that the shareholders unanimously agreed that they would cause Optus to issue the options to C & W. He submits that it is clear that all the corporators acting together can perform a corporate act without a formal resolution; see eg Re Duomatic Ltd [[1969] 2 Ch 365.] 
The question as to how far acts of all the corporators are acts of the company is an awkward one. The most scholarly treatment of the topic is by Ross
Grantham in "The Unanimous Consent Rule in Company Law", (1993) 52 Cam
LJ 245.

Mr Grantham traces the origin of the principle in an utterance of Lord Davey in Salomon versus Salomon [[1897] AC 22], 57 that a company was bound by the unanimous agreement of its members. Since then, the "Unanimous Consent Rule" has been applied in wide circumstances. However it has never covered the complete range of decisions of a company, vide Re RW
Peak (Kings Lynn) Ltd [[1998] 1 BCLC 193.] Various judges and academics have endeavoured to explain the basis of the rule (see eg
Herrman versus Simon (1990) 4 ACSR 81, 83 per Meagher, JA). However, none of them adequately explain all of its applications.

Whatever the rationale of the Rule is, with one exception, it only applies where the shareholders purport to act for the company. The exception was that considered by the Privy Council in Attorney-General for the Dominion of
Canada versus Standard Trust Company of New York [[1911] AC 498], 504-5 where the knowledge of a transaction by all the corporators in a closely held corporation without any attempt to challenge it was taken to be the approval by the company of the transaction.

The situation is analogous to the case of a pre-incorporation contract before recent amendments to the law. There is a vital distinction between the case where a promoter signed a contract, "Western Suburbs Holdings Ltd, Robert
Smallwood. Director" and one where the execution was by the formula "Robert
Smallwood, for and on behalf of Western Suburbs Holdings Ltd" (see Black v
Smallwood <case>; [(1966) 117 CLR 52).] Similarly there is a vital distinction between the case where there is an informal assent by the company to a transaction and where the shareholders personally assent to it for themselves.

In answer to the criticism that that principle only applies where the corporators purport to act for the company, Mr Jacobson, QC says that one could not imagine an act more closely connected with the corporation than a document which results in the company issuing options.

With respect, I disagree with that submission. It is clear to me that shareholders may make agreements on their own behalf which have an intimate connection with the company without them being the company's agreements.
Illustrations are voting agreements and pre-emption agreements. In the
Understanding document the shareholders were purporting to act for themselves and not for the company.

Thus I do not consider that there was any agreement by Optus by reason of the
Understanding document.

There are a line of cases that say that knowledge of all the directors is knowledge of the company; see eg ZBB (Australia) Ltd versus Allen [(1991) 4
ACSR 495], 506-7, but I cannot see how such cases are relevant in the present case.

Mr Macfarlan, QC says that the mere fact that the options were in mind in July does not lead to the view that there was financial assistance, as there was no encouragement or inducement by the company to the purchaser. I agree.
He also submits, and I agree, that it is most significant that the purchase of the shares by C & W took place in July 1997 and the first promise by Optus to give assistance was in March this year. Of course, it is clear on the admissions and as a matter of commercial reality, that the purchase would not have taken place were it not for the expectation by C & W that it would be granted the options.

The grant of the options has not yet been made. If the options are granted it will be <case> of the Corporations Law, inserted by the 1998 amending legislation, which will apply. The test will then be whether the plaintiff creditor is materially affected by the financial assistance. However, the promise to provide the assistance, if that is the correct categorization of what happened, occurred in March 1998, so the old law applies.

Section 205 itself makes clear that the time factor is a vital one. Section (1)(a)(i) expressly says that the financial assistance being considered takes place "whether before, or at the same time as" the purchase. Again, sub- section (4) uses the words "would assist" referring to the time of the giving of the financial assistance. A situation where the financial assistance comes after the purchase is not caught by the actual words of the section. The reasons of Walsh, J in the High Court in Glennon versus Federal Commissioner of
Taxation <case>; [(1972) 127 CLR 503], 510 bear out this view.

Mr Hutley, SC correctly submits that as any assistance was after the acquisition of the shares, the transaction can only fall foul of <case> if the grant of the options was "in connection" with the purchase, and that "purpose" is irrelevant.

The wording of the present section (and <case> of the 1981 Act) might be contrasted with the expression "made or to be made" in earlier versions of the section such as <case> of the 1961 Companies Act. This "made or to be made" expression was held to cover cases where the purchase had been effected before the financial assistance; see eg Gradwell (Pty) Ltd versus Rostra Printers Ltd [(1959) (4) SA 419], 424 and Lipschitz No versus UDC Bank Ltd [(1979) (1) SA ],
The form of the legislation appears to have been changed to avoid this result.

The supposed answer to this submission is that, if at the time of the purchase, the parties to the sale and purchase transaction have a specifically enforceable promise of assistance or perhaps that they legitimately expect financial assistance, the section applies.

The first possibility may be correct. However, there is no specifically enforceable promise by Optus in the present case. At the most, C & W might obtain specific performance against the other shareholders to cause Optus to do something.

The second possibility, which virtually is that there is some proprietary or equitable estoppel is more attractive. However, either the company is to be bound by a decree of an equity court to do something illegal (ie give financial assistance) or there is no financial assistance involved in which case cadit quaestio.

However, even putting these matters to one side, I do not consider that the present transaction involves granting financial assistance in connection with the purchase of shares. Mr Jacobson, QC put that, with the exception of Mayne
Nickless, everyone thought that it did (or well might). This is not a relevant matter when construing a statute or a contract.

In Burton versus Palmer [[1980] 2 NSWLR 878], 881,
Hutley, JA pointed out that the essence of financial assistance is that the company has "diminished its financial resources, including future resources, in connection with the sale and purchase of its shares." 
In Darvall versus North Sydney Brick & Tile Co Ltd [(1987) 16 NSWLR ](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281987%29%2016%20NSWLR%20212 "View LawCiteRecord" ), 247, Hodgson, J pointed out that one should not read the phrase from
Hutley, JA in isolation. Hodgson, J said, " However, his Honour went on to say that `the assumption by a company of obligations, even if it is unlikely that they have to be honoured, diminishes its resources'." 
Mr Hutley, SC submits that Hutley, JA used the word "diminished" as covering anything that could result in the diminution of the assets of the company such as the giving of a guarantee or fact situation dealt with by the English Court of Appeal in Belmont Finance Corporation versus Williams Furniture Ltd (No 2) [1980] 1 All ER 393. In that case, in simple terms, the company purchased an asset from Grosscurth at an overvalue and Grosscurth used the proceeds, as was intended, to buy shares in the company. The court held that the English equivalent of <case> was infringed.

Mr Jacobson, QC says that this passage from the judgment of Hutley, JA is really the "impoverishment test" which has largely been discarded by courts in the common law world. Mr Macfarlan, QC said, whether that were so or not, it was binding on me. To this Mr Jacobson, QC replied that it did not represent the view of the whole Court of Appeal and is not binding on me.

The other judges in Burton versus Palmer were Samuels and Mahoney, JJA. The former said that he generally concurred with the conclusions and generally with the reasons of both his brothers. Mahoney, JA gave detailed reasons which generally approached the problem from a different perspective. He did, however, say at page 891 that "a transaction which involves an obligation which presently does not but may (in a possible factual context not then existing and which does not eventuate) put the company in a position in which one of the alternative methods of discharging its obligation may constitute the giving of financial assistance" was caught by the section.

I would have thought that the passage that I have quoted from Hutley JA and the concurrence of Samuels, JA and Mahoney, JA in not contradicting it is binding on me. I am comforted by the fact that in Darvall versus North Sydney
Brick & Tile Co Ltd [(1989) 16 NSWLR 260], 296 in the Court of Appeal, Kirby, P took the same view as Hutley, JA and also thought that his Honour's views were the views of the court. Sheppard, J did the same in Re Myer Retail Investments Pty Ltd [(1983) 8 ACLR 102], 108; indeed he said he could not see how Mahoney, JA had expressed any contrary view. It is true that in Darvall's case, neither Mahoney JA nor Clarke JA dealt with the point, but the view of Kirby, P must carry great weight. Not a word was said in the Court of Appeal, which affirmed the decision of Hodgson,
J that the latter's construction of what Hutley, JA had said was wrong.

The main attack on the passage is by McPherson, SPJ in Re National Mutual
Royal Bank Ltd (1990) 3 ACSR 94, 101. Any judgment of that learned judge, especially on the subject of company law, is to be treated with the greatest respect. However, a single judge in NSW needs merely to follow the Court of
Appeal. That judge does so more willingly, when, as here, he agrees with what the Court of Appeal said.

The test in Burton versus Palmer is sometimes termed the "impoverishment test".
The words of Hodgson, J in Darvall's case show that that is a misnomer.
What the court considers is whether the resources of the company are diminished by the transaction.

The "impoverishment test" was adopted by the courts in South Africa before ; see eg Gradwell's case (supra). However in the Lipschitz case where, at page 800, Miller, JA, giving the decision of the Appellate
Division, said that the section "expressly and unequivocally includes within the meaning of `financial assistance' acts not necessarily nor even probably involving impoverishment of the company or the employment of all of its `pecuniary resources'." The court then cites the case of a guarantee and refers, with apparent approval, the article by R I Barrett, "Financial
Acquisition and Share Acquisition" [(1974) 48 ALJ 6] at page 7.

Miller JA then continues, "Clearly the purpose of the Legislature in specifically including the giving of a guarantee and the provision of security in the concept of "financial assistance" was to guard also against a company's merely exposing its funds to possible risk (as distinct from actually employing or depleting its funds) for the purpose of or in connection with the purchase of its shares.
 "I have no doubt that in certain cases, depending largely upon the form which the alleged financial assistance is said to have taken, the impoverishment test might be a very helpful guide and might often yield a clear and decisive answer to the question whether financial assistance was given by the company....But in other cases, of which I have given examples, the inquiry envisaged by the impoverishment test might be not only unhelpful but entirely irrelevant to the question whether what was done constituted financial assistance...." 
Although this passage was not cited during the oral argument, Mr Hutley SC clearly submitted that the case of a guarantee is not outside the test laid down by Hutley, JA as the contingent liability created diminishes the company's resources. He puts that such a situation is quite different to that which arises in the present case where there is no liability, contingent or otherwise, but merely a probably augmentation of capital.

In subsequent written submission, Mr Macfarlan, QC and Mr Jackman put that the reason for the South African courts in the Lipschitz case rejecting a universal application of the impoverishment test was because they considered it did not pick up transactions expressly covered by the section such as a guarantee. However, they submit the only real change was one of emphasis by the focus of greater attention on the form of the assistance provided (ie has there been ascertainable fiscal assistance) rather than assessing this solely by examining the financial impact on the company. Counsel also note that the
South African authorities have also applied more strictly the purpose requirement of the section; see eg Zentland Holdings (Pty) Ltd versus Saambou
Nasionale Bouvereniging [(1979) (4) SA 574.] In my view, these submissions are well founded.

Mr Jacobson, QC does not make any submissions on the recent South African cases. However, he places great store on the decision of Goldberg, J in the
Federal Court in Milburn versus Pivot Ltd [(1997) 149 ALR 439]; 25 ACSR ; [15 ACLC 1520.] Mr Hutley, SC says that, although he may have reached the correct result on the facts, with respect, Goldberg, J just misunderstood what
Hutley, JA said in Burton versus Palmer. Both Mr Macfarlan, QC and Mr Hutley,
SC put that whether that is so or not, I am bound by what was said in Burton v Palmer and can just disregard any contrary view expressed by Goldberg, J.

The simplified facts in the Milburn case were that the board of Pivot Ltd considered that it was in the company's interest for a Mr Shears to sell his shares in the company and to encourage greater interest by its farmer members.
Arrangements were made for ANZ to purchase the shares for $300 each. A dividend reinvestment scheme was set up. Members, including ANZ as underwriter of the scheme were entitled to acquire investor shares in the company at $25 per share. A special dividend of $5 per share was declared. The company told its members that it was uncertain whether the proposal involved giving financial assistance and called a meeting under <case>(10) to consider the matter. Milburn moved under <case>(13) for the court to disapprove. Goldberg, J granted that order.

Goldberg, J held that there was financial assistance being the favourable subscription price and a guaranteed acquisition of shares at that price pursuant to the underwriting agreement. ANZ was reluctant to buy Shears' shares unless the underwriting agreement was in place. As the shares would have a value of about $250 each, this was sufficient financial inducement for
ANZ to buy the shares.

The question arose as to whether Pivot was "impoverished" by the transaction.
Goldberg, J said that, whilst impoverishment was a guide to whether there had been financial assistance, it was not determinative of the matter. He cited, with approval, the view of the Western Australian Full Court in Dempster v
National Companies and Securities Commission [(1993) 10 ACSR 297.] Dempster was a case where a company had borrowed money to lend to X who had lent it to Y who had purchased shares in the company. Although Malcolm, CJ, with whom
Walsh and Anderson, JJ agreed, said at page 353 that the impoverishment test was inconsistent with a number of clear situations where there was financial assistance though the balance sheet was not disturbed, it was clear on the facts of the case that on any test there was financial assistance. Certainly
Hutley, JA did not say that one just looked at the balance sheet. One does not have to be involved in commercial law long to realize the number of frauds that are committed by assuming that $x in cash is exactly the same as a promise by A to pay $x on demand, even though, in law they may have equivalence; see Fadden versus Federal Commissioner of Taxation <case>; [(1945) 70 CLR 555.] 
The facts of the Milburn case are fairly similar to the present case. In each, the majority bona fide considered that there was an advantage to the company if a shareholder parted from their midst. In each case, the price being demanded by the seller was such that there would not be a purchaser unless there was a side deal. In each case, the side deal was bringing about the ability of the purchaser to acquire further shares in the company at less than the market price. In each case, the company took some active part in bringing about that state of affairs.

It will be observed that in the Milburn case, apart from the dividend (which may be the reason for Mr Hutley, SC's concession as to the case's correctness on the facts, but which played no part in the ratio decidendi) the assets and the resources of the company were unaffected by the transaction.
Indeed, the company might be better off because ANZ had an obligation to subscribe about $1,700,000 in capital. ANZ got an advantage because it could buy shares at $25 worth $250, but the assets and resources of the company were unaffected.

Mr Jacobson, QC says that the resources of the company were depleted because it was less able to raise capital because of the dilution of its share capital by the promise to issue "discount" shares. He says the same applies in the instant case where options were issued to take up shares at less than their market price.

Mr Macfarlan, QC and Mr Hutley, SC point out that the exercise of the options in the present case, could in some circumstances, be forced by the company.
They say that it is necessary to analyse the rights which C & W are taking. Absent a listing of Optus on the ASX, the options can never be exercised, and, if there is no listing by a date in 2000, the options can never be exercised. Pending listing, the options cannot be sold. Furthermore, no one can predict with any degree of accuracy what will be the price of the shares on the market. $x was fixed by the shareholders as the likely listing price and that exceeds the exercise price of the options, but circumstances at the time of listing may mean that some other price than $x will be the listing price. Further, there is no certainty as to the price of Optus shares when the option is exercised.

It is useful to consider what is the legal position when a company allots shares at less than their current market value and, indeed, the legal nature of an option to take up shares.

In Ord Forrest Pty Ltd versus Federal Commissioner of Taxation <case>; [(1974) 130 CLR 124], 135, Stephen, J said that it was a misconception to say that "a company which allots at par shares having a value greater than par does not thereby suffer any financial detriment." The detriment is not to the company's capital, but it may well be at the expense of the company; see Hilder v
Dexter [[1902] AC 474], 480. The Ord Forrest case went to the Full High Court, where the statutory majority affirmed the decision. The High Court reaffirmed it in Federal Commissioner of Taxation versus St Helens Farm (ACT) Pty Ltd <case>; [(1981) 146 CLR 336.] 
It was noted in the two High Court cases to which I have just referred, that the assumption was made that the asset backing value of the shares and the market value were approximately equal.

I considered the nature of an option to take up shares in Re BDC Investments
Ltd [(1988) 13 ACLR 201], 203. I there doubted whether, until there had been a breach or anticipatory breach of the obligation to allot shares, a company which had granted options was even a contingent debtor of the grantee.
Nonetheless, I followed a series of decision to the effect that, for the purpose of a scheme of arrangement such people are creditors.

In the instant case, the company agreed to grant the option, which would give the grantee the right to take up shares at well under the current market price. If and only if that agreement is dishonoured would the company be liable in damages and then the quantum would be the difference between the option exercise price and the then current market value of the shares. It is extremely difficult to quantify those damages at the present time.

Mr Jacobson, QC says that, by analogy with the Milburn case, there is financial assistance given. Even on the Burton versus Palmer test, there is a diminution of resources because the company's ability to deal with its unissued capital is restricted.

In summary, Messrs Macfarlan, QC and/or Hutley, SC say (1) it is distinguishable because of the prior agreement; (2) it is distinguishable because in the Milburn case come what may ANZ would receive $25 per share, whereas here, the ultimate value at the time of the exercise of the option is unclear and unassessable; (3) it overlooked the distinction between inducement and provision of financial assistance; (4) it was in error in misunderstanding the test in Burton versus Palmer; (5) that there is no diminution in the resources of the company in the relevant sense and thus no financial assistance.

As I have indicated above, Mr Macfarlan, QC says that in fact there was no inducement by the company in July 1997. However, if that is wrong, then the highest the matter could be put against the company is that there was an inducement to the purchaser to enter into the purchase transaction. He puts that there is a great difference between inducement by offering a collateral financial benefit and financial assistance.

This submission is borne out by the cases; see Industrial Equity Ltd v
Topcar Pty Ltd [1972] 2 NSWLR 505, 514; Burton versus Palmer, supra at pp -890 per Mahoney, JA . Those cases were followed by the English Court of
Appeal in British and Commonwealth Holdings plc versus Barclays Bank plc [[1996] 1 WLR 1], 15-16.

Mr Macfarlan, QC says that if a company makes a loan to X at the request of Y ( who is buying shares in the company), <case> does not apply as the company is not assisting the purchase, unless a round robin is clearly contemplated.

Mr Hutley, SC points out that the same reasoning process shows that the company giving information could not be financial assistance.

As I have said, I must follow the Burton versus Palmer test. On that test, I cannot say on the facts of this case that there was any diminution of the company's assets in the wide sense in which those words were used in that case.

I have given full force to Mr Jacobson QC's submissions that the existence of the options means that the company is restricted from dealing with its unissued capital thereby diminishing its financial resources. This submission is assisted by the Ord Forrest case. I agree also that Hutley, JA was not limiting himself by the term "resources" to balance sheet matters and to actual as opposed to contingent diminutions. However, in view of all the contingencies that affect C & W's rights under the options, I cannot see how there was a diminution.

If I kept away from the Burton versus Palmer test and just looked at the commercial realities of the substance of the transaction, I would agree with
Mr Macfarlan, QC that the present case gets no closer than proffering a financial inducement by the shareholders of the company.

I have considered this matter long and hard, not the least of the reasons for this is that, at first blush, the case looks so similar to the Milburn case. However, it is distinguishable. Because of this, I need say no more about Mr Hutley SC's criticisms of it, except to say that they appear to me to have merit.

Thus, there was no financial assistance involved in the transaction.
 . Has there been substantial compliance with <case>(10)? 
In view of my answer to question 1, the other questions cannot affect the result of this litigation. However, should the case go further, it may be useful to deal briefly with them.

The parties agreed (as did Goldberg, J in the Milburn case at ALR 478), that the relevant test is the one I applied in Deveraux Holdings Pty Ltd v
Pelsart Resources NL (No 2) [(1985) 9 ACLR 956], 958.
Essentially the test is, "will the information fully and fairly inform and instruct the shareholder about the matter upon which he or she will have to vote?" 
There is a bizarre twist to the section. Not only is the section to protect members, it is also to protect creditors. Thus, after a special resolution is passed by the members under <case>(10), (at a meeting before which both members and debenture holders have to be given full information) the company has to advertise to the creditors what has occurred which advertisement can trigger an application by a creditor under sub-section (12) to oppose the approval of the financial assistance.

The court is not to approve the financial assistance unless the company has disclosed to the members all the material matters relating to the financial assistance. In the present case, there can be no complaint about the information given to the members as each and every one of the members had the fullest knowledge of the matter. However, the argument is put by PBFL that, unless the public information given to the members under sub-section (10) is full and ample, the statutory right of a creditor to oppose the financial assistance is reduced to being near worthless.

As to this, Mr Macfarlan, QC denies that a person who is a convertible note holder is a debenture holder or a creditor who should be given information and that, so long as the members have full information that is sufficient. If however the members have to be appraised of the information in some statutory form, that has happened. He submits that it is impossible to read subsections and (13) in a vacuum: one has to have regard to all the background facts and circumstances. He points out that the wording of sub-section (13) specifically speaks in terms of a disclosure "to the members of the company".

What raises the commercial hackles of Optus is that it takes the view that
PBFL is seeking to ensure that if and when it takes up its shares in lieu of repayment of the Note, the value of those shares is not diluted. In view of the fact that there is an anti-dilution provision in the Note, Optus considers this attitude unreasonable. It says that "creditor" in <case> means a business creditor by way of trade or otherwise who might be affected by a back door reduction of the capital fund that must be available for the payment of debts.

Mr Macfarlan, QC submits that PBFL cannot be detrimentally affected as a creditor as the assets and resources of Optus are not in any way being depleted. He says that if PBFL has any complaint, it would be that the share capital of Optus was being diluted and/or that C & W may become a majority holder. In any event, Mr Macfarlan, QC submits there are anti-dilution provisions in the Note which will be brought into play at the proper time and
C & W, having 49.12% by reason of acquiring BellSouth's shares could, without difficulty, after the proposed float, acquire another 1% of the shares on the market. Indeed, it probably has effective control in any event at .12%.

He further submits that if PBFL had obtained (a) a debenture; and (b) an option to acquire shares by two separate instruments, there would be no argument that PBFL was not entitled to object to the transaction qua its rights as an optionholder. Why, he asks rhetorically, should things be different because the two sets of rights are contained in the one document? He points to the analogy of the cases under <case> of the Corporations Law where it was only oppression of a person qua a member that was actionable before recent amendments; see eg Re Lundie Brothers Ltd [[1965] 2 All ER ](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1965%5d%202%20All%20ER%20692 "View LawCiteRecord" ), 698.

This attitude is understandable, but I cannot see any legal justification for so limiting the meaning of the words "debenture holder" and "creditor" in the section.

Has the company substantially complied with sub-section (10)? This involves consideration of what it has done, what is necessary to do and what is a substantial compliance. As to this last matter, the law has been usefully digested by Carr, J in Commissioner of Taxation versus Comcorp Australia Ltd [(1996) 70 FCR 356], 395. His Honour said, after referring to the authorities, that the word "substantially", "involves a matter of the degree of the compliance. It is used in a relative sense rather than any absolute sense." 
The Comcorp case involved the Voluntary Administration part of the
Corporations Law. The first decision on the present section is one of my own given many years ago in Re U Drive Pty Ltd [(1986) 10 ACLR 565.] I there said, in a case where there were no known creditors that, if before the relevant cut-off time for making an application to the court, the members and creditors received adequate information for them to make the decision as to whether or not to contest the matter, generally speaking there had been "substantial" compliance with the terms of the section. That decision was followed in the Federal Court in Re News Corporation Ltd [(1993) 11 ACLC ], .

Mr Jacobson, QC says that the particulars of financial assistance in the explanatory statement are inadequate because they do not accept the position that there was financial assistance. Furthermore, the real reason for any financial assistance, namely the desire to rid Optus of the BellSouth shareholding is not stated. Again, the statement did not indicate the effect that the financial assistance would have on Optus, namely that it has been deprived of shareholders' funds in the amount which represents the premium for control.

I will approach this submission on the basis that, contrary to my finding, there was financial assistance in this case.

In the Milburn case at ALR 479, Goldberg, J said, "In order to constitute a particular of the financial assistance proposed, the subject-matter relied on as constituting that particular must be identified or propounded in such a way as to enable a shareholder reading the document containing it to understand what is said to be the financial assistance proposed." Where there was doubt as to whether the transaction involved financial assistance, the statement needs to set out, "that part of the arrangement which (Optus) thought at least might be classified as financial assistance" (ALR 482).

These words seem to me to run counter to the suggestion that, in doubtful cases, the company must accept that there was financial assistance. The current notice did specify what was considered might be financial assistance.
It is true that the desire to get rid of BellSouth was not mentioned in the notice, but all the shareholders were aware of it and the advantage to C &
W was specified. Mr Jacobson, QC says that as no evidence was called from the shareholders as to what they knew, I should not accept that they were fully aware. I dismiss this submission because, in the absence of contrary evidence, this fact is shown by the Shareholders' Understanding.

As to the premium for control point, I agree with Mr Macfarlan, QC that a shareholder with a shareholding just over 49% could easily go into the market and buy 1% once the company was listed, so that the so-called premium for control is really illusory.

Thus, I consider that there was substantial compliance with the section.

It is unnecessary to explore the submission in depth that a debenture holder or creditor needs information even though all the shareholders are aware of the real situation. My view is that there is substantial merit in this submission. It is clear that what is "substantial compliance" is a question of degree, Re Asset Risk Management Pty Ltd [(1995) 59 FCR 254], and has to be assessed according to the facts and circumstances of each case. However, at the very least, the statutory notices which are distributed or published for the benefit of outsiders must still contain sufficient for those people to see the "red light" which might cause them to investigate further. That investigation doubtless would, in the first instance, be a request for more information, but, whether or not that information was given, there would be the opportunity to approach the court.
 . Has PBFL Standing to make an application under <case>(13)? 
There is no doubt that PBFL is a creditor of Optus. However, as I have already indicated, Mr Macfarlan, QC says that a creditor only has a legitimate interest to pursue if it is affected qua a creditor.

I have dealt with this argument where it more logically fits, in section 2 above. It does not affect PBFL's standing to make an application.
 . Should time be extended for PBFL's application? 
Section 205(13) gives a person who wishes to oppose the grant of financial assistance 21 days after the publication of the statutory notice to do so.
That time expired on 31 March 1998. The present application was not made until July 1998, over three months out of time.

The application is made under <case> of the Corporations Law. Although specific portions of the Law may indicate that time is essential or that there is some more specific provision available so that the power under <case> is excluded, when it is applicable, the section is to be liberally applied; see eg Re J & E Holdings Pty Ltd [(1995) 36 NSWLR 541], 546.

Despite submissions to the contrary, I do not consider that <case> excludes s (4). I understand the submission that by extending the time, PBFL will have been given some four months to make up its mind. However, in view of the fact that the Tallglen application was before the court and no prejudice has been demonstrated, had it been of value to do so, I would have extended the time for application.
 . What, if any order should be made under <case>(13)? 
It follows that the answer to this question is, simply, "None".
 . What is the result of the litigation? 
Mr Macfarlan, QC and Mr Jackman submit that, if I come to the view that there is no financial assistance involved, I should make an order such as the following:- 
A declaration that the issue by Optus Communications Pty Limited to Cable & Wireless (Investments) Pty Limited or its nominee of ,800,000 options (plus an additional number of options in the event of a pro rata issue by that Company prior to the exercise of the options) each exercisable into one fully paid ordinary share of $1 in that Company does not constitute the giving of financial assistance by that Company within the meaning of section 205 of the Corporations Law.

Otherwise, all I need do is order - that the third cross claim be dismissed; that PBFL pay the costs of Optus and C & W of the cross claims; and the exhibits may be returned on the basis that if there is an appeal the exhibits will be returned to the Court.

In view of the urgency of the matter, by request, I pronounced these orders in open Court earlier today.
 * * * 
