

Director of Public Prosecutions versus Kane and Ors Matter No 11386/97 [1997]
NSWSC 390 (10 September 1997) 
Director of Public Prosecutions versus Kane & Ors /97 September 1997 
Hunt CJ at CL 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
FILE NO: 11386/97 
DATES OF HEARING: 28-29 May 1997 
DATE OF ORDERS: 29 May 1997 
DATE OF REASONS : 10 September 1997 
JUDGMENT OF: HUNT CJ at CL 
PARTIES: DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS versus KANE & ORS 
Appearances: 
For the plaintiff: D M J Bennett QC & I M Jackman 
For the defendant Kane: J L Glissan QC & K J Manion 
Solicitors: 
For the plaintiff: Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions 
For the defendant Kane: Cowley Hearne 
CATCHWORDS: 
Equitable obligation of confidence - legal professional privilege - whether obligation depends upon continued existence of privilege - waiver - imputed or implied waiver - [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s122.html) - whether applies derivatively to privilege arising independently of judicial or quasi-judicial proceedings - whether imputed or implied waiver arises under
Act.

An application was made by the (Cwth) Director of Public Prosecutions by six defendants charged with Commonwealth offences that the committal proceedings against them be discontinued. Written advice was tendered to the Director by a solicitor employed in his Office, considering the application in detail and recommending that it be refused. The Director noted on that document some instructions as to the future conduct of the prosecution. A letter was written to the solicitors for each of the defendants informing them that the prosecution would proceed. There was no reference in the letter to the document in question, nor was there any notation that the letter was to be accompanied by any enclosure. A clerk inadvertently included a copy of the document in question with the letter. The error was discovered when counsel for one of the defendants complained that two pages of the document were missing. Urgent faxes were sent to each of the solicitors asserting that the document had been distributed inadvertently, and asking that it not be read or copied and that it be returned with any copies which may have been made. The solicitors for five of the six defendants complied with the request. The sixth refused.

An application was made by the Director for orders restraining the defendant from using or otherwise dealing with the document which came into his possession and to require him to deliver that document up to the plaintiff.
The application was based in the alternative upon the equitable obligation of confidence and legal professional privilege. The application was granted.

On equitable obligation of confidence: 
Johns versus Australian Securities Commission <case>; [(1993) 178 CLR 408] referred to 
On waiver: 
Great Atlantic Insurance Co versus Home Insurance Co [[1981] 1 WLR 529] discussed 
On [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/): 
Telstra Corp Ltd versus Australis Media Holdings Pty Ltd [(1997) 41 NSWLR 277] referred to 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
The Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions brought these proceedings seeking orders to restrain the defendants from using or otherwise dealing with a document which came into the possession of each of them and to require the defendants to deliver that document up to him.

The three defendants to these proceedings, with three others, had been charged with offences that they have been involved, in various ways, in collusive tendering. Three corporations had been charged with conspiring to defraud the
Commonwealth by such collusive tendering, and three individual persons both with procuring the participation of the corporations in that conspiracy and with being knowingly concerned in the crimes which the corporations had committed. The committal proceedings against all six were part heard in the
Local Court at the time when the Director's application was heard, and they were to resume a short time thereafter.

The document in question which came into the possession of each of defendants is a photostat copy of a minute from Mr Ian Glasgow, a solicitor employed in the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions, addressed to the Director and dated 15 April 1997. It related to an application by each of the six corporations and individuals charged made to the Director that the committal proceedings be discontinued. On 29 April, the Director wrote to the solicitors for each of the six charged referring to the application that the prosecution should not proceed further, and continuing: "After a careful consideration of all the circumstances in the case including the matters raised in your letter I have decided that the prosecution should proceed." 
There is no reference in the letter to the document in question, either directly or indirectly. There is no notation that the letter was to be accompanied by any enclosure. The letter had been posted in Adelaide and it was received without any enclosure by the solicitor for the first defendant in these proceedings (James Leslie Kane) on Thursday 1 May. On Friday 2 May, Mr
Kane's solicitor received an envelope posted in Canberra which contained a photostat copy of the Director's letter and of the document in question. The same happened in relation to the solicitors for each of the other corporations and individuals charged.

On Tuesday 6 May, the Director learnt that the document had been sent to the solicitors for each of the corporations and individuals charged when counsel appearing for Mr Kane complained to the solicitor instructing for the prosecution in the Local Court that two pages were missing from his copy.
Urgent faxes were sent by the Director's Office the same day to each of the solicitors asserting that the document had been distributed inadvertently, and asking that it not be read or copied and that it be returned with any copies which may have been made. The solicitors for three of the six charged delivered the document up as requested. The present proceedings were then commenced against the remaining three charged. Two of them subsequently delivered up the document, and consent orders were made disposing of the proceedings so far as they were concerned. Only Mr Kane argued that he should not be obliged to deliver the document up.

On Thursday 8 May, the Director successfully applied ex parte to Sully J for an interim injunction restraining the defendants from using or otherwise dealing with the document pending the determination of these proceedings. On
Friday 9 May, when two of the three present defendants appeared, the orders were varied by Sully J to permit the defendants to use the document in the present proceedings but not to copy it. The Director's application for permanent relief came on for hearing before me on 28 May. On 29 May, I granted the relief sought by the Director and said that I would deliver my reasons later. I now proceed to give those reasons.

On behalf of the Director, affidavits were filed by Mr Peter Walshe (the First
Deputy Director), Mr Glasgow (the solicitor who was the author of the document in question) and Ms Michelle Willans (a clerk who was engaged on a temporary basis to work in the Director's Canberra office). None was required for cross- examination. I find the relevant facts and circumstances to be as follows:
The Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions consists of a head office in Canberra with regional offices around Australia. The Legal Branch at the head office in Canberra provides legal advice to the Director and to the
Associate Director as to their statutory functions.
One of the functions of the Director is to institute prosecutions on indictment for offences against the laws of the Commonwealth and to do anything incidental or conducive to that function.[1] I am satisfied that that function includes the conduct of committal proceedings in relation to indictable offences against those laws on behalf of the informant and the determination of applications by persons charged with such offences that the prosecution be discontinued.
When such an application is received, the case officer responsible for the conduct of the proceedings and senior officers within the regional office provide to the Legal Branch in Canberra material concerning the proceedings and the issues raised by the application. A lawyer employed in the Legal
Branch reviews that material and makes a recommendation to the Director or to the Associate Director as to the exercise of those statutory functions, addressing the issues raised, the submissions made and the material so provided. The document prepared by the solicitor is referred to as a minute.
The present Director (Mr Brian Martin QC) is based in Adelaide and regularly works there. When he decides upon the appropriate response to an application to discontinue a prosecution, he notes his decision on the minute provided by the lawyer. The minute and all accompanying documents are then returned to the Canberra office, which in turn informs the case officer of the
Director's decision and provides the case officer with copies of the minute and any letter sent to the applicant.
In the present case, Mr Glasgow prepared the relevant minute for the
Director. It is thirtyseven pages long. The original minute had a large number of annexures, but copies of the annexures were not included with the copies of the minute when they came into the possession of the defendants. The minute identifies each of the six corporations and individuals charged and their legal representatives, and it proceeds to deal in detail with each submission made on behalf of each of them. The minute draws the Director's attention to the material independently put forward in relation to those submissions by counsel instructed to prosecute and the case officer as well as to the views expressed by the informant police officer and the senior Assistant Director in the Sydney office. Mr Glasgow then gave his own reasons for the recommendation which he made to the Director. That recommendation - which was disclosed in the proceedings before me - was that the application made by each of the defendants charged be refused.
On 28 April, the Director orally informed Mr Glasgow of his decision to accept that recommendation and instructed him to draft for his signature letters to the solicitors for the defendants charged informing them of that decision. Mr Glasgow sent a copy of his minute to the case officer in Sydney by e-mail on the same day and informed him of the Director's decision. On 29
April he sent the draft letters to the Adelaide office by e-mail. These were signed by the Director and sent to the solicitors from the Adelaide office.
On 30 April, Mr Glasgow received through the Office's internal and regional mail system the original minute and photostat copies of the letters signed by the Director and sent to the solicitors. The minute contains underlining highlighting some passages, apparently made by the Director, and two specific instructions in the Director's handwriting relating to the future conduct of the prosecution. The photostat copies of the letters were on white paper.
Mr Glasgow's intention was then to send to the case officer in Sydney, by the office's internal and regional mail system, photostat copies of the original minute (including the notations made by the Director) and of the signed letters. He instructed Ms Willans to photocopy the minute, taking care that the Director's handwritten notes on it were legible, and the signed letters and to forward them to the case officer in Sydney. He later noticed Ms
Willans doing what appeared to be a large amount of photocopying. Later again, he found a number of copies of the minute in his office and two further copies in the outward mail tray stamped with the internal circulation stamp for the
Office. He collected these additional copies and instructed Ms Willans to "bin" them. He gave no further instructions to her, nor did he make any further inquiries of her.
Ms Willans recalls her instructions from Mr Glasgow as being to make sure that the case officer in Sydney was sent "a copy of everything and that the handwritten comments on the last page of the [minute] are legible", and that he added "send a copy to [the case officer] down in the Sydney office today if possible, and the letters to go out today". She thought that the white photostat copies of the letters signed by the Director were originals which had been returned to the Canberra office for posting out. She thinks that she made three green copies and one white copy of the minute and of each of the signed letters. These are used in the Canberra office as a file copy, two internal circulation copies and one for the author's personal file. She has no recollection of making any extra copies of the minute, but she concedes that it is possible that she did so. She has no recollection of putting copies of the minute with the signed letters, but she concedes that she may have done so by mistake. She had not been instructed to do so, nor did she make any assumption that the minute was to accompany the letters. I am satisfied that she had not consciously intended to send out copies of the minute with the copies of the Director's letter.
Ms Willans (who was a temporary employee only) had been busy on that day and it was getting late in the afternoon when she did the photocopying. She had an appointment to meet friends that day after work, and she was hurrying.
She was conscious that the documents had to be sent to the case officer in
Sydney that day.
Mr Glasgow was not authorised to release the minute to anyone outside the
Office of the Director. He did not instruct Ms Willans to do so. It is not the practice of the Office to reveal the contents of such a document to anyone outside that Office. I am satisfied that Mr Glasgow did not intend so to release the document in question here.

The relevant difference between the two versions is that, according to Mr
Glasgow, his instructions to Ms Willans were to send copies of everything to the case officer in Sydney, whereas her recollection is that he instructed her to send a copy of everything to the case officer "and the letters to go out today".

I am satisfied that the version of the conversation given by Mr Glasgow is the correct one, although it does not really matter. Even if Ms Willans had been instructed that the letters were to go out that day, such an instruction did not cause her to send the copies of the minute with those letters. She specifically said (and I accept) that she did not believe that she had been instructed to do so. Nor does it really matter whether Ms Willans misunderstood the instructions given or whether her recollection is faulty. My conclusion is that she must have misunderstood what was said to her. I accept that she believed that she was to send out what she thought were the originals of the signed letters. That was her first mistake. I accept that she never understood that she was to send out copies of the minute with those signed letters. She must nevertheless have done so. That was her second mistake. The second mistake may well have resulted from the fact that she was busy and she was in a hurry to get away at the end of work to meet her friends. But it was nevertheless her mistake. I did not understand the remaining defendant in the present proceedings to dispute that conclusion in the end. The document was therefore sent to the solicitors by inadvertence.

The Director based his application for relief upon two bases in the alternative - (a) the equitable obligation of confidence, and (b) legal professional privilege. I will deal with each separately.

A convenient statement of principle in relation to the equitable obligation of confidence is to be found in the dissenting judgment of Gaudron J in Johns v
Australian Securities Commission:2 "The jurisdiction to grant equitable relief with respect to confidential information is not in doubt. Nor is it in doubt that the basis for the jurisdiction lies in an obligation of conscience. The question whether there is an obligation of that kind ordinarily depends on the `circumstances in or through which the information was communicated or obtained.'[3] However, other circumstances may be relevant when it is claimed that persons who were not parties to the original confidence are bound by it or come under a duty with respect to the information involved.

It has been held, both in Australia and in the United Kingdom, that a third person who comes by information innocently may be restrained from making use of it once he or she learns that it was obtained in circumstances involving a breach of confidence.[4] And it was conceded by counsel for the sixth and seventh respondents that the law in this regard is as stated by Lord Denning
MR in Fraser versus Evans,5 namely, that `[e]ven if [a recipient of information] comes by it innocently, nevertheless once he gets to know that it was originally given in confidence, he can be restrained from breaking that confidence'." 
Gaudron J goes on to observe that the law of confidence has yet to develop to the point of identifying in a definitive or comprehensive way the matters which determine whether a duty of confidence has devolved onto third parties.

The presence of that statement of principle in a dissenting judgment does not detract from its validity, as Brennan J (with whom Dawson J agreed generally as members of the majority) also accepted the jurisdiction in equity to grant relief against actual or threatened abuse of confidential information[6] and relied upon the same authority.[7] McHugh J, in his dissenting judgment, also accepted the jurisdiction.[8] The point of departure between the majority and the minority judgments in Johns versus Australian Securities Commission was whether the jurisdiction to restrain the repository of a statutory power from using or disclosing information obtained in exercise of the power rested on the same basis as that in equity.

The situation in which equitable relief with respect to confidential information is more usually sought is that described by Sir Robert Megarry V-C in Malone versus Metropolitan Police Commissioner:9 "If A makes a confidential communication to B, then A may not only restrain B from divulging or using the confidence, but also may restrain C from divulging or using it if C has acquired it from B, even if he acquired it without notice of any impropriety ... . In such cases it seems plain that, however innocent the acquisition of the knowledge, what will be restrained is the use or disclosure of it after notice of the impropriety." 
There are many cases in the books in which a person who obtained confidential information in the course of some contractual relationship with the owner of that information has been restrained from passing on that information to a third party. Those cases fall directly within the description given by the
Vice-Chancellor. It is nevertheless also clear from such cases that, where the information has already been passed on, equitable relief is available against that third party as well, and (as Sir Robert Megarry points out) however innocently that third party may have acquired that information. Nor does there need to be impropriety on the part of the person from whom the third party acquired it. It is sufficient if it were given to the third party inadvertently, once that party learns that it had been obtained in breach of confidence. That is made clear by the second paragraph of the passage which I have quoted from the judgment of Gaudron J in Johns.

The Director put his case on confidentiality upon two alternative bases - that the document was received by Mr Glasgow from the Director in confidence and it was received by the defendant (through his solicitor) from Mr Glasgow (through
Ms Willans) in breach of confidence; or that the document was received by Ms
Willans from Mr Glasgow in confidence and it was received by the defendant (through his solicitor) from Ms Willans in breach of confidence. In both cases, the breach was inadvertent, and not as the result of any impropriety.

In Coco versus AN Clark (Engineers) Ltd,10 Megarry J held by reference to authorities in the Court of Appeal that the obligation of confidence may exist even when there is no contractual relationship between the parties. In such cases, his Lordship said, three elements must be established: "In my judgment, three elements are normally required if, apart from contract, a case of breach of confidence is to succeed. First, the information itself ... must `have the necessary quality of confidence about it.' Secondly, that information must have been imparted in circumstances importing an obligation of confidence. Thirdly, there must have been an unauthorised use of that information to the detriment of the party communicating it." 
The quotation included in the first ingredient is taken from the judgment of
Lord Greene MR in Saltman Engineering Co Ltd versus Campbell Engineering Co
Ltd.11 
The test posed by the first of those ingredients will be satisfied if the information is of such a nature that the preservation of its confidentiality or secrecy is of substantial concern to the plaintiff.[12] The document in question here has already been described in general terms (in the paragraph numbered 5, above). The information which it contains can be described satisfactorily only in terms of confidentiality. Indeed, it was very properly conceded on behalf of the defendant that, at least until it was sent to the solicitors for the defendants charged, it was a confidential document. It is as well, however, to refer in a little more detail to its contents (in a way which does not improperly reveal their nature) for the purposes of other issues with which I have to deal later in any event. The document exposes the different views expressed by the various contributors to the process of its compilation in relation to some of the issues raised by the defendants charged, although it is appropriate to say that the views of the Senior
Assistant Director and of Mr Glasgow (the solicitor) coincide completely in relation to the advice which was given to the Director and which was accepted by him. The Director's own notes as to his instructions relating to the future conduct of the prosecution are revealed in the document. It could hardly be mistaken as other than a document to which the highest obligations of confidentiality were attached. It is an internal document written by a solicitor to the Director advising him in relation to the exercise of his statutory functions and it notes the Director's instructions as to the future conduct of the prosecution.

It is unnecessary to consider both of the two alternative ways in which the
Director puts his case. It is sufficient to consider only the second alternative, in which relief is sought upon the basis that the document was given to Ms Willans by Mr Glasgow in confidence and it was inadvertently disclosed by her to the defendant through his solicitor. Employment in the
Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions necessarily imposes an obligation of confidentiality concerning most documents in relation to prosecutions which that Office is conducting (and certainly this one),[13] and sending this document to anyone outside the office (even inadvertently) necessarily constitutes an unauthorised use of the document.

There is some dispute in the authorities as to the need for "detriment" to the plaintiff as stated by Megarry J in relation to the third ingredient. Megarry
J himself accepted in Coco versus AN Clark (Engineers) Ltd that it was unnecessary for him to decide whether such an ingredient was necessary, as detriment clearly did exist in that case; for this reason he expressly left open whether it was necessary.[14] The leading equity text book argues that it is not necessary,[15] and there are statements in the cases supporting that argument.[16] The authors concede, however, that in Commonwealth versus John
Fairfax & Sons Ltd[17] Mason J accepted detriment as an essential ingredient when quoting from the judgment of Megarry J in Coco versus AN Clark
Ltd without reference to the later qualification which his
Lordship had expressed in that case.

It is unnecessary in the present case as well to decide whether detriment is necessary, as I am satisfied that the disclosure of the different views expressed by the different persons concerned in the prosecution and the
Director's instructions as to its future conduct would be prejudicial to the prosecution. The document was in fact made the subject of an application by the defendant to stay the proceedings as an abuse of process, although in my view (expressed without the benefit of full argument upon it) the application for such a stay proceeded upon a particularly fragile basis.[18] Nevertheless, the fact that the application was made is, in my view, sufficient detriment arising from the disclosure. All three ingredients nominated by Megarry J are thus satisfied when applied to the second alternative way in which the
Director put his case on confidentiality.

The defendant's solicitor (Mr Campbell-Williams) gave evidence. He said that it had "momentarily" crossed his mind that the document had been sent to him accidentally, but that he had not put it as a "serious possibility". He nevertheless thought it appropriate to seek the view of counsel as to whether the circumstances in which he received it gave rise to any obligations of confidence. Counsel for the Director did not seek to have him disclose the nature of the advice which he had received. When Mr Campbell-Williams gave the document more leisurely consideration, he said, he had likened it to the practice of openness to which he was accustomed in the Construction List, the area in which he mainly practised, and he had seen it as paying him "the courtesy of a reasoned debate" in relation to the application which had been made. He thought that the fact that it had been sent to him with a copy of the original letter received the day before indicated that it should have been sent with the original. He believed that the absence of two pages from the document resulted from the fact that they disclosed something sensitive which was being denied to him. It did not occur to him, he said, to telephone anyone in the Director's Office to ask whether it had been sent to him inadvertently.
When asked whether he would have wished to return the document if he had been aware that it had been sent inadvertently, Mr Campbell-Williams paused for a substantial period before deflecting the question with an assertion that he felt that it had not been sent to him inadvertently; he thought that it had been intended to send it to him.

In the circumstances to which reference will be made later in this judgment, it is unnecessary for me to make any specific findings as to Mr Campbell-
Williams' reaction to his receipt of the document, although I should say that, in my view, his initial action of seeking advice from counsel is more consistent with a belief on his part that the document may well have been sent to him in error, and that his subsequently perceived comparison to what happens in the Construction List is more consistent with reconstruction (and perhaps justification) on his part. So far as the claim for relief based upon the equitable obligation of confidence is concerned, it is sufficient to say that the urgent fax which he received on 6 May unequivocally made him aware of the fact that it had been sent to him inadvertently. It was not suggested otherwise; nor could it be.

I am satisfied that the Director has made out the elements of his claim that the defendant was under that obligation of confidence in relation to the document which his solicitor received. The facts as I have found them fall directly within the principle stated by Gaudron J in Johns versus Australian
Securities Commission which I earlier quoted. They also satisfy the definition stated by Megarry J in Coco versus AN Clark (Engineers) Ltd which I also earlier quoted. The defendant nevertheless maintained his opposition to relief being granted to the Director upon this basis because, it was submitted, once the document had been sent to his solicitor (even inadvertently), it had lost its confidentiality as the legal professional privilege which had attached to the document had been waived.

I do not accept that the confidentiality of the document in question depended upon the continued existence of the privilege, or that the defendant was released from his equitable obligation of confidence even if the privilege had been inadvertently lost. That equitable obligation and the doctrine of legal professional privilege overlap - privilege necessarily depends upon the confidential nature of the communication in question - but they are nevertheless distinct one from the other.[19] The obligation of confidence in the present case arose out of the relationship between Mr Glasgow and Ms
Willans which resulted from the terms of their respective employments with the
Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions, not out of the legal professional privilege which existed concerning the document itself. In my view, legal professional privilege is but one category in which that equitable obligation of confidence arises, so that any loss of the privilege does not automatically destroy that obligation where it has arisen independently of the privilege, as it has in the present case. But, as I am in any event satisfied that that privilege had not been lost by way of waiver, it is unnecessary to pursue that issue further. To the issue of privilege I now turn.

An issue arises at the outset as to which principles are applicable to a claim of privilege in the circumstances of this case. The [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) is expressed to be applicable only to evidence sought to be adduced in court; it is not expressed to be applicable to the rights and obligations of the parties where the issue arises other than in that situation. The provisions of the
Supreme Court Rules which incorporate the principles stated in the Act to discovery and interrogatories[20] do not assist in the circumstances of the present case, in that neither the prosecution itself nor the committal proceedings in the Local Court are civil proceedings to which either the Act or the Rules applied. Nor does this claim of privilege necessarily relate to the committal proceedings. It largely arises independently of any judicial or quasi-judicial proceedings. It arises because the Director was advised by a solicitor within his office in relation to the exercise of his statutory functions. It also arises because the document in question has noted on it the
Director's instructions as to the future conduct of the prosecution and the committal proceedings (which may fairly be described as quasi-judicial proceedings), but the principal emphasis has been placed upon the first of those two bases.

In Telstra Corp Ltd versus Australis Media Holdings Pty Ltd,21 McLelland CJ in
Eq held that the principles as to legal professional privilege stated in the [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) - where it is called "client legal privilege" - should be treated as applying, not directly but derivatively, to any claim of privilege made in proceedings ancillary to such civil proceedings such as the right to inspect documents produced to the Court in answer to a subpoena or a notice to produce.[22]
Although the privilege is now accepted as existing independently of judicial or quasi-judicial proceedings,[23] historically it emerged from the adducing of evidence at the trial. It was this fact which persuaded McLelland CJ in Eq to reach the decision which he did. He thought that it would be anomalous, conducive to confusion and disorder in the preparations for and conduct of proceedings, and verging on the absurd, if the principles upon which the privilege operates for the adducing of evidence in court were to differ from those applicable to the ancillary processes.[24] I entirely agree with that decision.

The same considerations apply also, in my view, to any privilege claimed to arise independently of judicial or quasi-judicial proceedings, as it largely does in the present case. It is not necessary in the present case to consider whether or not that view is correct.[25] Although the law of legal professional privilege - or client legal privilege as I should call it for the purposes of this part of my judgment - has been altered in some respects by
Div 1 of [Pt .10](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/index.html#p3.10) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), the differences in the law to which my attention has been drawn do not, if applied to the present case, produce any different result to that produced by the common law. Three main alterations were drawn to my attention. Obviously there will be others discovered when the legal profession has come to understand fully the interaction between the various provisions in the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/),[26] but I can only deal with those alterations which were discussed before me.

The first alteration was the replacement by [ss ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s118.html)-[119](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s119.html) of the sole purpose test, which was first perceived by the High Court in
Grant versus Downs,27 with the dominant purpose test which had existed earlier and which was preferred by the House of Lords in the later decision of Waugh v British Railways Board.28 It was expressly conceded in the present case that the document which was sent to the defendant's solicitor was the subject of either client legal privilege or legal professional privilege up to the time when it was so sent. Counsel for the defendant in fact described the document sent to his client's solicitor as "clearly privileged". The concession constituted an acknowledgment that: the document as prepared by Mr Glasgow was brought into existence solely for the purpose of giving legal advice to the Director (which was thus also his dominant purpose); the notes were endorsed on the document by the Director solely for use by the prosecution in the committal proceedings (which was thus also his dominant purpose); and the copy of the document made by Ms Willans was also solely for use by the prosecution in the committal proceedings.

That concession was correctly made. It accords with my own view of the evidence.

The second alteration discussed was the overriding by [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s123.html) of the Act of the decision of the High Court in Carter versus Managing Partner,
Northmore Hale Davy and Leake,[29] so that the privilege which the common law had retained even as against a defendant to a criminal proceeding is now lost. The communication which such a defendant wishes to use must, of course, be relevant to the criminal proceedings in which he is the defendant and, although the document in question here was said to be relevant to the application to this Court to stay the committal proceedings (to which reference was made earlier), there is nothing in the document which could assist the defendant in the present case in his conduct of a trial in the event that he is committed. It was conceded that it would not be admissible in any such trial. That that is so is again acknowledged by the concession referred to in the last paragraph. It was also conceded that the application to this Court for a stay did not itself fall within the [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s3.html) definition of a criminal proceeding; if the document otherwise remains privileged, [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s123.html) would not permit the defendant to adduce it in evidence in that application.

The third matter which it has been suggested may have been altered by the [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) is the nature of what constitutes a waiver of the privilege. At common law, the prevailing line of authority is that an inadvertent disclosure of a privileged document does not necessarily constitute a waiver by which the privilege is lost. In Great Atlantic Insurance Co versus Home Insurance Co,30 in which a partial disclosure of a privileged document was made during the course of the trial, the Court of Appeal accepted that remedial action was available in certain circumstances to cure a disclosure made by mistake when it had been made before the trial.

In English and American Insurance Co Ltd versus Herbert Smith & Co,31 a bundle of papers were returned by the clerk of the barrister for one party by mistake to the solicitors for the other party, who inspected and copied them before passing them on to the other solicitors. The documents included the instructions to counsel, his advice to the solicitors and the statements of that party's witnesses. It was a matter in the Commercial Court. Sir Nicolas
Browne-Wilkinson V-C held that the documents nevertheless retained their confidentiality, and orders were made requiring the copies made of the documents to be delivered up and restraining any use of them in the proceedings. His Lordship said:[32] "Legal professional privilege is an important safeguard of a man's legal rights. It is the basis upon which he and his advisers are free to speak as to matters in issue in litigation and otherwise without fear that it will subsequently be used against him. In my judgment, it is most undesirable if the security which is the basis of that freedom is to be prejudiced by mischances which are of everyday occurrence leading to documents which have escaped being used by the other side." 
I agree entirely. The apparent and long discussed tension between the decisions in Lord Ashburton versus Pape[33] and in Calcraft versus Guest[34] was resolved upon the basis that relief would be granted where the documents which should not have been disclosed had not been relevantly used by the party to whom that disclosure had been made. The Vice-Chancellor remarked[35] that that had been put beyond doubt by the decision of the Court of Appeal in Goddard v Nationwide Building Society.36 
In Goddard, a solicitor (who had acted for both parties to a real property transaction which was subsequently the subject of litigation between them) sent to the defendant a copy of his file note of the information which he had given to the plaintiff prior to the completion of the transaction. The defendant pleaded the substance of the contents of the note in his Defence. It was held that, in the circumstances in which the file note was made, the privilege attaching to it belonged exclusively to the plaintiff. Orders were made requiring the defendant to deliver up the document and restraining him from using it. Only two lord justices heard the appeal: May & Nourse LJJ.
Each gave a judgment reaching the same result, but it is the judgment of
Nourse LJ to which reference has usually been made.

Nourse LJ made a number of general observations in relation to the case where the communication in question is both confidential and privileged and where that privilege has not been waived.[37] First, it is crucial that the holder of the privilege seek relief before the party to whom the confidential communication was disclosed has adduced it in evidence or otherwise relied on it at trial. Secondly, this equitable jurisdiction can prevail over the rules of evidence relating to privilege. Thirdly, the right of the party seeking equitable relief "does not in any way depend on the conduct of the third party into whose possession the record of the confidential communication has come".
Nourse LJ went on to say: "This view seems to give effect to the general rule that equity gives relief against all the world, including the innocent, save only a bona fide purchaser for value without notice. It is directly in point in the present case and our decision necessarily affirms it." 
Fourthly, once the equitable jurisdiction employed in Lord Ashburton v
Pape is available, there is no discretion to refuse to exercise it according to any views formed as to the materiality of the communication or the justice of admitting or excluding it or like considerations. He went on to say: "The injunction is granted in aid of the privilege which, unless and until it is waived, is absolute. In saying this, I do not intend to suggest that there may not be cases where an injunction can properly be refused on general principles affecting the grant of a discretionary remedy, for example on the ground of inordinate delay." 
Fifthly, even if that equitable jurisdiction can no longer apply, public policy (rather than the exercise of discretion) may nevertheless preclude a party who has acted improperly in the proceedings from using the communication. Finally, there should be no distinction in the exercise of the equitable jurisdiction in relation to civil and criminal proceedings.

In Guinness Peat Properties Ltd versus Fitzroy Robinson Partnership,38 a case involving the discovery of documents, the Court of Appeal made the point that the privilege may be lost by an inadvertent disclosure but that the courts nevertheless had power to intervene for the protection of the party making the mistake where the disclosure was procured by fraud or where the other party realises that he has been permitted to see the document only by reason of obvious mistake. In Hooker Corporation Ltd versus Darling Harbour Authority,39 another case involving the discovery of documents, Rogers J said that an unintentional disclosure will not necessarily amount to a waiver, although he said that a further question would arise as to whether it was fair in all the circumstances of the case to allow the claim for privilege to be maintained.
This was a reference to "waiver by imputation", an issue to which I will return. In Key International Drilling Company Ltd versus TNT Bulk Ships
Operations Pty Ltd,40 yet another case involving the discovery of documents, a letter from a party to his solicitor accompanying documents to be discovered and commenting upon them was inadvertently included with the documents delivered to an opposing party for inspection. Kennedy J,[41] upholding the claim for privilege notwithstanding the inadvertent disclosure, followed the decision of Rogers J in Hooker Corporation Ltd versus Darling Harbour
Authority.

The reference to implied waiver made by Rogers J was to the statement by Mason & Brennan JJ in AG (NT) versus Maurice,42 that a party may lose the privilege through a waiver by imputation, which they defined as occurring: "... when, by reason of some conduct on the privilege holder's part, it becomes unfair to maintain the privilege." 
This doctrine of implied (or imputed) waiver was more recently examined by the
High Court in Goldberg versus Ng.43 Once again, it was held that, in considering whether there has been an imputed waiver of legal professional privilege, the governing consideration is whether fairness requires that the privilege should cease irrespective of the intention of the holder of the privilege.[44] If, for example, the holder of the privilege has used the privileged material in such a way that it would be unfair for him to assert the privilege, he will be held to have waived it. Ordinarily, the conduct of the holder of the privilege will be deliberate, and it will involve or relate to a limited actual or purported disclosure of the privileged material.[45] It was conceded in the present case that no question of implied or imputed waiver of that type arises.
 [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s122.html) of the Act deals with what the common law calls waiver. Subsection (2) provides that evidence of a communication for which privilege is claimed may be given if the client has "knowingly and voluntarily disclosed" to another person the substance of the evidence and where that disclosure was not made in the course of making a confidential communication or preparing a confidential document or in various other circumstances. It is conceded that none of those other circumstances applies to the circumstances of this case. The provisions of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s122.html) were considered by Rolfe J in Ampolex Ltd versus Perpetual Trustee Co (Canberra)
Ltd.46 As he had found that there had not been any disclosure at all of the privileged material, what Rolfe J went on to say was obiter, and it was somewhat tentative. His Honour said:[47] "I think the distinction is that the disclosure was made voluntarily, in the sense that it was not make by way of mistake, it being possible that a disclosure may be made 'knowingly' yet by way of mistake and, accordingly, perhaps not voluntarily." 
It is not necessary for me to take this issue further. I am satisfied that the document in question in the present case was sent to the defendant's solicitor inadvertently (or mistakenly) and not voluntarily. The result in the present case is the same whether under the common law or under the Act.

The place of implied (or imputed) waiver under the Act (if any) was not explored before me. I have assumed, without deciding, that it remains. In my view, the result is the same in the present case even if implied waiver is considered.

I turn then to the defendant's arguments that the privilege was nevertheless waived. It was accepted that the document had not been sent to the defendant's solicitor deliberately and that it was perhaps mistakenly sent. A distinction, however, was sought to be drawn between mere inadvertence and negligence in the disclosure, negligence (it was submitted) giving rise to either waiver or implied waiver. The negligence is laid at the door of Mr Glasgow, in that (it was argued) either that he did not make his instructions sufficiently clear to
Ms Willans or he failed to supervise her in relation to such sensitive or confidential documents. Reference was made to the distinction said to be drawn between mere inadvertence and negligence in the law of tort,[48] but even in the law of tort the terminology is regarded as inexact.[49] In my view, it is of even less assistance in relation to the question as to whether there has been a waiver of legal professional privilege.

I do not accept that Mr Glasgow was negligent. As I pointed out earlier, the only difference in the recollections of Mr Glasgow and Ms Willans as to those instructions relates to whether she was to send out that day the letters to the solicitors (which she thought were originals but which were in fact photostats on white paper). I have accepted her evidence that she did not believe that she had been instructed by Mr Glasgow to send the document in question with that letter. There was thus nothing in relation to Mr Glasgow's instructions which led to the document being disclosed. It was, to adopt the terms of the submission, mere inadvertence on the part of Ms Willans that the document was enclosed and thus disclosed. There was no negligence on Mr
Glasgow's part - or even inadvertence - so far as his instructions were concerned which led to the disclosure. Nor was he negligent in his supervision of Ms Willans. Granted that the document was obviously confidential and "clearly privileged", everyone (even a temporary employee) working for an organisation such as the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions would have understood the sensitivity of all documents handled there. But I do not accept that Mr Glasgow had a duty to go so far as checking what was in fact put in the envelopes by Ms Willans for posting.

That is not, however, the end of the matter. Counsel for the defendant argued that the privilege had nevertheless still been lost. Reference was made to the cases involving the discovery of documents, and it was submitted that the party claiming the privilege has an onus of explaining the inadvertence which led to the disclosure as being the pressure of time,[50] or the inordinate volume of the operation,[51] or some other "additional supervening factor to excuse the mistake". The discovery process, however, is a somewhat more deliberate one than what was involved here. A party's list of documents usually has to be verified on oath. It is an important interlocutory step in the proceedings, and special care is expected to be taken in relation to it.[52] It involves a deliberate selection of documents to be included. Even in relation to disclosure during the discovery process, a distinction has been drawn between a document which is inadvertently included with the documents delivered to the opposing party for inspection (when the privilege is kept)[53] and a document for which privilege was not claimed because it was not appreciated that it was privileged (when the privilege is lost).[54] In my opinion, the discovery cases have little to do with the situation with which I am concerned, where the document in question was inadvertently enclosed with a letter. I do not accept the submission that relief should be granted only where the inadvertence can be explained in the way suggested in the discovery cases.

Next, the defendant referred to the decision of Scott J in Webster versus James
Chapman & Co.55 His Lordship, relying upon the law relating to confidential information, said that, where there has been an inadvertent disclosure of a privileged document, there had to be a balance drawn between on the one hand the legitimate interests of the party by whom such disclosure was made in keeping the confidential information suppressed and on the other hand the legitimate interests of the party to whom it was disclosed in seeking to make use of the information.[56] Although accepting that no firm rules should be laid down as to how the balance should be struck, he did say this: "If the document was obviously confidential and had been obtained by a trick or by fraud, it is not difficult to see that the balance would be struck in favour of the party entitled to the confidential document. If the document had come into the possession of the other side not through trick or fraud but due to a mistake or carelessness on the part of the party entitled to the document or by his advisers, the balance will be very different from the balance in a fraud case.

Suppose a case where the privileged document has come into possession of the other side because of carelessness on the part of the party entitled to keep the document confidential and has been read by the other party, or by one of his legal advisers, without realising that a mistake has been made. In such a case the future conduct of the litigation by the other party would often be inhibited or made difficult were he to be required to undertake to shut out from his mind the contents of the document. It seems to me that it would be thoroughly unfair that the carelessness of one party should be allowed to put the other party at a disadvantage." 
The disadvantage suffered by the defendant in the present case was identified as being denied the use of the document in his application to this Court to stay the proceedings. That is not, of course, a disadvantage of the type contemplated by Scott J in the passage from his judgment which I have quoted.
I doubt whether his concluding reference to "a disadvantage" was intended to be to any disadvantage at all, whether or not it amounted to something which inhibited or distracted the party in the conduct of the relevant proceedings.
It is more likely to have been no more than a description of the situation to which he referred in the immediately preceding sentence - having to conduct the litigation under the weight of an undertaking to shut out of that party's mind the contents of the document mistakenly disclosed.

The judgment of Scott J in Webster versus James Chapman & Co has not remained unnoticed in subsequent cases.

In Derby & Co Ltd versus Weldon (No 8),57 Vinelott J (at first instance) noted that it had not been suggested in Webster that the privilege attaching to the document had been waived (as already stated, Scott J relied solely upon the law relating to confidential information), and that in
Goddard versus Nationwide Building Society Nourse LJ had said that the injunction is granted "in aid of the privilege which, unless and until it is waived, is absolute". Vinelott J disagreed with the view expressed by Scott J that this statement by Nourse LJ formed no part of the ratio decidendi of the decision of the Court of Appeal, and he interpreted it as meaning that, if the injunction is sought "in aid of legal professional privilege", no balancing act is called for.[58] This is a reference to the balancing exercise discussed by Scott J in the passage from his judgment which I have already quoted. On appeal, Dillon LJ (with whom the other members of the Court of
Appeal agreed) dismissed the submission that Vinelott J was in error in rejecting the balancing exercise which Scott J had said should be carried out, in this way:[59] "I see no reason why any such balancing exercise should be carried out. The court does not, so far as privileged documents are concerned, weigh the privilege and consider whether the privilege should outweigh the importance that the document should be before the court at the trial, or the importance that possession of the document and the ability to use it might have for the advocate; and, again, where the privilege is being restored because the inspection was obtained by fraud or by taking advantage of a known mistake, there is to my mind no logic at all in qualifying the restoration of the status quo by reference to the importance of the document. `You have taken advantage of an obvious mistake to obtain copies of documents; we will order you to return all the ones that are unimportant but you can keep the ones that are important' would be a nonsensical attitude for the court to adopt." 
There had been some disagreement between academics in the Law Quarterly Review as to the correctness of the earlier decision of the Court of Appeal in
Goddard versus Nationwide Building Society upon which reliance was placed in
Derby. One academic, agreeing with that decision, said:[60] "[It] confirms that the common law limits of the privilege do not confine equity. Equity goes further in protection of the privilege holder's information because it treats him as enjoying property in that information." 
Another academic, disagreeing with that statement and with the judgment in
Goddard generally, called the decision of Scott J in Webster in aid of his view.[61] The second academic did not have the benefit of the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Derby & Co Ltd versus Weldon (No 8) at the time when he wrote. So far as I have been able to discover, no further contributions to the debate have been published in the Review since judgment was given in that case.

Shortly after the decision of the Court of Appeal in Derby had been given (but well before it was reported), in Corporate Group Holdings Ltd v
Corporate Resources Group Ltd,62 Hillyer J (in the High Court of New
Zealand) followed Webster in relation to a claim of privilege, although he ultimately upheld the claim. In a subsequent case, National Insurance Co Ltd v Whirlybird Holdings Ltd,63 the NZ Court of Appeal said that, if the correctness of the judgment in Webster were in issue, it would be necessary to take account of what had been said both at first instance and on appeal in Derby & Co Ltd versus Weldon (No 8). As the document which had erroneously been disclosed on discovery in that case had not been read when the error was notified to the other party, no question of balancing arose in any event, but the Court of Appeal expressly quoted the judgment of Dillon LJ in Derby as stating the relevant principle.

In the meantime, in Hongkong Bank of Australia Ltd versus Murphy,64 another discovery case in which the plaintiff had inadvertently failed to claim privilege for a number of documents, Smith J held that only one of the documents was privileged, and that there had been no intentional waiver in relation to that document. In determining whether a waiver should nevertheless be implied in accordance with the test stated in AG (NT) versus Maurice, the judge referred to the example given by Scott J in Webster as illustrating one situation in which fairness required that the party who inadvertently disclosed the privileged document should bear the consequences of his mistake.[65] Although Smith J referred to Derby & Co Ltd versus Weldon (No ) in another context,[66] he did not consider the effect (if any) of that decision upon the need to carry out the balancing exercise which he did.
Ultimately, he upheld the privilege.

I have been referred to two other Australian decisions in which there is mention of the decision of Scott J in Webster: Copping versus ANZ McCaughan
Ltd[67] and Ulgera Gap Nominees Pty Ltd versus Elders Ltd.68 Although the decision of the Court of Appeal in Derby is also mentioned, the effect of that decision upon the correctness of what was said by Scott J appears not to have been considered. I have found a third (more recent) Australian decision for myself: Meltend Pty Ltd versus Restoration Clinics of Australia Pty Ltd.69
In that case, Goldberg J followed Derby, but he drew a distinction[70] between the balancing exercise which Scott J said should be undertaken and the considerations of fairness referred to in AG (NT) versus Maurice and in
Goldberg versus Ng.

In neither of those two decisions of the High Court is there any reference to either Webster or Derby. That is hardly surprising, because the context in which imputed or implied waiver is discussed by the High Court in both of them necessarily assumed that the holder of the privilege had deliberately disclosed the confidential communication in a limited way but without any intention of waiving the privilege, whereas the context in both
Webster and Derby is that the disclosure was inadvertently made. I do not intend to suggest that the imputed or implied waiver discussed in AG v Maurice and in Goldberg versus Ng is limited to deliberate although limited disclosures, but the very substantial distinction between a deliberate and an inadvertent disclosure of a privileged document raises the issue as to whether the consideration of fairness to which the two decisions of the High
Court refer are as easily applicable to the case of an inadvertent disclosure.
It may well be that the distinction which Goldberg J has drawn in Meltend is correct, although (with respect) the position can hardly be said to be clear.

In the present case, it is once more unnecessary for me to resolve the issue.
As I have already said, the document in question here was sent to the defendant's solicitor inadvertently (or mistakenly) and not voluntarily. There was therefore no disclosure within the meaning of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s122.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/). At common law, there was no intention to waive the privilege because it was disclosed inadvertently. I am satisfied that no waiver should be implied or imputed.
Even if the example given by Scott J in Webster is applicable in establishing an implied waiver (as the defendant contends), I am satisfied that - whatever Mr Campbell-Williams may or may not have believed when he received the document - the hypothetical reasonable solicitor would have realised that it had been sent to him by mistake.

Even if the person who received the privileged document asserts that he or she did not realise that it had been sent by mistake, the privilege is not lost if the hypothetical reasonable person with the qualities of the actual recipient would have so realised. That was decided by the UK Court of Appeal in Pizzey v Ford Motor Co Ltd.71 In that case, Mann LJ said: "If the mistake was evident to [the recipient] then the exception applies, but what of a case where it was not evident but would have been evident to a reasonable person with the qualities of the recipient? In this context the law ought not to give an advantage to obtusity and if the recipient ought to have realised that a mistake was evident then the exception applies. ... The critical question is thus whether a reasonable person with the qualities of [the recipient] would have realised that [the sender] had made a mistake. The relevant quality of [the recipient in that case] is that she is a solicitor.
The onus is upon [the party claiming privilege] to satisfy the court that a [hypothetical reasonable] solicitor, on receiving the letter of 13 May 1991 with its enclosures, ought to have realised that there had been a mistake." 
I accept that statement as correct.[72] The test which it provides is satisfied in the present case. I need not rely for that conclusion upon the fact that all of the other solicitors to whom the document had been sent realised that it had been sent in error. The document was, as it has been conceded, "clearly privileged" in nature on its face. The letter from the
Director with which it was enclosed made no reference to the document, directly or indirectly, and there was no notation that the letter was to be accompanied by any enclosure. The disclosure did not occur during the discovery process when a solicitor would ordinarily be entitled to assume that any document in his opponent's list of documents for which privilege was not claimed had been deliberately included in the list upon that basis. No such assumption could have been made in the circumstances of this disclosure.

There was therefore no waiver of the privilege, and the privilege was not lost. The Director's claim must accordingly succeed on both bases upon which it was made - the defendant's equitable obligation of confidence, and legal professional privilege.

After I had made the orders sought, the defendant produced to the Court the document which had been sent to his solicitor and fourteen copies of that document. They were all shredded in my presence.
 [1] [Director of Public Prosecutions Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/doppa1983343/), [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/doppa1983343/s6.html)  <case>; [(1993) 178 CLR 408] at -460.
 <case>; [(1984) 156 CLR 414] at 438.
 [4] See, for example, Fraser versus Evans [[1969] 1 QB 349] at 361;
Butler versus Board of Trade [[1971] Ch 680] at 690; Forster v Mountford & Rigby Ltd [(1976) 14 ALR 71] at 75; G v
Day [[1982] 1 NSWLR 24] at 35; Wheatley versus Bell [[1982] 2 NSWLR 544] at 550.
 [1969] 1 QB at 361.
 [6] (at 427).
 [7] Moorgate Tobacco Co Ltd versus Philip Morris Ltd [No 2] (at 437-438).
 [8] (at 474).
 [[1979] Ch 344] at 361.
 [[1969] RPC 41] at 47.
 [(1948) 65 RPC 203] at 215.
 [12] Moorgate Tobacco Co Ltd versus Philip Morris Ltd [No 2] (at 438).
 [13] Many of the cases are collected in AG (UK) versus Heinemann Publishers Pty
Ltd [(1987) 10 NSWLR 86] at 190.
 [14] (at 48).
 [15] "Equity: Doctrines and Remedies", Meagher Gummow & Lehane (3rd Edn, ), par 4110.
 [16] AG (UK) versus Heinemann Publishers Pty Ltd (at 190); AG versus Observer
Ltd [1990] 1 AC 109 at 256, 270, 282.
 <case>; [(1980) 147 CLR 39] at 50-57.
 [18] After I granted the relief sought by the Director in these proceedings,
Mr Kane's application for a stay was called, he produced no evidence and the application was dismissed.
 [19] Moorgate Tobacco Co Ltd versus Phillip Morris Ltd [No 2] (at 437-438);
Hartogen Energy Ltd versus Australian Gas Co Ltd [(1992) 109 ALR 177] at -186; Re Compass Airlines Pty Ltd [(1992) 109 ALR 119] at -135.
 [20] SCR [Pt ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/doppa1983343/index.html#p23) r 1(c); [Pt ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/doppa1983343/index.html#p24) r 6(3)(c).
 [(1997) 41 NSWLR 277] at 280.
 [22] See also Tallglen Pty Ltd versus TV Holdings Pty Ltd (Hunter J, 3 March , unreported) at 5; Sunstate Airlines (Qld) Pty Ltd versus First Chicago
Australia Securities Ltd (Giles CJ Comm D, 26 March 1997, unreported) at 3.
 [23] Baker versus Campbell [(1983) 153 CLR 52.] [24] Telstra (at 279).
 [25] See, for example, the contrary view expressed in "Litigation Evidence and Procedure" Aronson & Hunter (5th Edn, 1995) at 481.
 [26] cf Regina versus B D (CCA, 28 July 1997, unreported) at 18. Some are discussed in a later judgment of McLelland CJ in Eq in Telstra Corporation
Ltd versus Australis Media Holdings Pty Ltd <case>; [(1976) 135 CLR 674.] [[1980] AC 716.] [29] (1995) 183 CLR 121.
 [[1981] 1 WLR 529] at 537.
 (1987) 137 NLJ 148; [[1988] FSR 232.] As neither series of reports is widely available, a discussion of the case can be found in Hooker Corporation Ltd versus Darling Harbour Authority [(1987) 9 NSWLR ]
at 544 and in Derby & Co Ltd versus Weldon (No 8) [[1991] 1 WLR 73] at 81-82.
 [32] (at 149).
 [33] [[1913] 2 Ch 469.] [34] [[1898] 1 QB 759.] [35] (at 148).
 [[1987] QB 670] at 683.
 [37] (at 684-686).
 [[1987] 1 WLR 1027] at 1043-1046.
 [(1987) 9 NSWLR 538] at 541.
 [[1989] WAR 280.] [41] (at 284).
 [(1986) 161 CLR 481] at 487-488.
  <case>; [(1996) 185 CLR 83.] [44] (at 96-98, 109-110, 120-122).
 [45] (at 96).
 [(1996) 40 NSWLR 12.] [47] (at 22).
 [48] See, for example: Caswell versus Powell Duffryn Associated Colleries Ltd  <case>; [(1964) 110 CLR 24] at 37-38.
 [50] Hooker Corporation versus Darling Harbour Authority (at 541, 543).
 <case>; [573 F 2d 646](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=573%20F%202d%20646 "View LawCiteRecord" ) (1978) at 652.
 [52] See, for example, the remarks of Slade LJ in Guinness Peat Properties
Ltd versus Fitzroy Robinson Partnership (at 1044).
 [53] Key International Drilling Company Ltd versus TNT Bulk Ships Operations Pty
Ltd (at 248).
 [54] Meltend Pty Ltd versus Restoration Clinics of Australia Pty Ltd [(1997) ALR 391] at 402.
 [[1989] 3 All ER 939.] [56] (at 945).
 [[1991] 1 WLR 73] at 83-84 [58] Reliance was placed upon the judgment of Croom-Johnson LJ in The Aegis
Blaze [[1986] 1 Lloyds Rep 203] at .
 [59] [[1991] 1 WLR 73] at 99.
 [60] "The Influence of Equity Upon the Doctrine of Legal Professional
Privilege", NH Andrews [(1989) 105 LQR 608] at 609.
 [61] "Inadvertent Disclosure in Civil Proceedings", ALE Newbold [(1991) 107
LQR 99] at 123-124.
 [[1991] 1 NZLR 115] at 119-120.
  <case>; [[1993] 2 VR 419.] [65] (at 441).
 [66] (at 440).
 [67] (Supreme Court of South Australia (Full Court), 24 April 1995, unreported), per Matheson J at 24-25.
 (Supreme Court of South Australia (Perry J), 29 October 1996, unreported), at 6-10.
 [(1997) 145 ALR 391.] [70] (at 404).
 (26 February 1993, unreported). The judgment is briefly reported in "The
Times" of 8 March 1993, and a substantial passage from the judgment is quoted in IBM Corp versus Phoenix International (Computers) Ltd [[1995] 1 All ER ](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1995%5d%201%20All%20ER%20413 "View LawCiteRecord" ) at 422-423.
 [72] I acknowledge that Perry J expressed some doubt as to whether the test was so limited, in Ulgera Gap Nominees Pty Ltd versus Elders Ltd (at 13).
 * * * 
