

Nrma Ltd versus John Kerin Morgan T/as Allen Allen and Hemsley [1996] NSWSC 369 (26 August 1996) 
NRMA LTD & 2 ORS -V- JOHN KERIN MORGAN T/AS ALLEN ALLEN & HEMSLEY & 112 ORS /95 
Friday, 23 August 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMERCIAL DIVISION 
HUNTER J 
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: These are proceedings brought by NRMA Ltd (NRMA), NRMA Insurance Ltd (NRMA Insurance) and NRMA Holdings Ltd (NRMA Holdings) against the partners of Allen Allen & Hemsley (Allens) and the partners of Abbott Tout (Abbott Tout) arising out of the failure of a prospectus which contemplated the offering of approximately 1 million shares in NRMA Holdings to the members of NRMA and of NRMA Insurance together with a restructuring of the last two mentioned corporations. Allens and Abbott Tout were involved in varying degrees in advising the plaintiffs in relation to the proposal the subject of the prospectus.

The proposal was frustrated by a decision of Gummow J on 13 October 1994 that declared NRMA Holdings had engaged in conduct in contravention of the [Trade
Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth) in connection with the issue and distribution of the prospectus: a decision which was upheld by the Full Federal Court on 27 January 1995 (the Federal Court proceedings). It is further alleged that since those decisions the judgment of the High Court in Gambotto & Anor versus W.C.P. Ltd & Anor <case>; [(1994-1995) 182 CLR 432] exposes further deficiencies in the proposal as involving an invalid expropriation of members interests (the Gambotto issue).

In their respective defences, Allens and Abbott Tout have pleaded a failure by the plaintiffs' to mitigate their alleged damages, inter alia, by refusing to issue a supplementary prospectus. In reply, the plaintiffs deny that they failed to mitigate their losses, allege that no mitigation was possible in light of the decision in Gambotto and plead that: "the Plaintiffs received advice that they could not proceed by way of a supplementary prospectus and reasonably followed that advice.

Particulars (references in [ ] are to discovery numbers):- 
Opinion JD Heydon QC 13/3/95 [ACB 02 30] 
Report Minter Ellison 29/3/95 [ACB 02 43] 
Joint opinion J Garnsey QC, B. Camilleri 31/3/95 [GPJ 06 32] 
Opinion SEK Hulme QC 3/4/95 [MISC 03 2] 
Opinion SEK Hulme QC 3/4/95 [MISC 03 3] 
Letter Minter Ellison 3/4/95 [HC 93 25] " (par 8(c) of the Reply to the defence of the First Defendants) 
Those otherwise privileged documents (the reply documents) have been the subject of discovery and inspection in the proceedings. The proposal and the opposition to it attracted widespread commercial interest which spilled over into the print media, with articles appearing in the Australian Financial
Review and the Sydney Morning Herald. Objection was taken to the tender of this material which I admitted on a provisional basis pursuant to [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s57.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) (the Act), subject to the adducing of evidence of disclosure by the plaintiffs of the material appearing in the media publications. Except to the extent referred to in these reasons, that evidence was not forthcoming. However, as I indicated during the course of the hearing, the newspaper articles, in a limited way, had some relevance in identifying the subject matter of admissible correspondence.

The plaintiffs discovered to the defendants, inter alia, the following documents (the Buchanan affidavit material):
A letter dated 13 September 1995 to the Editor-in-Chief of the Sydney
Morning Herald (the Herald) from Helen Conway, the NRMA Group Secretary and
General Counsel, written on NRMA letterhead purporting to correct some "grossly inaccurate" passages in a Herald article entitled "Failed NRMA
Float: Director's $25m `liability' " (the Conway letter).
Letter dated 13 September 1995 to the Editor of the Herald from Sly & Weigall on behalf of "the directors of NRMA Holdings" .... also seeking correction of the article referred to in the Conway letter (the Sly &
Weigall letter).
A news release dated 13 September 1995 by Conway on behalf of NRMA criticising inaccuracies in the same Herald article (the news release).
Letter dated 14 September 1995 to Sly & Weigall from John Fairfax publications Pty Ltd in reply to the Sly & Weigall letter (the Herald reply).

The article which aroused so much activity was one appearing in the Herald publication of 13 September 1995. The relevant parts of that article were as follows: "NRMA directors who approved the float prospectus breached their duty to members, and may be liable for $25 million spent on the failed float, according to a confidential brief from solicitors retained by the board.

The Minter Ellison brief to a Melbourne QC, Mr Jeffrey Sher, raises the directors' liability when canvassing whether the NRMA's legal advisers and solicitors, Allen Allen and Hemsley and Abbott Tout, were negligent in their advice on the float.

Last week the NRMA board announced it would sue the two law firms "in light of the advice from Mr Jeffrey Sher QC". The firms have denied any inadequacy in their advice, and will defend any action against them.

The Minter Ellison brief to Mr Sher said it appeared the directors were liable for "aiding, abetting, counselling or procuring contraventions (of [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/)) by NRMA
Holdings, the Association and Insurance, or being knowingly concerned in, or party to those contraventions, or conspired with one another to effect the contravention".

It also appeared the directors had "breached their general law duty to provide members of the Association and Insurance with sufficient information to vote on the proposed resolutions to demutualise the companies", and that the directors "have breached their duty to disclose all matters within their knowledge which would enable the members to make a properly informed judgment" at an October 1994 meeting which was meant to endorse the proposal to turn the
NRMA into a publicly listed company.

The Minter Ellison brief said the directors were concerned that legal advice upon which they had relied was wrong, and as a result each of them may be liable for the expenses of the float. The brief referred to an earlier Minter
Ellison report, in which it expressed the opinion that in some instances the directors would not be found liable due to the wrong nature of the legal advice." 
The source of the Herald article is not identified, either within the article, or in any extrinsic material, although, having regard to the then current proceedings in the Federal Court instituted by a director of NRMA,
Richard James Talbot (Talbot) against the plaintiffs and the directors of NRMA
Holdings (the Talbot proceedings), one may not have to look far to identify that source.

The Conway letter expressed concern at the alleged inaccuracies in the
Herald article. The inaccuracies were identified in that letter and echoed in the news release as follows: "1. Minter Ellison have NOT advised with respect to the liability of any directors other than the five directors of NRMA Holdings Limited.
As far as the NRMA Holdings Limited directors are concerned, Minter
Ellison have advised that they would NOT be liable for the costs of the float.
On the basis of this advice, NRMA Limited and NRMA Insurance Limited resolved not to sue the NRMA Holdings Limited directors. This decision was made public in a statement on May 26, 1995." 
So far as is relevant the letter concluded with the following statement: "I should point out the advice of Minter Ellison is confidential and accordingly cannot be released nor the detail canvassed. The limited disclosure of the advice set out above is made on the basis that it is necessary to set the record straight." 
The Sly & Weigall letter is in a different category from that of the
Conway letter. Sly & Weigall were the solicitors for the directors of NRMA
Holdings and it was on their behalf that the Sly & Weigall letter was sent to the Herald. From the terms of that letter it seems that nobody in the
NRMA group was very happy with the Herald article, except, perhaps, Talbot.
The Sly & Weigall letter "strenuously" denied the accuracy of the thrust of the Herald article and, so far as is relevant to this application, pointed out that:
The Minter Ellison brief to Melbourne QC, Mr Jeffrey Sher does not state that our clients - breached their duty to members of the NRMA; or may be liable for $25M spent on the failed float.

The brief sets out Minter Ellison's opinion that - "the directors are liable for aiding, abetting, counselling or procuring" certain acts set out in the brief: and "the directors breached their general law duty to provide the members of the Association and Insurance with sufficient information to vote" on certain resolutions referred to in the brief.
The brief sets out certain entities and their directors (including our clients) are concerned they may have a liability in respect of certain expenditure incurred in respect of the restructure proposal.
The brief refers also to an earlier Report prepared by Minter Ellison and states that in a number of instances "the directors will not be found liable in proceedings as they relied upon legal advice".
The Minter Ellison Report in fact advised NRMA Association and NRMA
Insurance that no action should be taken against our clients or any other directors in respect of the various matters referred to in your story." 
The letter sought a correction in the following terms: "It has been drawn to out attention by the directors or NRMA Holdings Limited,
Mr Don Mackay, Mr Peter Jack, Mr Ray Kirby. Mr Ray Willing and Ms Marree
Callaghan that the article published in the SMH yesterday under the heading "Failed NRMA Float" was misleading and inaccurate.

The directors point out that they have no liability in respect of the failed float.

Minter Ellison, solicitors have in fact advised NRMA Association and NRMA
Insurance that any proceedings commenced against the directors in respect of the failed float are unlikely to succeed as the directors acted at all times on the basis of independent professional advice. Accordingly the Boards of
NRMA Association and NRMA Insurance have resolved that no action be taken against any directors in respect of the failed float.

Dissident NRMA director, Mr Richard Talbot is seeking leave in the Federal
Court of Australia to bring proceedings against the directors of NRMA Holdings in an attempt to establish their liability for the float costs. Those proceedings have not been heard and are being defended by the various NRMA entities against whom they have been brought." 
The plaintiffs also discovered in these proceedings an affidavit of Talbot sworn 11 September 1995 (the Talbot affidavit) which had been read in the
Talbot proceedings. For the main part, the Talbot affidavit attests to events concerning a meeting of directors of NRMA and NRMA Insurance, of which he was a director, on 5 September 1995. It appears that prior to the meeting, directors were provided with board papers which included an opinion of Mr J L
Sher QC dated 16 August 1995 (the Sher opinion). Tabled at the meeting by
Conway were four documents, namely: 
A letter dated 1 September 1995 from Allens to Conway (the Allens letter).

A facsimile dated 4 September 1995 from Talbot's solicitors to Conway (Talbot's facsimile), 
A facsimile dated 4 September 1995 from Jane Singleton (Singleton) a director of NRMA and NRMA Insurance to Conway and a co-director, Mark Burrows (the first Singleton facsimile), 
A facsimile dated 5 September 1995 from Singleton to Conway and Burrows (the second Singleton facsimile).
 (The Talbot affidavit annexures) 
Of those documents the only one of significance is the second Singleton facsimile which announced her inability to attend the board meeting of 5
September and in which she "set out some preliminary responses to the opinion of Mr J Sher QC". Those responses included the following: "1. I find the Sher opinion an astonishing document and would illustrate this by reference to one paragraph only, paragraph 93: `There is not the slightest doubt that AT were well aware of Heydon QC's reservations about the use of the word "free". I regard it as certain that
AA&H were also aware of these concerns. The report suggests that these concerns were not communicated to the Board and I gather that the statement of fact is based upon the instructions given to my instructing solicitors by
Board members when they were interviewed. If the fact be that these concerns were not communicated I find that surprising."
There are a number of other very material matters referred to in the Sher opinion, as to the course of the Share the Future proposal from early 1993 onwards, which I simply was unaware of until reading the Sher opinion.
The Sher opinion, on its face, is a detailed, complex, legally sophisticated and vitally important document. As a layperson, I have a number of issues which I wish to explore in conference with Mr Sher.
 ..................
Not only does the Sher opinion give rise to questions of legal action against the nominated legal advisors but also the Sher opinion - and the truly extraordinary facts revealed there in, give rise to the question of whether the retainer of Abbot Tout (sic) should be terminated forthwith. (Page ).
 ..................
As to the odium surrounding the NRMA, the Sher opinion makes plain for all to see who bears responsibility for the parlous situation the NRMA finds itself in today. Again, to put forward continuing the odium as a reason for
NOT proceeding against the legal advisors its to totally ignore how the present situation, despite the independent directors, best efforts to the contrary came into being." 
The Talbot affidavit testifies to discussion that took place at the board meeting between Conway, himself and other directors. Included in that discussion were the following remarks: 
Michael Eason stated that in his opinion there was "little alternative but to pursue a legal action based on the strength of Sher's advice".

Talbot takes a point of order with his chairman in the following terms: "You are out of order as you are involved in the matter as stated in the
Minter's advice, the Sher opinion and my resolution".

Conway stated that: "the opinion of Sher is very clear as to damages. Damages would run into millions and millions".

The meeting closed with a resolution of directors in the following terms: "Having considered the opinion of Mr J Sher QC, and after a lengthy discussion
IT WAS RESOLVED:
To commence court proceedings for the recovery of damages against Abbott
Tout and Allen, Allen & Hemsley in respect of legal advice provided by those firms in relation to the 1994 NRMA "Share the Future" proposal;
To establish a committee of the Board pursuant to Article 148(a) of the company's Articles of Association to be known as the "Share the Future Legal
Advisers Litigation Committee", comprising Mr MDI Burrows and Dame Leonie
Kramer and having full and sole delegated power of the Board to provide instructions in relation to the conduct and settlement of these proceedings.
That the committee further investigate the position of Mr JD Heydon QC and report back to the Board;
To authorise the Group Secretary & General Counsel as the sole person to comment publicly on behalf of the organisation in respect of all matters surrounding the proceedings." 
The resolution also delegated to Burrows and Dame Leonie Kramer the power to "provide instructions in relation to the conduct and settlement of these proceedings" and authorised Conway "as the sole person to comment publicly on behalf of the organisation in respect of the proceedings and all matters surrounding the proceedings".

The Talbot affidavit annexures were discovered by the plaintiffs in these proceedings. The Sher opinion was not discovered for inspection by the defendants.

On 23 July 1996 a subpoena for the production of documents relating to
Singleton's involvement in the proposal was served upon her by the solicitors for Allens. The documents produced in answer to the subpoena included a folder marked "privileged". In a letter on behalf of Singleton to Allens' solicitors, the documents so produced were described as "Subject to Legal Professional
Privilege" and were identified as including: 
Minter Ellison report dated 15 May 1995 (the second Minter report) 
The Sher opinion 
Minter's observations to Sher dated 2 June 1995 (Minter's observations) (the disputed documents) 
The privilege was claimed on the basis that the documents were "confidential communications that were created for the dominant purpose of a client obtaining legal advice". It is apparent that this choice of words was dictated by the provisions of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s118.html) of the Act which is in the following terms: "Evidence is not to be adduced if, on objection by a client, the court finds that adducing the evidence would result in disclosure of: a confidential communication made between the client and a lawyer; or a confidential communication made between 2 or more lawyers acting for the client; or the contents of a confidential documents (whether delivered or not) prepared by the client or lawyer; 
For the dominant purpose of the lawyer, or one or more of the lawyers, providing legal advice to the client." 
Indeed, it is contended on behalf of the plaintiffs that the issues on this application "are to be determined primarily by reference to [ss ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s118.html) and [122](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s122.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) ....".
While I do not agree with that description it is convenient to set out [s :](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s122.html) " (1) This Division does not prevent the adducing of evidence given with the consent of the client or party concerned.

Subject to subsection (5), this Division does not prevent the adducing of evidence if a client or party has knowingly and voluntarily disclosed to another person the substance of the evidence and the disclosure was not made: in the course of making a confidential communication or preparing a confidential document; or as a result of duress or deception; or under compulsion of law; or if the client or party is a body established by, or a person holding office under an Australian law - to the Minister, or the Minister of the State or Territory, administering the law, or the part of the law, under which the body is established or the office is held.

Subsection (2) does not apply to a disclosure by a person who was, at the time, an employee or agent of a client or party or of a lawyer unless the employee or agent was authorised to make the disclosure.

Subject to subsection (5), this division does not prevent the adducing of evidence if the substances of the evidence has been disclosed with the express or implied consent of the client or party to another person other than: 
A lawyer acting for the client or party; or if the client or party is a body established by, or a person holding an office under, an Australian law - the Minister, or the Minister of the State or Territory, administering the law, or the part of the law, under which the body is established or the office is held.

Subsections (2) and (4) do not apply to: a disclosure by a client to another person if the disclosure concerns a matter in relation to which the same lawyer is providing, or is to provide, professional legal services to both the client and the other person; or a disclosure to a person with whom the client or party had, at the time of the disclosure, a common interest relating to a proceeding or an anticipated or pending proceeding in an Australian court or a foreign court. " 
The application is that of Allens seeking access to the disputed documents.

In claiming privilege, Singleton did not identify the "client" the subject of the legal advice and she was not a party to Allens' application, they being the plaintiffs and Abbott Tout. This drew an inquiry from me of the parties as to whose privilege was said to attach to the disputed documents. It was stated from the bar table on behalf of the plaintiffs that the privilege was the privilege of the plaintiffs, they having sought and received the advices with which the disputed documents were concerned. I think it is necessary to qualify that statement, having inspected the disputed documents with the agreement of the parties. It is apparent that two areas of advice were involved in the disputed documents, namely, advice to NRMA and NRMA Insurance as to any entitlements they and NRMA Holdings and the plaintiffs' directors may have against the defendants and advice to NRMA and NRMA Insurance concerning any possible liability to them of the directors of NRMA Holdings relating to the proposal. Accordingly, NRMA and NRMA Insurance and arguably
NRMA Holdings and the directors of the plaintiffs are the parties by whom privilege may be claimed in respect of the Sher opinion and Minter's observations and the privilege attaching to the second Minter report is that of NRMA and NRMA Insurance.

The basis of the claim of the applicants falls into two areas:
The extent to which the plaintiffs' reliance upon the reply documents exposes the plaintiffs to an obligation to discover and permit inspection of any advices related to the reply documents, and
The extent to which there has been a waiver of privilege by disclosure in relation to any of the disputed documents.

In examining both questions I have no occasion to consider whether one has to apply in this situation the sole purpose test of Grant versus Downs <case>; [(1976) 135 CLR 674] or the dominant purpose test of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s118.html) of the Act. On any view of the question of legal professional privilege the disputed documents are privileged, subject to the resolution of the matters raised on this application.

It has not been argued that this application has been affected by the gazetting on 19 July 1996 of amendment no. 303 of the Supreme Court Rules, which, inter alia, brings the process of production of documents on discovery and on notice to produce in line with the concept of privilege in Pt .10 of the Act. (That amendment is subject to further amendment to be gazetted on 23 August 1996).

To that extent, I think that the difficulties confronting the court in Trade
Practices Commission versus Port Adelaide Wool Co Pty Ltd & Anor [(1995) 32
ALR 645](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281995%29%2032%20ALR%20645 "View LawCiteRecord" ) will be avoided in the future in this Court.

However, in considering the effect of the plaintiffs' use of the reply documents, it may be necessary to have regard to <case> of the Act which is in the following terms: "If, because of the application of section 121, 122, 123, 124 or 125, this
Division does not prevent the adducing of evidence of a communication or the contents of a document, those sections do not prevent the adducing of evidence of another communication or document if it is reasonably necessary to enable a proper understanding of the communication or document." 
I think it is necessary to isolate the issue to which the reply documents relate. In my opinion, the issue is a narrow one, namely, whether the plaintiffs failed to mitigate their alleged loss, by the failure to issue a supplementary prospectus and, in this respect, failed to act reasonably on legal advice that the defects in the prospectus as enumerated in the Federal
Court proceedings could have been cured in a supplementary prospectus.

Whether the effect of the plaintiffs' reliance on the reply documents is viewed in the context of <case> of the Act, or in accordance with the principles of Attorney-General (NT) versus Maurice & Ors <case>; [(1986) 161 CLR 475] leads to no different conclusion. Given the limited issue to which the reply documents relate, there is nothing in the disputed documents in my opinion that warrants comment other than as set out in cl 35 of the second Minter report. Whether the test to be applied is that found in <case> of the Act, or whether one applies the principles of Maurice, the content of cl does not warrant disclosure of the second Minter report.

The principal authority is that of Maurice where the question was considered in the judgment of Gibbs CJ at 481 et seq as follows: "It is not difficult to see that where a document deals with a single subject- matter it would be unfair to allow a party to use part of the document and claim privilege as to the remainder. So it has been held that where cross- examining counsel asked a witness whether he had said certain things in a written statement, examining counsel was entitled to require the whole statement to be put into evidence: Burnell v. British Transport Commission . Similarly, where a party disclosed a document which contained part only of a memorandum which dealt with a single subject-matter, and then read the document to the judge in the course of opening the case, it was held that privilege was waived as to the whole memorandum: Great Atlantic Insurance Co.
v. Home Insurance Co. (42). In that case Templeman L.J. said: "... the rule that privilege relating to a document which deals with one subject matter cannot be waived as to part and asserted as to the remainder is based on the possibility that any use of a part of a document may be unfair or misleading, that the party who possesses the document is clearly not the person who can decide whether a partial disclosure is misleading or not, nor can the judge decide without hearing argument, not can he hear argument unless the document is disclosed as a whole to the other side. Once disclosure has taken place by introducing part of the document into evidence or using it in court it cannot be erased." 
The same test must be applied in deciding whether the use in legal proceedings of one document impliedly waives privilege in associated material. In Nea
Karteria Maritime Co. Ltd. v. Atlantic & Great Lakes Steamship
Corporation [No. 2] (43) Mustill J. dealt with this question and suggested the following test: "... where a party is deploying in court material which would otherwise be privileged, the opposite party and the court must have an opportunity of satisfying themselves that what the party has chosen to release from privilege represents the whole of the material relevant to the issue in question. To allow an individual item to be plucked out of context would be to risk injustice through its real weight or meaning being misunderstood." 
In General Accident Corporation v. Tanter (44), Hobhouse J. considered that in this passage Mustill J. used the words "deploying in court" in a strict sense, as referring to what is in evidence. After carefully reviewing the authorities, Hobhouse J. held that it was only where privileged material was adduced in evidence by the party to whom privilege attached that the waiver extended to related material. He said (45) that "the underlying principle is one of fairness in the conduct of the trial and does not go further than that". In the United States it appears that so strict a view has not been taken. In United States v. Cote (46) it was held that a taxpayer by filing income tax returns waived privilege in the working papers used in preparing the returns. In the United States, also, the principle that there is a waiver if fairness requires it appears to be well accepted: Duplan Corporation v.
Deering Milliken Inc. (47); Weil v. Investment/Indicators, Research and
Management Inc. (48).

If Hobhouse J. was correct in saying that there is no waiver of associated material until that material is adduced in evidence it follows in the present case that privilege in the source material has not been waived. In my opinion however the rule is not so inflexible; the question is whether the disclosure or use of material that has been made renders it unfair to uphold the privilege in the associated material, and although the question whether material that has been disclosed has been used in evidence is relevant, it is not decisive." (At 481-483) 
Similar principles were expressed by Mason and Brennan JJ as they then were at et seq.

Deane J expressed the principle in the following terms: "Waiver of legal professional privilege by imputation or implication of law is based on notions of fairness. It occurs in circumstances where a person has used privileged material in such a way that it would be unfair for him to assert that legal professional privilege rendered him immune from procedure pursuant to which he would otherwise be compellable to produce or allow access to the material which he has elected to use to his own advantage. Thus, ordinary notions of fairness require that an assertion of the effect of privileged material or disclosure of part of its contents in the course of proceedings before a court or quasi-judicial tribunal be treated as a waiver of any right to resist scrutiny of the propriety of the use he has made of the material by reliance upon legal professional privilege." (at 492 - 493) 
In Benecke versus National Australia Bank (1994 - [1995) 35 NSWLR 110] at 111
Gleeson CJ after referring to Grant expressed the requirement of disclosure of otherwise privileged material as follows: " In Grant versus Downs <case>; [(1976) 135 CLR 674] and Baker versus Campbell 91983) [153 CLR 52], the High Court considered the nature and extent of this privilege, and the considerations of public policy upon which it is based.

The rule that prevents an unauthorised disclosure of confidential communications between one client and a legal adviser, when such communications are for the purpose of obtaining legal advice, or for use in existing or anticipated litigation, constitutes a restriction upon the capacity of courts to ascertain the truth in certain circumstances. That restriction, however, is regarded as acceptable on the ground that it promotes the public interest, and assists the administration of justice, by facilitating the representation of clients by legal advisers. It does this by encouraging uninhibited communications. Thus, in cases where the rule operates, one aspect of the public interest is preferred against another (discovering the truth).

It would be inconsistent with the reason for the existence of the privilege to permit it to operate in the manner for which the appellant contends. But for her own actions, the privilege would have enabled the appellant to insist that nobody should be able to give evidence of the confidential communications between the appellant and her senior counsel about the settlement of the first proceedings, without the consent of the appellant. However, it did not enable the appellant to make public her version of those communications and, at the same time, to enforce silence on the part of others who disagreed with that version. The law permits the search for the truth in legal proceedings to yield, in certain circumstances, to the public interest in preserving the secrecy of communications between lawyer and client. In the present case, however, the appellant herself lifted the veil of secrecy by giving her version of the communications. Thereafter, there was no reason in principle why the pursuit of the truth should not take its course, or why the court should be inhibited in seeking to ascertain the true facts concerning those communications." 
In my opinion there is nothing in the disputed documents that impinges upon the "propriety of the use" made of the reply documents nor does any consideration of fairness call for the disclosure of the contents of the disputed documents in the Court's "pursuit of truth ... in seeking to ascertain the true facts concerning" the reply documents. Similarly, if considerations inherent in <case> of the Act were applied, there is nothing in the disputed documents which makes it "reasonably necessary" to disclose their contents "to enable a proper understanding" of the reply documents.

Different considerations arise in determining whether the privilege attaching to the disputed documents has been lost by waiver flowing from disclosure of their content. In respect of this issue, the plaintiffs rely upon the affidavit of Drew Scott James sworn 15 August 1996 (the James affidavit) to rebut any evidence of conscious waiver of privilege, particularly in relation to the Sher opinion. The James affidavit evidences the fact that he is the solicitor for the plaintiffs and had been instructed by them to maintain the protection of privilege in respect of the Sher opinion and that, in giving discovery of the Talbot affidavit and its annexures, he was unaware that, upon the admission into evidence of the Talbot affidavit in the Talbot proceedings, counsel for NRMA and NRMA Insurance had obtained orders of confidentiality in respect of pars 9 and 12 of the Talbot affidavit. Par 9 evidences the Talbot affidavit annexures and par 12 evidences the discussion at the board meeting of 5 September 1995, referred to earlier in these reasons. In discovering this material without claim for privilege James "did not believe that it could in any way amount to a waiver of privilege in respect of the (Sher) opinion ...." and he testified that, had he been aware of the claim for confidentiality made in respect of the Talbot affidavit in the Talbot proceedings he "would have claimed privilege over those same paragraphs and exhibits and not included those parts in the plaintiffs' discovery".

The order of confidentiality to which James referred is that made by Burchett
J on 6 October 1995 on the application of counsel for NRMA and NRMA Insurance.
The terms of that order were that pars 9 and 12 of the Talbot affidavit and exhibits A, B, C, D, and E and the exhibit marked RJT1 listed as confidential "be not disclosed to any person other than counsel and solicitors for the respective parties and the parties and at such time as may be directed by ...... the Court detached, if necessary, from the relevant affidavits and placed in a sealed envelope in the Court". Exhibit RJT1 was the board papers which contained the Sher opinion.

The exhibits referred to included the Talbot affidavit annexures.

James also evidenced a conversation by telephone with Buchanan on 1 August in which the urgency in having this application listed was described by
Buchanan as being driven by the need to have access to the disputed documents prior to a mediation, presumably amongst the parties to these proceedings, scheduled to take place on 26 August 1996. On the basis of that evidence, it was submitted that the application should fail as the production of the documents was sought "for a purpose not associated with there (sic) being tendered in evidence in the proceedings".

I consider Buchanan's explanation for the urgency of the application to be irrelevant to the issues I have to determine. It may be of some tactical benefit to the applicants to have access to the disputed documents, if they are so entitled to access, prior to the mediation. However, that desire should not have the effect of defeating the application unless the sole purpose of obtaining access to the disputed documents was for their use in the mediation.
There is no suggestion that production is sought on that limited basis.

Nor do I think that the evidence of James' belief as to the effect of giving discovery of the Talbot affidavit and its annexures in the circumstances described by him negates a waiver of privilege, if that is the effect of the disclosure in the absence of such a belief. It was submitted on behalf of the plaintiffs that the case was analogous to that of Hooker Corporation Ltd v
Darling Harbour Authority & Ors [(1987) 9 NSWLR 538.] That was a case of inadvertent or unintentional discovery of a privileged document. The evidence accepted by Rogers J was that the solicitor charged with the task of discovering relevant material, through sheer inadvertence, had not considered the discovered material in the context of legal professional privilege that may have attached to it. That is not the case here. Indeed, while the Talbot affidavit and the Talbot affidavit annexures were discovered without claim for privilege, James did not permit inspection of the Sher opinion on the basis that legal professional privilege attached to it.

This is a case of conscious production of material which, to put it neutrally, refers to privileged communications. I think that distinction is pertinent in considering the relevance of the intention of James in making conscious disclosure of the Talbot affidavit and its annexures. If one is considering the fairness of treating the privilege attaching to the disputed documents as waived, the fact that James believed it had not been waived by the disclosure of the Talbot affidavit and annexures should not, in my opinion, bear upon the question. When Maurice speaks about fairness, I do not think that the court had in mind unfairness to a litigant whose professional adviser had made a conscious decision in a belief as to its affect which was erroneous and not induced by any conduct of another party to the proceedings.
 
In approaching the question of waiver by disclosure, in the context of production of a document on subpoena to a third party, I think it is a misconception, as a matter of principle, to treat Pt 3.10 of the Act as codifying the factual circumstances in which waiver of legal professional privilege will be deemed to have taken place: although things may have changed with the July 1996 amendment to the Supreme Court Rules. While not expressed in terms of waiver, Pt 3.10 of the Act specifies the circumstances in which waiver of legal professional privilege will be regarded as having occurred at the point of considering the admission into evidence of a communication in respect of which legal professional privilege is claimed. Waind versus Hill and
National Employers' Mutual General Association Ltd [(1978) 1 NSWLR 372] and the numerous cases that have followed and applied Waind, recognise the different considerations confronting the Court when determining whether documents produced on subpoena should be made available for inspection by a party to proceedings, as distinct from considering whether those documents should be admitted into evidence.

Putting aside the July 1996 amendment to Pt 23 of the Supreme Court Rules, nothing has changed with the advent of the Act, except to the extent that a regime has been laid down to determine whether waiver has occurred when considering the admissibility of a communication in respect of which legal professional privilege is claimed. I am not persuaded that such a regime should be treated as governing the considerations of the court which is required to determine whether, in the factual circumstances confronting it, there has been a waiver of legal professional privilege in relation to documents produced on subpoena by a third party.

It may well be that the factual circumstances embraced in Pt 3.10 of the Act will encompass most, if not all, of the factual circumstances which may constitute waiver of legal professional privilege. However, in my opinion, except when considering admissibility of communications, to which Pt 3.10 of the Act applies, the court should be free to evaluate each factual circumstance as it presents itself in determining whether, upon the principles of fairness enunciated in Maurice or the considerations of inadvertence discussed in Hooker Corporation, waiver of legal professional privilege has taken place. It has never been the case that production and inspection of documents on subpoena is limited to admissible documents.

Whether there has been a waiver by disclosure in this case depends upon whether there was a conscious, authorised disclosure of the contents or portion of the contents of the disputed documents to such an extent as to justify, as a matter of fairness, the loss of legal professional privilege which would otherwise have attached to those documents or any parts of them.
Mere reference to the material is clearly insufficient. What will constitute waiver by disclosure will be a question of degree in most cases.

The disclosure relied upon by the applicants in relation to the discovery of the Talbot affidavit material falls into two segments:-
The exchange that took place at the board meeting of 5 September 1995 as set out in par 12 of the Talbot affidavit, and
The Talbot affidavit annexures.

The first category principally concerns the Sher opinion and I think it would be a surprising result if discovery of that board room exchange constituted a waiver of privilege attaching to the Sher opinion. It could not be said, and I did not understand it to be argued, that there was any waiver of privilege in the disclosure of the Sher opinion to the various directors of NRMA and NRMA
Insurance (see Farrow Mortgage Services Pty Ltd (In Liq) versus Webb & Ors (New South Wales Court of Appeal, 5 July 1996, unreported)).

The Statements at board level are, essentially, expressions of opinion by
Conway and by individual directors as to certain aspects of the Sher opinion.

In my view there is little or nothing in the discovery of that material that could be reasonably regarded as waiver by disclosure of the contents of privileged communication such that considerations of fairness would require the production and inspection of the disputed documents by the applicants.

I think emphasis should be placed upon the context in which the discovered statements were made; namely, in the course of a lively exchange at a board meeting where expressions of antipathy amongst directors were not foreign to the exchanges. In my opinion, that fact and the fact that the exchanges rise very little above expressions of opinion as to a consequence of the Sher opinion, with a passing reference to the second Minter report or Minter's observations, do not warrant a conclusion that, by discovery of that material, there has been a waiver of privilege in respect of the disputed documents.

If one was considering whether there was a loss of privilege within the meaning of the Act, in particular <case>, the superficial nature of the statements and the context in which they were made remain an important element in approaching the question. S 122 is concerned with the knowing and voluntary disclosure, not of the fact of the subject legal advice, but of "the substance of the evidence" (emphasis added) constituting the privileged communication - Pt 3.10 being concerned with admissibility of evidence: the point being that, if one is looking at the nature of the disclosure in this case, what transpired at the board meeting was in the nature of passing reference to legal advice, in particular the Sher opinion. I think it is extracting too much from the concept of waiver as expressed in Pt 3.10 of the
Act to convert such statements into a disclosure of the "substance of the evidence" constituting the subject advice referred to in those statements.

In Ampolex versus Perpetual Trustee Co (Canberra) Ltd [(1996) 14 ACLC 977] Rolfe J had occasion to consider the operation of <case> of the Act. What is clear from that decision is that what amounts to a disclosure "will have to be considered in the light of the particular circumstances, the issues raised and the form of the disclosure .... each case has to be analysed having regard to the matter in issue, which will determine the extent to which the advice can be explored at the evidentiary level". Frequently, the dividing line between retained privilege and loss of privilege will be anything but distinct.

I note that in Ampolex Rolfe J took the view that the determination of whether there had been disclosure of the substance of the evidence was required to be made without recourse to the material said to be disclosed. I did not understand that observation to be essential to the reasoning of his
Honour and I would hesitate to regard the exercise as necessarily so constrained: particularly when the question is whether there has been a disclosure of the "evidence". If one is concerned with a question of admissibility under <case> of the Act, at some stage it will be necessary to have recourse to the material said to have been disclosed.

With the consent of all parties, I have had the advantage of inspecting the disputed documents and nothing that I have seen there would cause me to take a different view of the consequences of the disclosure relied upon in relation to the discovery of the statements of directors at the board meeting of 5
September 1995.

Turning to the second category, the only document that I think warrants close consideration is the second Singleton facsimile, the relevant aspects of which have been extracted in these reasons. As an exchange between a director and the corporation it does not amount to waiver of the privilege attaching to the
Sher opinion. As to the paragraphs number 2, 3, 5 and 7 there is nothing in that exchange, the discovery of which could reasonably, in my opinion, amount to a waiver of privilege. Par 1 of that facsimile is in a different category.
It purports to quote par 93 from the Sher opinion.

I think it should be emphasised that the quotation by Singleton of par 93 is by way of an illustration of her view that the Sher opinion was "an astonishing document". Moreover, the paragraph quoted is a mixture of assumed facts, observations, not necessarily of a legal content, and an expression of surprise by counsel should certain of the assumed facts proved to be incorrect. I regard none of that material as having any probative value in these proceedings outside of its consistency with any opinion of Sher that there was a good cause of action against the defendants on the facts in respect of which he was asked to advise. More to the point, I see little or nothing in the discovery of that material as warranting, by the application of any consideration of fairness, the conclusion that professional privilege had been waived in respect of the Sher opinion, except as to par 93.

In considering the question of waiver in relation to that paragraph in terms of <case> of the Act, I entertain little doubt that there has been a voluntary and conscious disclosure of the contents of par 93 of the Sher opinion by the discovery of the second Singleton facsimile. So far as that disclosure is concerned, I could not imagine the applicants seeking to tender the material in respect of which privilege is lost and, were they to do so, I think it would be rejected as having no probative value. I do not regard that disclosure of par 93 of the Sher opinion in the plaintiffs' discovery material as justifying the application of <case> of the Act so as to cause a loss of privilege in respect of the remainder of the Sher opinion to "enable the proper understanding" of par 93: assuming that <case> is capable of applying to the balance of a communication where part of it has lost the protection of legal professional privilege. In this respect I think the observations of
Kirby J in Ampolex Ltd versus Perpetual Trustee Co (Canberra) Ltd & Ors <case>; [(1996) 137 ALR 28] are in point.

In that case, Kirby J considered an application for a stay pending the hearing of an application for special leave to appeal to the High Court from orders of the New South Wales Court of Appeal dismissing an application by Ampolex Ltd for leave to appeal, and a motion, in effect, seeking a stay in respect of a decision of Rolfe J in which his Honour held that there had been a loss of privilege under <case> of the Act in relation to certain legal advice referred to in a Part B statement issued by Ampolex. In the course of refusing the application Kirby J made the following observations upon the ruling of Rolfe
J: "Ampolex stated that it had "legal advice supporting its position". Rolfe J concluded that this statement was, within <case>, disclosure of the "substance of the evidence". The disclosure suggested, to reasonable inference, that the legal advice supported Ampolex's stated position. Ampolex drew attention to the limits of "substance" suggested by such decisions as Derby & Co Ltd v
Weldon (No 10). I agree that a mere reference to the existence of legal advice would not amount to a waiver of its contents. Rolfe J appears to have acknowledged this distinction by later rulings to which I was taken during the course of argument. But at least in respect of the substance of the legal advice supporting Ampolex's assertion about the correct ratio, which is in contest here, it is strongly arguable that the public reference to the supporting legal advice, waived the privilege as to the precise content of the legal advice on that point. I cannot say that the ruling is attended by such doubt as to promise a substantial prospect of a grant of special leave to appeal to this court. On the contrary, on my present understanding of the facts and as a tentative view, the opinion expressed in the ruling seems arguably correct.
 ....................

I depart from this case by making clear what I said during argument. My understanding of what Rolfe J has done is that his Honour has admitted into evidence an envelope containing the subject legal advice but he has kept access to that exhibit under his control by requiring that the envelope remain sealed. Access to the legal advice therefore remains under his Honour's direction, and rightly so. The courts will protect a client's legal professional privilege to the full extent possible and subject, in this case, only to the extent of any waiver that is established. For all I know, the documents in the envelope contain matters going beyond the substance of the assertion in the Part B statement. As the judge of trial Rolfe J will doubtless be conscious of the need to protect any other confidences which are not the subject of waiver as [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s122.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) provides. I did not take the respondents to dispute his Honour's power to control access to the documents so as to reveal those parts which have been held to be covered by the waiver and to protect those parts which are not. Such determination can safely be left to Rolfe J to whom the proceedings shall now be returned." (Emphasis added) (At 34, 35) 
In my opinion, there is nothing in the disputed documents to warrant the disclosure of anything other than par 93 of the Sher opinion by reason of the disclosure of that paragraph in the plaintiffs' discovery.

The further matter to be considered is the Buchanan affidavit material. It is accepted that the advice referred to in this material is reference to the second Minter report and Minter's observations.

The Buchanan affidavit material I have identified as consisting of the Conway letter, the Sly & Weigall letter, the news release and the Herald reply.
In considering that material, I think the correct approach is to regard the relevant disclosure as consisting of its discovery and production by the plaintiffs for inspection in these proceedings and, independently of that, the disclosure represented by the Conway letter and the news release.

In my opinion, the Sly & Weigall letter is not a disclosure by any person entitled to assert privilege in relation to the second Minter report. It is a letter by the solicitors "for the directors of NRMA Holdings Ltd". Neither
NRMA Holdings nor its directors, as directors of NRMA Holdings, had a common or joint interest in the privilege attaching to the second Minter report. As stated earlier in these reasons, that was a report to NRMA and NRMA Insurance.
In the case of Minter's observations, the position is not so clear. I think the correct view is that the directors of NRMA Holdings, in their personal capacity, were not persons entitled to the benefit of privilege. Their possession of Minter's observations was only in their directors' capacity as `the mind' of NRMA Holdings.

There is no evidence that any disclosure of the second Minter report to Sly & Weigall was authorised by NRMA or NRMA Insurance. Exhibit C, a letter from NRMA to Talbot, suggests it was unauthorised. In the case of Minter's observations, disclosure has come through the directors of NRMA Holdings. If it is inferred that the disclosure was authorised by NRMA Holdings, on the view I have taken of the entitlement to privilege, NRMA Holdings could not have waived privilege without the consent of NRMA and NRMA Insurance whose interest in the subject privilege I regard as a joint interest. Consequently, disclosure in the case of the Sly & Weigall letter, is limited to its discovery by the plaintiffs in these proceedings.

The discovery of that material represents discovery of expressions of opinion by Sly & Weigall as to the defamatory nature of the subject Herald article: of the instructions of their clients and of denials that Minter's observations were as stated in the offending article. The letter then proceeds to set out certain matters said to be contained in Minter's observations and concludes with a statement that the second Minter report "in fact advised NRMA .... and NRMA Insurance that no action should be taken against" NRMA Holdings' directors. This last matter was the subject of a request by Sly & Weigall that it be included in a correction by the Herald. In my opinion, discovery of that letter should not be treated as a waiver of any legal professional privilege attaching to Minter's observations or the second Minter report except as to the particular matter so disclosed in the Sly & Weigall letter. That material, in my view, is irrelevant to the issues in these proceedings. Again the remarks of Kirby J in Ampolex are in point..

One wonders why the Buchanan material was discovered by the plaintiffs.
Statements of the directors of NRMA holdings as to their personal liability and their references to legal opinion rendered to third parties to support their position, on the face of it, would seem to have very little to do with the issues in these proceedings. Recourse to the second Minter report and to
Minter's observations only reinforces that view. If the question of disclosure is considered in the context of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s122.html) of the Act, no different conclusion emerges.

The Conway letter and news release should be seen in the context of NRMA attempting to correct perceived public misstatements concerning its affairs.
This nature of the disclosure by NRMA is given emphasis by Conway's statement to the Herald that "the advice of Minter Ellison is confidential and accordingly cannot be released nor the detail canvassed. The limited disclosure of the advice set out above is made on the basis that it is necessary to set the record straight".

In my opinion, it would be a curious state of affairs if a party to litigation was forced into public correction of allegedly misleading statements as to the effect of legal advice received by that party, that the disclosure necessary for such corrections should be viewed as a waiver of legal professional privilege of the whole of the privileged material. I have little difficulty in rejecting the proposition that the Conway letter with the attendant news release, or its discovery constituted a waiver of legal professional privilege in relation to the second Minter report or Minter's observations other than the disclosed opinion that "the NRMA Holdings directors ... would NOT be liable for the costs of the float". As in the case of the Sly & Weigall letter, recourse to the second Minter report and to Minter's observations leads to no different result. Furthermore I regard the disclosed opinion, as irrelevant to the issues in these proceedings, whether read in isolation, or in the context of the second Minter report or Minter's observations.

If one views the Conway letter and the news release within the framework of loss of privilege under the Act, the only material that falls within the category of disclosure of evidence of privileged material is in the paragraph in the Conway letter (repeated in the news release) which reads: "As far as the NRMA Holdings Ltd directors are concerned Minter Ellison have advised that they would NOT be liable for the cost of the float" 
Although no doubt NRMA and NRMA Insurance felt compelled to correct what they perceived to be an erroneous report by the Herald, I would not regard that form of compulsion as robbing the publication of that material of its voluntary nature. In any event, there was a conscious and voluntary disclosure in the plaintiffs' discovery in these proceedings.

While the statements above quoted may be treated as disclosure of the substance of the evidence of the opinion expressed in the second Minter report it does not follow that privilege is lost in respect of the whole of the communication containing that opinion. In my opinion, in the circumstances of this disclosure, loss of privilege in respect of the whole of the communication would not be warranted. Furthermore, the problem remains that the disclosed opinion is irrelevant to the issues in these proceedings. That would be so in my opinion, whether or not one had recourse to the second
Minter report or the Minter's observations in their entirety in considering the question of admissibility.

The applicants also place reliance on the conduct of NRMA and NRMA Insurance in the Talbot proceedings as evidence of further disclosure of the contents of the disputed documents.

The relevant portion of the transcript records counsel for NRMA and NRMA
Insurance referring to a possible claim against the directors of NRMA Holdings in the following terms: "The advice so far has been that there is not a claim worth pursuing ....." "if, as at present, advice is they do not have a claim then they do not want to have their funds, and time and energy of its staff tied up in litigation which they have been advised will fail" (Exhibit B) 
As I have stated advice received by NRMA or NRMA Insurance as to any right of action either of those corporations may have against the directors of NRMA
Holdings arising out of the misleading nature of the prospectus, on the face of it, is irrelevant to the issues in these proceedings. In my opinion, references to that advice by counsel for NRMA and NRMA Insurance in the context of debating the future conduct of the Talbot proceedings have limited consequences in these proceedings. I regard the statements as passing references to the subject advice as a justification for the course of litigation favoured by the NRMA and NRMA Insurance in the Talbot proceedings.
I place this disclosure in the same category as the disclosure contained in the Conway letter and the news release.

Accordingly, I am of the opinion that there has been no waiver of the legal professional privilege attaching to the disputed documents except as to par 93 of the Sher opinion the particular advice disclosed in par 2 of the Conway letter and repeated in the new release, and the particular matters set out in pars 3(a), (b) (where secondly occurring), 4, 5 and 6 of the Sly & Weigall letter.

I regard none of that material as relevant to these proceedings, nor do I regard the disclosure as warranting the loss of privilege in respect of the disputed documents beyond that so disclosed.

Further, there is in my opinion, nothing in the disputed documents which would occasion me to reach a different conclusion.

For those reasons, notwithstanding the disclosures to which I have referred, in the exercise of my discretion, I would not permit access to the disputed documents.

The application is dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
