

Smits versus Buckworth (No 2) Matter No 3869/96 [1997] NSWSC 562 (14 November )
 
Smits versus Buckworth (No 2) /96 November 1997 
Young J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division /96 - SMITS V BUCKWORTH (NO 2) 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: On 22 September 1997, I delivered reasons for judgment in this matter. 
When the short minutes were brought in, Mr Webb QC for the Attorney General, strongly submitted that a paragraph of my previous judgment should be deleted.
This paragraph was as follows:- " I am reinforced in this view by the decision of Barr, AJ in Action 
Australia Pty Ltd versus Frankel (No 2) (24 April 1995 unreported). That case also concerned Mr Buckworth as an assessor. The learned Judge in that case had to deal with a suggestion that the client's bringing of the proceedings were justified because it had acted on the rulings made by Mr
Buckworth. Mr Buckworth had in that case expressed the view that there was no bill of costs because the collection of documents submitted to him were not individually and collectively signed and that the documents were incapable of understanding and assessment as a bill of costs in the form presented. Barr,
AJ, ordering that the client pay indemnity costs, simply said, `I disagree with the two reasons put forward by Mr Buckworth in his letter and I think that his conclusion was wrong.' It seems that, despite this, the assessor is still adhering to his earlier views." 
Mr Webb QC's submission was that that paragraph was as wrong as wrong could be. He said that the further affidavit of Mr Buckworth now sworn in these proceedings shows that Mr Buckworth was unaware of the judgment of Barr, AJ in
Action Australia Pty Ltd versus Frankel (No 2) delivered on 24 April 1995 until he read my judgment. Accordingly, what Barr, AJ said in that case did not in any way affect his action nor could I infer from the fact that he had acted in the way described in my earlier judgment that he was continuing a course of conduct notwithstanding the judgment of a judge of this court. Furthermore, Mr
Webb QC said that, in any event, I had misread what Barr, AJ said on that occasion.

I suggested to Mr Webb QC that I could, by supplementary reasons, make a note to the effect that Mr Buckworth had not read the judgment and so the fact that he did not act in accordance with it could not be a criticism of his conduct.
Mr Webb QC said that was insufficient and he required the paragraph to be withdrawn.

Miss Dowling, for the plaintiffs, submitted that as what had been said had been said, and that as the request to delete part of the judgment was based upon further material filed afterwards, the paragraph should stand.

After hearing submissions, I reserved my decision because I considered that the application raised very serious issues.

For the purpose of these reasons, I am prepared to assume as follows:-
Mr Buckworth did not in fact become aware of Barr AJ's judgment until after I delivered my judgment on 22 September 1997.
Mr Buckworth never had any intention of acting as a costs assessor contrary to a decision of the court.

However, I consider that the following ought also to be said -
The judgment was actually referred to in correspondence between the parties before the matter came to my court (Mr Buckworth acknowledges this, but says that he thought it was a typographical error in reference to an earlier judgment of Barr, AJ in the same matter).
I do not think I misconstrued his Honour's judgment but it is possible that I did.
Up until Mr Buckworth filed his affidavit after delivery of my judgment I believe that the inferences I drew were available to me to draw.
As the paragraph says, the inference I drew only reinforced a view that I had already formed on other material. It is thus not essential for the purposes of the judgment.

Miss Dowling submits that once a judgment has been delivered, it should stand.
If it is erroneous, then there can be an appeal.

With respect, this submission is a little too simplistic. One can only appeal against orders, not against reasons. If the orders are impeccable, and they can be supported by any valid legal reasoning, whether that contained in the judgment or not, then an appeal will fail (assuming that the appropriate notice of contention has been filed in the Court of Appeal). Again, a person whose reputation is affected by the judgment and who is not a party has no right of appeal.

Mr Webb QC says that Mr Buckworth considers that his professional standing is prejudiced by the paragraph in question. With respect, I think that he is being over-sensitive about this because I did not intend to make, nor do I think that any fair-minded reader would consider that I made, any criticism of
Mr Buckworth in his professional capacity. However, Mr Webb QC, with firm politeness, says that he just does not accept that statement of mine and that
Mr Buckworth considers that he has been affected in his professional career.
There is not much point in going any further along this line apart from merely recording the two views.

The question that I thought was a very serious one was, what should happen where, before entry of judgment, a party considers that a judgment contains an error of fact or erroneously makes an imputation.

It is clear that if the judgment contains some plain error such as error in a mathematical calculation or error in a date, that the matter should be brought to the judge's attention so that it can be corrected. It is also plain that ordinarily, except by consent, if a party alleges that the judge has committed an error of fact, but it was open to the judge to reach that finding of fact on the evidence before him or her, the party is without a remedy. Is there any difference in a situation where a party, in particular a party who is a professional person, considers that the error of the judge may affect his or her professional reputation? 
Miss Dowling says the answer is simply "No". A party must be ready to put all the evidence before the judge, before the judge makes a decision, and if, because of the incomplete material, the judge draws available but wrong inferences, that is the end of the matter because there must be finality in litigation.

This sort of problem has come up before, but not in the present context. In
Mahon versus Air New Zealand Ltd [1984] AC 808, Mahon, J, then a Justice of the
High Court of New Zealand, as Royal Commissioner, found that Air New Zealand had taken part in a predetermined plan of deception involving an orchestrated litany of lies when his Royal Commission was investigating the Erebus air disaster. The airline applied for an order for judicial review because the
Royal Commissioner had ordered it to pay $150,000 towards the costs of the
Commission. The airline succeeded both before the Court of Appeal and in the
Privy Council on the basis of denial of natural justice. What would have happened had the Judge/Royal Commissioner not made an order for costs is an interesting matter for speculation. Probably Air New Zealand would not have been able to do anything about the decision. However, in the New Zealand Court of Appeal, reported as Re Erebus Royal Commission; Air New Zealand Ltd v
Mahon (No 2) [[1981] 1 NZLR 618], 653, three judges said that although findings of Royal Commissions are in the end only expressions of opinion and do not alter legal rights, "Nevertheless they may greatly influence public and Government opinion and have a devastating effect on personal reputations; and in our judgment these are the major reasons why in appropriate proceedings the Courts must be ready if necessary ... to ensure that they keep within the limits of their lawful powers and comply with any applicable rules of natural justice." 
The problem surfaced again in Campbell versus Mason Committee [1990] 2 NZLR
In that case, the Minister of Health appointed a Committee of Inquiry into the procedures of psychiatric hospitals after two people had been killed by a former psychiatric patient. The Committee was very critical of the plaintiffs in its report to the Minister. The plaintiffs sought declarations that the adverse or critical allegations, findings and statements in the report were invalid and orders prohibiting the publication of the report.

Robertson, J said at 582, "In the course of the submissions before me yesterday all counsel at times typified the passages complained of as being `critical of the plaintiffs', `prejudicial to the plaintiffs', `damning of the plaintiffs' and `damaging of their reputation'. It is important that I stress that those are not in themselves reasons for the Court to consider granting relief. When an area as controversial and as divisive as the subject of the
Committee's inquiry is scrutinised, it may well be that findings are and should be made which are damning, prejudicial and highly critical. The purpose of this proceeding is to ascertain whether such comments, conclusions or reports were made fairly ... . It would be unfortunate if there were to arise the misconception that the Courts will intervene to suppress a comment or finding simply because it is prejudicial or critical. The test is the quality of the procedure which was adopted in reaching that position not the nature of the assessment made." 
In both the New Zealand cases the scenario was that the Commission or
Committee had made its report and so, as the Court of Appeal said in the
Erebus case, was out of the reach of both prohibition and certiorari. The only remedy was an order for review under New Zealand administrative law statutes or a declaration. The present is a case where the order made as a result of the judgment has not yet been passed and entered. There is thus a wider power to reconsider.

In some cases, even if an order has been passed and entered, a judge may rectify his or her error. An instance is Hall versus Harris <case>; [(1900) 25 VLR 455.] In that case, on an order nisi for review, Hood, J had caused a request to be made to the magistrate who heard the original proceedings for further information. The magistrate replied by letter, but Hood, J misread the letter and made the order for review absolute. On the informant's counsel moving the judge to reconsider, Hood, J ordered that the order absolute be set aside on the ground that the mistake of the judge had misled counsel for the informant and induced him to refrain from arguing the main point in the case.
On appeal it was put by the defendant that as the order had been entered, it could not be altered. Counsel (Cussen) put at 457, "If the Court allowed this order to be set aside on the ground of accidental omission the principle might be extended to an erroneous conclusion upon a long series of facts. It might happen that a Judge of an inferior Court said `Upon closer examination of the facts I now say they point to another conclusion'." 
The Full Court said, at 460, that it was unnecessary to decide the point because the order should be made absolute for another reason, but stated "We should have hesitated long before we came to the conclusion that a Judge, under the circumstances in which our brother Hood found himself, having pronounced judgment, even although the order of the Court had been passed and entered, could not do what justice required by setting aside a judgment founded wholly upon the Judge's own error as to a fact and not upon any mistake in his deliberation." As far as my researches go, that case has never been judicially considered since it was decided. It was a hard case, and as the cliche goes, hard cases make bad law. I would consider myself that, if such a mistake did occur, the mistake would have to be dealt with in the Court of Appeal. Indeed, I said almost as much in the Black Garter case where it was alleged that I made a mistake as to the telephone number, which mistake was only discovered after the order was passed and entered; see Rahme v
Telstra Corporation Ltd (No 2) (19 July 1995 unreported).

However, in the instant case, the judgment has not yet resulted in a formal order which has been entered. In such circumstances the judge has far greater control. The question is when should this power be exercised? 
Probably the widest exercise of the power was by a County Court Judge in
Allen versus Ower <case>; [(1880) 6 VLR (L) 213.]
There, his Honour found a verdict for the plaintiff for 20 shillings. He was then told that the rules provided that where the verdict was under [sterling]10.0.0. there were no costs and as the plaintiff's costs were [sterling]25.0.0. the plaintiff would actually lose money by the verdict the judge had just given. The judge then said that he would find a verdict for [sterling]25.0.0. The Full Court of the Supreme Court of Victoria held that he was entitled to change his mind before the verdict was entered.

On two occasions in Victoria, a judge himself has become concerned after delivery of judgment because he has discovered an authority which was not cited to him by counsel and which might affect the decision. The instances are
Robertson versus Pitcher (Supreme Court of Victoria, Lowe, J - 15 February , unreported) and Foletta versus Merri Creek Quarry Pty Ltd <case>; [[1951] VLR 149], 154. In both cases the judge reopened the question.

In Driver versus Driver <case>; [[1950] SASR 8], a husband obtained a decree nisi for a divorce in 1930 but did not have the order drawn up or entered. He resumed cohabitation with his wife in 1934; they had three children and then they parted again in 1941. In , the husband applied to have the order made in 1930 passed and entered.
The Full Court of South Australia rescinded the decree nisi. It was obvious that they should have done so unless barred by some technical objection.
However, the court said that the power of reconsideration was not at large but could only be exercised judicially and on sufficient grounds.

The High Court considered the matter in Addison versus City Mutual Life Assurance
Society Ltd <case>; [(1933) 49 CLR 106.] In that case, the High Court had declared on 30 May 1932 that certain mortgages were void because of the Queensland Liquor Act 1912-1926. A judge, hearing a matter involving the same point on 4 July 1932, followed the
High Court and made the same order. Before his order was entered, amending legislation was passed to repeal the impediment and establish the validity of all securities retrospectively. The judge then, on the application of the mortgagee, reconsidered his judgment, vacated his order and gave judgment for the mortgagee. The mortgagor appealed to the High Court. At 112, five Justices of the High Court said that the course that the judge had taken was well within his discretion to adopt.

The High Court considered the matter again in Smith versus NSW Bar Association <case>; [(1992) 176 CLR 256.] At 265, four Justices commented on the then statement in Ritchie's Supreme Court
Practice at Vol 1 p 2855 that the power to review a judgment where an order has not been entered will not ordinarily be exercised to permit a general reopening. The judges said "As a general statement that is correct ... But it is a general statement only and, once a matter has been re-opened, the nature and extent of the review must depend on the error or omission which has led to that step being taken. Very little will be required in a case where, for example, all that is involved is a mathematical error in the calculation of some particular item of loss or damage. And, in the case of a factual error, the extent of the review will vary depending on whether the error goes to the heart of the matter or whether its significance is confined to some discrete subsidiary issue." 
The High Court considered the matter yet again in Autodesk Inc versus Dyason (No ) <case>; [(1993) 176 CLR 300.] At 301-2,
Mason, CJ said, "The exercise of the jurisdiction to reopen a judgment and to grant a rehearing is not confined to circumstances in which the applicant can show that, by accident and without fault on the applicant's part, he or she has not been heard. It is true that the jurisdiction is to be exercised with great caution, having regard to the importance of the public interest in the finality of litigation. ...
 "... The public interest in the finality of litigation will not preclude the exceptional step of reviewing or rehearing an issue when a court has good reason to consider that, in its earlier judgment, it has proceeded on a misapprehension as to the facts or the law ... . However, it must be emphasized that the jurisdiction is not to be exercised for the purpose of re- agitating arguments already considered by the Court; nor is it to be exercised simply because the party seeking a rehearing has failed to present the argument in all its aspects or as well as it might have been put. What must emerge, in order to enliven the exercise of the jurisdiction, is that the
Court has apparently proceeded according to some misapprehension of the facts or the relevant law and that this misapprehension cannot be attributed solely to the neglect or default of the party seeking the rehearing. The purpose of the jurisdiction is not to provide a backdoor method by which unsuccessful litigants can seek to re-argue their cases." 
Brennan, J at 308 also said the jurisdiction was to be exercised sparingly as did Dawson, J at 317. The High Court has continued to hold this line, the most recent decision being Nintendo Co Ltd versus Centronics Systems Pty Ltd (No 2) [(1994) 68 ALJR 918.] 
In Wentworth versus Rogers (No 9) [(1987) 8 NSWLR 388], 394,
Kirby, P giving the judgment of the Court of Appeal, said that the power to reopen an argument is to be exercised with great caution. If it were otherwise, wealthy litigants could exhaust the opponent by continuously denying the finality of the judgment.

There have been a series of cases in both the Privy Council and the High Court permitting a judgment of a final appellate court to be amended even after the order has been entered. Examples of these cases are Rae versus Sing (1839) 2
Moo Ind App 181, 215-7; <case>; [18
ER 269], 282 and
State Rail Authority of NSW versus Codelfa Construction Pty Ltd <case>; [(1982) 150 CLR 29], 38 and 45. The rule in such cases is that the jurisdiction is to be exercised with great caution. The cases rarely deal with a slightly different point and are of little assistance in the present case.

I will mention only two other Australian cases, both decided after the
Autodesk case, as further examples of how the jurisdiction is exercised.
In Hyster Australia Pty Ltd versus Anti-Dumping Authority (No 2) [(1992) 41
FCR 259](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281992%29%2041%20FCR%20259 "View LawCiteRecord" ), the losing party sought to add additional issues after judgment had been given on a point that was thought to deal with the whole case. Hill, J considered the relevant principles at 263, that is, the interests of the applicants in having the matter argued, prejudice to the respondents, and the public interest in the finality of justice. He also considered cases on amendments. Bearing all these matters in mind he considered that the case would have been run differently at an earlier stage had these issues been in the ring and considered he should not reopen the judgment.

In Australian Fisheries Management Authority versus PW Adams Pty Ltd [(1996) FCR 349]; [145 ALR 345], it was claimed that the Full Federal Court had proceeded under a misapprehension and erred in saying that the appellant had not claimed to have suffered prejudice when in fact it had and this error affected the outcome of the appeal. The order made by the trial judge and on appeal was that the question between the parties be reheard by an administrative tribunal. The Full Court at FCR [355, ALR 350], considered what was said in the Autodesk case and other cases and followed the summary of the law by Kirby, P in Wentworth versus Rogers (No 9) supra. However, it considered that as there was to be rehearing, it should not interfere with its order.

In England, the words "with great caution" do not seem to appear as regularly in recent cases (though they did appear in earlier cases). Thus, in the leading case of In re Harrison's Share [[1955] Ch 260], the jurisdiction of the court to recall a judgment which had not been passed and entered appears to be very full indeed.

The cases in both England and Australia make it clear that the jurisdiction is wide and is discretionary. The detailed consideration in the cases is as to when the jurisdiction should be exercised. It is in that connection that the words "great caution" are used.

However, merely because the jurisdiction is to be exercised with caution does not mean that the courts are to be slow to exercise the jurisdiction in a proper case. As Lord Dunedin said in Russian Commercial and Industrial Bank v British Bank for Foreign Trade Ltd [[1921] 2 AC 438], 448, with respect to judgments that had said declaratory relief was only to be given "sparingly" or "with extreme caution", "My Lords, I confess that to my mind such expressions give little guidance." In Ibeneweka versus Egbuna [[1964] 1
WLR 219](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1964%5d%201%20WLR%20219 "View LawCiteRecord" ), Viscount Radcliffe said of the same expression in the same context (224-5), "Anxious warnings of this character appear to their Lordships to be not so much enunciations of legal principle as administrative cautions issued by eminent and prudent judges to their, possibly more reckless, successors. After all, it is doubtful if there is more of principle involved than the undoubted truth that the power ... should be exercised with a proper sense of responsibility and a full realisation that judicial pronouncements ought not to be issued unless there are circumstances that call for their making." 
In the instant case, there is the factor that is always present, namely, the finality of a judgment. There is no prejudice that I can see to the plaintiffs. The impugned paragraph is not part of the essential reasoning of the judgment. The defendant says that he is upset by the paragraph. This in itself is not sufficient to alter the judgment. There may be arguments one way or the other as to whether, in the light of the correspondence, the defendant should have read Barr AJ's judgment, but the fact is, as subsequently appeared from his affidavit filed after judgment was given, that he did not read it.
Accordingly, although the paragraph was an inference open at the time, subsequent evidence has shown it to be erroneous. There is again, a doubtful case as to whether not dealing with this aspect of the matter at the trial was by accident. The defendant says that he could not have possibly anticipated such a finding; the plaintiffs say that he should have dealt with the matter.
However, as whether the error occurred by accident or not is not a governing factor in the exercise of the discretion, it is not necessary to deal with this point any further.

On balance, particularly because the case is a peculiar one, and no-one is likely to be prejudiced by the deletion, I believe that I should exercise my discretion by deleting the paragraph.

When I reached that conclusion in a reserved judgment, I directed that the matter be relisted on Thursday 6 November 1997. At that stage I then formally withdrew the paragraph and directed that the persons who had been distributed copies of the earlier judgment through the usual channels should be notified of the withdrawal. Of course, future copies will be issued in the amended form. I also pronounced final orders in the suit. It was not physically possible to provide the reasons on that day, but it was appropriate that the orders be made and the reasons given later. These reasons are now furnished.
 * * * 
