

Regina versus Kane Adams [1997] NSWSC 285 (1 August 1997) 
REGINA versus Kane ADAMS 
REGINA versus Wayne ADAMS 
REGINA versus John DOUBLE /96, 6067/96, 6068/96 
Monday 12 May 1997 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
SMART J, BRUCE J 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: Kane Clinton Adams, Wayne John Adams and Charles John Double have sought leave to appeal against the severity of the sentences imposed upon them for break, enter and steal offences, particulars of which are as follows.

Kane Clinton Adams: April 1993 at Glenella property, Lue Road near Mudgee, breaking and entering a dwelling and stealing a video recorder, twin tape deck, stereo sound system, compact disc player, portable television set, 16 blank video cassettes, 30 compact discs and a quantity of fireworks; June 1993 at Charles Road, Grattai, breaking and entering a dwelling and stealing a compact disc player, a quantity of compact discs, 20 litres of petrol, a gerry can and an amount of cash; between 11 and 14 June 1993 at Roberts Road, Grattai, breaking and entering a dwelling and stealing cigarettes, cash, a video cassette and a video remote control unit.

Concurrent sentences were imposed on each count, comprising a minimum term of months and an additional term of 8 months.
 
Wayne John Adams: April 1993 at Glenella property as earlier mentioned; between 11 and 14 June 1993 at Roberts Road as earlier mentioned; between 5 and 13 June 1993 at Koonda property, Running Stream, breaking and entering a dwelling and stealing two portable combined television clock radios, 40 litres of petrol, an XL500 motor cycle, two horse saddles, one set of drill bits, an angle grinder, power drill, assorted tools, two fishing rods, pocket knife and an amount of cash.

Concurrent sentences were imposed on each count comprising a minimum term of months and an additional term of 8 months.
 
Charles John Double: to 14 June 1993 at Roberts Road as earlier mentioned; between 5 and 13 June 1993 at Koonda property as earlier mentioned.

Concurrent sentences were imposed on each count, comprising a minimum term of months and an additional term of 8 months.

The lighter sentence imposed on Double is readily explained. He committed two offences while the Adams brothers each committed three offences. The two
Grattai properties had small acreages and were in an area of small properties.
The area was described as semi-rural residential. Glenella property and the
Koonda property were substantial.

Each of the offences had some common features. The residents of the properties were away when the offences occurred and a group of people went to the property in a vehicle. Entry was obtained to the houses. Goods were removed and placed in the vehicle and the group left. There is a qualification in that the Charles Road property was entered by Kane Adams alone. He left the group at the Roberts Road property for a period and attended the Charles Road property. He then rejoined the main group.

When the offenders attended the Koonda property, a pair of bolt cutters was used by Kane Adams to cut the padlock which secured the front gate. An electric fence adjacent to the gate was also cut. After breaking into the house and stealing items in it the men moved to the double garage. In all, property having a value of about $1,500 was taken from this property.

The majority of the property which was stolen was recovered; about 25 percent was not recovered. On each occasion, the offenders searched through the house to find items which they regarded as worth taking. Damage was done to the properties.

Kane Adams and Double pleaded guilty at the commencement of the trial while
Wayne Adams pleaded guilty on the afternoon of the second day of the trial after much of the Crown evidence had been given.

It was a strong case even though the Crown relied on the evidence of an accomplice who had been given a light sentence.

Kane Adams attended the police station voluntarily on 21 September 1993. He was charged and released on bail. At the time of the offence, Kane Adams had been convicted of exceeding the prescribed concentration of alcohol for which he was fined $100 and his licence was disqualified for seven days. On 27
January 1994 he was convicted of attempting to steal a motor vehicle for which he was placed on a two year good behaviour bond.

Kane Adams was aged 18 at the time of the offence. He had left school when he was aged 15 and had a variety of unskilled jobs. When he saw the Probation
Officer in about November 1993 he presented as manipulative and unwilling to accept responsibility for his role in the offences. He was undeterred by the damage and disturbance suffered by the victims. His attitude left much to be desired.

By September 1996 his attitude had undergone a major change. He had become a good worker and was described as trustworthy and responsible. The move from
Mudgee and his settling down in the Griffith area was to his advantage.

Wayne John Adams attended at the police station voluntarily on 23 September
At the time of the offence he had been convicted in the Children's
Court in February 1991 of an attempt to steal a motor vehicle. He was placed on a 12 month good behaviour bond. Subsequent to the subject offences he was convicted on 27 January 1994 of an attempt to steal a motor vehicle, larceny and possessing car-breaking implements. He was placed on a two year good behaviour bond. The papers do not disclose when these offences took place but we have been told without objection from the Bar table that they occurred on June 1993.

Wayne Adams was aged 20 at the time of the offences. He had left school when he was 14 1/2 years of age. He had a number of labouring jobs. In 1993 he was defiant and his character lacked probity. He expressed no contrition. At the suggestion of his solicitor he too left Mudgee. He ended up at Griffith with his brother in April 1994. By September 1996 he had become a good worker and trustworthy. Indeed, their employer was prepared to re-employ the Adams brothers if they were not sent to gaol.

Charles John Double had not been convicted of any offence prior to the subject offences. On 27 January 1994 he also was convicted of possessing car-breaking implements. On 18 May 1994 he was convicted of failing to appear, assault occasioning actual bodily harm and assault. His appeal against conviction to the District Court was on 4 August 1995 dismissed but he was placed on a six month good behaviour bond.

Double was aged 19 at the time of the offence. He left school when he was aged
He had been in casual, unskilled employment as a labourer. He made a poor impression on the Parole Officer. Double did not want to accept responsibility for what he had done. He sought to blame others. He admitted to the Probation
Officer drinking alcohol and using cannabis. He had caught up with the Adams brothers at Griffith in April 1994. He too received a favourable report from the employer.

The picture which emerges from 1993 is one of three rather wild young men who cared not for anyone else's rights and property and embarked upon a series of burglary offences. They had poor attitudes. Since moving to Griffith their attitudes and behaviour have changed. Their solicitor appears to have set this in train by advising them to leave Mudgee where they were not wanted and were under observation.

In the intervening two and a half years they have matured and realised that their conduct led to periods of trouble with the law and possibly gaol. There was no contest that there were special circumstances but it was submitted that the stronger grounds for such a finding related to the applicants never having previously undergone a custodial sentence and their rehabilitation. There is considerable force in those arguments.

We have been told that the delay in the matter coming to trial was due to the heavy lists of the District Court at Mudgee. Neither the Crown nor the applicants were at fault. The most telling point in favour of the applicants is that for about two and a half years before their trial they appear to have led satisfactory lives and to have achieved a real measure of rehabilitation.
This was probably driven to an important extent by their fear of going to the gaol.

The criminality revealed by the totality of the offence was too serious for other than a custodial sentence. The question is whether the sentence imposed fell within the correct exercise of the sentencing discretion.

These were three young men who had never previously been to gaol. The prior records of the Adam's brothers did not disentitle them to leniency and Double had no prior record. There were pleas of guilty although that of Wayne John
Adams was belated. They complained about having been threatened. That problem appears to have been handled administratively but nonetheless they appear to have spent time in protection.

The judge was moved by statements from this Court that breaking and entering peoples' homes and stealing were serious offences. That is indeed true. The applicants did not have prior records of any consequence, they were young when the offences were committed, they had not previously been to gaol and they had embarked upon a substantial measure of rehabilitation which had lasted for two and a half years. These considerations lead me to the conclusion that the sentences imposed were excessive notwithstanding the seriousness of the offences.

In my opinion, the correct sentences in relation to each of the Adams brothers should be a sentence comprising a minimum term of 10 months and an additional term of 12 months and in relation to Double, a minimum term of 8 months and an additional term of 10 months.

Accordingly, I propose that leave to appeal be granted, that the appeals be allowed, that the sentences imposed on Kane Adams and Wayne Adams and Charles
John Double be quashed and in lieu thereof that Kane Adams and Wayne Adams each be sentenced to a minimum term of 10 months commencing on 2 October 1996 expiring on 1 August 1997 and an additional term of 12 months commencing on 2
August 1997 and that Charles John Double be sentenced in lieu thereof to a minimum term of 8 months commencing on 2 October 1996 and expiring on 1 June and an additional term of 10 months commencing 2 June 1997.

BRUCE J: I agree.

SMART J: The orders are as I have proposed.
 * * * 
