

Carpenter Pacific Resources Nl Matter No 4639/97 [1997] NSWSC 542 (5
November 1997) ` 
Carpenter Pacific Resources NL` ` 4639/97` `5 November 1997` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` `  `
 /97 RE CARPENTER PACIFIC RESOURCES NL 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application, under s194 of the Corporations Law, to validate an allotment of shares made in July this year. 
The plaintiff company is a public company. It is a mining company and prior to was a company limited by shares. Since 1994, in its status as a no liability company, it has issued, as it is entitled to do, shares at a discount (vide Corporations Law s190(1)) and has also issued options to acquire shares at a discount.

The company's annual general meeting is to be held on Friday next. The summons for orders was filed this morning and, because it is necessary to make sure it is known who is entitled to vote for what at the annual general meeting, I have dispensed with advertisement and have heard the case this afternoon. I was able to do this because it would not appear that anyone can be prejudiced.
However, just in case, I will direct the orders not to be taken out until 26
November 1997 and have the matter mentioned in my list on 25 November 1997 so that before the order is passed and entered, any person with a bona fide objection can be heard.

As I said in Re Farnell Electronic Components Pty Ltd (30 October 1997 unreported), the court does not lightly make orders validating issues of shares and is disturbed by the number of applications that have recently been made. However, having read the affidavit material and having heard the oral supplementary evidence, it is clear that the problem in the instant case has been caused in part by the obscurity of the law and accounting procedures as to how to deal with shares issued at a discount. It is also caused in part because of communication problems between the Board, the company's secretariat and the company's share registry. Accordingly, the case should be taken as one where there has been an inadvertent lapse.

The basal problem is that although more than the authorised capital at par value was issued in July 1997, the actual money received by the company was less than the authorised capital of $50 million. The accounts have treated the share capital as being the amount actually received by the company, namely $34,088,696 as at 30 June 1997. Had the share capital been shown as the amount at par value of the issued shares, the issued capital would have been nearer $48 million. On this basis, when additional shares were issued in July of this year, the authorised capital of $50 million as well as the authorised number of shares of 200 million would both have been exceeded.

The company's accounts do, with the notes, fully set out the position in that note 13 discloses, in respect of each of the shares that have been issued at a discount, that fact and also how much the discount was.

I believe that the order for validation should be made because the mistake was inadvertent, and I will make the orders in accordance with the short minutes that have been discussed with counsel. In accordance with the practice that has developed in respect of applications under s190, the orders will include an order that the plaintiff continue its practice of disclosing in its annual report that certain shares have been issued at a discount and the amount of that discount until further order (cf Re Alexanders Securities Ltd -
Santow J 17 February 1997 unreported, which is the modern update of the concept that first appeared in Re Air Northwest Pty Ltd [(1988) 6 ACLC ](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281988%29%206%20ACLC%201143 "View LawCiteRecord" ), 1144). This will ensure that the practice continues so that potential investors or lenders have access to the information that the share capital is not what it might first appear to be.

I have heard some evidence as to what is accounting practice where shares are issued at a discount. I am not completely convinced by that evidence. It would seem to me that the first clue is provided by looking at the concept of issuing shares at a discount, which was discussed well before s190 was ever thought of in the House of Lords in Welton versus Saffery [[1897] AC .] The next clue comes from bearing in mind that under s191(2)(e)(ii) of the
Corporations Law, there is authorisation (but not compulsion) to utilise part of the share premium account to counterbalance all shares at a discount. These clues lead to the conclusion that the appropriate form that the accounts should take where shares are issued at a discount is that the par value of the capital issued should appear under share capital with the appropriate note to show there has been a discount. This is in accordance with the concept of what capital really is.

I do not intend to speak ex cathedra on this because the matter has come before me in a busy duty judge list on short notice. However, it is my opinion that, had that view been taken in the company, the problem that has occurred would have been less likely to have occurred.

Accordingly, I make orders in the short minutes. The exhibits may be returned on the basis that should the matter need to be reconsidered on 25 November , they will be returned to the court. Stand over for mention on 25
November 1997 at 9.30 am before me.
 * * * 
