

Bou-Hamdam versus Nrma Insurance Limited Matter No Ca 40833/97 [1998] NSWSC 564 (4 November 1998) 
Last Updated: 4 December 1998 
BOU-HAMDAM versus NRMA INSURANCE LIMITED 
CA 40833/97; DC 7051/95 November 1998 
Priestley JA, Stein JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: DISTRICT COURT OF NSW - 
McLachlan DCJ 
FILE NO/S: CA 40833/97; DC 7051/95 
DELIVERED: 4 November 1998 
HEARING DATE: 23 October 1998 
PARTIES: BOU-HAMDAM versus NRMA INSURANCE LIMITED 
JUDGMENT OF: PRIESTLEY JA, STEIN JA 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: A Lidden 
Respondent: P J Deakin QC 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: Martin Ricci 
Respondent: Sparke Helmore 
CATCHWORDS: 
EVIDENCE - witness - judge's observation of demeanour - where likely to influence decision - failure of judge to inform counsel may constitute procedural unfairness 
DAMAGES - impact of adverse findings on credit on assessment of economic and non-economic loss - miscarriage of justice - new trial 
EXTEMPORE/ RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: ALLOWED 
NO OF PAGES: 11 
BOU-HAMDAM versus NRMA INSURANCE LIMITED 
The plaintiff claims that the award of McLachlan DCJ of $85,671 damages for injuries received in a motor vehicle accident was manifestly inadequate. He also submits that, in making findings adverse to the plaintiff's credit, the trial judge misused his advantage and denied the plaintiff procedural fairness.

Held: 
While judges are entitled to take appearance and demeanour into account, common justice requires that the matter be brought to the notice of the parties, so that they have the opportunity to deal with it in an effective way. This was not done. The findings on credit made by the trial judge clearly had serious implications for his assessment of past and future economic loss and of non-economic loss. As a result, there has been a miscarriage of justice which can only be remedied by a new trial.

GIO versus Bailey [(1992) 27 NSWLR 304] 
Angaston & District Hospital versus Thamm  <case>; <case>; [(1993) 177 CLR 472] applied 
ORDERS ) Appeal upheld ) Verdict for appellant in the sum of $85,671 set aside together with
McLachlan DCJ's orders for costs.
 ) A new trial limited to the assessment of damages.
 ) Respondent to pay appellant's costs of appeal.
 ) Costs of the first trial to abide the new trial.

BOU-HAMDAM versus NRMA INSURANCE LIMITED 
PRIESTLEY JA: I agree with Stein JA. 
STEIN JA: The appellant (plaintiff) was awarded $85,671 damages for personal injuries suffered in a motor vehicle accident which occurred on 27 March 1994. Liability had been admitted and the quantum of damages was assessed by McLachlan DCJ. The appellant submits that the damages awarded are manifestly inadequate. Issues of procedural fairness are raised on his behalf. 
His Honour's verdict is made up as follows: * Past economic loss $ 10,000 * General damages $ 34,500 * Past out of pockets $ 18,671 * Future out of pockets $ 7,500 * Future economic loss $ 15,000 
All of the above components are challenged, save the past out of pocket expenses which were agreed. A new trial is sought. The appellant also complains about his Honour's rejection of the tender of a letter from his previous employer.

THE JUDGMENT 
His Honour recorded that the accident was a fairly severe one and described the appellant's injuries. These included the appellant being left with a 5 cm scar on the left side of his head. The judge examined the scar, which he said was noticeable but mainly because of the appellant's `somewhat unusual hairstyle which severely trims the hair except for hair at the top of his head'. The judge noted the appellant's continuing complaints with the neck, back and right knee. The latter was clearly the most serious problem to the appellant and this was borne out by the medical evidence. The knee limited his ability to do his pre-accident work as a carpenter/glazier, as well as certain sporting activities.

The judge made some comments bearing on the appellant's credit: 
Having seen the plaintiff in the witness box and having heard his history before and since the accident, I am not persuaded on the balance of probabilities that he really wants to get back to that particular job but I agree that on the question of economic loss, I need to consider whether he is fit to do so. [AB 10] ...

Whilst the defendant's counsel did not specifically raise the question of exaggeration, in my view, that is a component in the case. Other problems in the way of the plaintiff recovering the substantial damages sought by his counsel are as follows: firstly, he seems to have given different histories of complaints to doctors which did not always accord with the evidence given in court; secondly, he did not lodge tax returns for the 1992, `93, `95 and '96 years yet he did lodge a 1994 return which seriously conflicts with his evidence. As to that return which I accept he signed, he says that the accountant made a mistake and it was in fact the 1993 return; thirdly, counsel for the plaintiff seeks past economic loss at $60,000 and future at $116,000.
The evidence before me does not in my view establish such a claim; fourth, the plaintiff says that he has tried to find continuing employment.

I shall not repeat the detail of his jobs here and his efforts to form his own business, he says that every time he mentions his accident, employers veer away. One problem maybe his appearance and hair style. He dressed well in court but his hair style gives him an unusual and to me a way out appearance.
That of course is his choice and privilege but it may well be a factor when he seeks a job. [AB 10-11] 
The judge acknowledged that the knee injury was the appellant's major problem.
He accepted the submission of counsel for the defendant that general damages should be assessed at 22% of a most extreme case ( ie. $34,500). In relation to future out of pocket expenses, the judge rejected the appellant's evidence that his knee was worsening but allowed what he termed a `buffer' of $7,500.
As to the past economic loss, his Honour said that he could not accept the appellant's word without reservation because of his omission to lodge tax returns and his view that the appellant : ... has been trying out a number of occupations as many people do at his age and he is seeking to now capitalise on his motor accident. [AB 13] 
Accordingly, he allowed $10,000 as a `buffer' for the past economic loss. His
Honour doubted if there would be any future wage loss, but nonetheless allowed $15,000.

THE APPEAL 
There is no doubt that the appellant suffered a severe knee injury, as well as a minor neck injury and aggravation of a pre-existing back condition. He had to have a knee reconstruction and two other surgical procedures to his knee.
The expert medical opinion was essentially in agreement that the knee injury brought about a reduction in the appellant's earning capacity. In addition, the knee injury had consequences for arthritic change.

At the time of the accident the appellant was working for Magic Glass. He ceased to do so after the accident but, it appears, returned in October 1995 on a casual basis on restricted duties earning less than he had earlier. His continuing disabilities meant that he was unable to continue and left Magic
Glass in or around December 1995.

A letter dated 21 July 1997 from Magic Glass relating to the appellant's employment and wages was tendered but rejected (AB 68). We are not aware of the reasons for its rejection. The letter was generally in accordance with particulars provided, as well as the motor vehicle claim form. However, its date and contents make it likely that it was brought into existence for the purposes of the legal proceeding and would therefore be rendered inadmissible (s 69 [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) ).

Apart from casual employment as a security guard, it appears that the appellant was unemployed during 1996 until he started up an underwater photography business in Queensland in the latter part of the year. He spent around 8 months training as a diver and working in a voluntary capacity in order to gain experience.

I have some difficulties with his Honour's remarks directed to the appellant's credit. Although he did not find that the appellant was a liar, he concluded that he had exaggerated his knee condition. His Honour was also clearly concerned with the appellant's failure to file a number of tax returns.
Further, the judge was critical of the appellant's appearance, in particular his hair cut. According to his Honour, this was relevant to the quantification of economic loss because it affected his employment prospects. Counsel for the appellant, Mr Lidden, submits that the judge palpably misused his advantage (Abalos versus Australian Postal Commission <case>; <case>; [(1993) 177 CLR 472).] He also submits that the appellant was denied procedural fairness. This is because, apart from the issue of the scar on his head, the appellant was not asked any questions about his hairstyle and its impact on obtaining employment.
Moreover, the judge never mentioned the matter at any stage during the trial.
Not surprisingly, no evidence was directed towards the matter nor, as we are informed, was any submission made by either counsel.

I think the submission has merit. The appellant could not be obliged to wear his hair in a style so as to conceal the scar on his head. Moreover, his chosen hair style had no relevance to damages. There was no evidence that his hairstyle or appearance reduced his earning capacity. Bearing in mind the appellant's pre-accident occupation and his post injury employment, I have difficulty in conceiving any relevance in his hair style. I do not accept that nowadays any potential employer would or should determine offers of employment on the basis of a hair style.

Judges are entitled to take appearance and demeanour into account. If, however, a judge makes use of an observation in a way which influences his decision, common justice requires that the matter be brought to notice so that there is an opportunity to deal with it in an effective way, see GIO versus Bailey [(1992) 27 NSWLR 304] and Angaston & District Hospital versus Thamm [(1987) 47 SASR 177.] As Sheller JA observed in Kappos versus State Transit Authority [(1995) 11 NSWCCR 386] at 391: 
Generally it is desirable, if the judge regards the observations as relevant, that the parties be apprised of the precise nature of the observations and the use the judge has in mind to make of them.

One might accept that his Honour was entitled to conclude that the appellant was exaggerating his complaints. It may be noted however (as his Honour records) that this was not a submission made by the respondent, nor the opinion expressed by any medical practitioner. Dr Kendall had been called to give oral evidence but was not asked if the appellant exaggerated his symptoms. Nonetheless, the thrust of the cross- examination of the appellant was that he was able to do more than he claimed by reason of his scuba diving activities. Although this was not spelt out, it is a reasonable assumption that it was, at least in part, the basis for the finding of exaggeration.

The non-lodgment of tax returns was a legitimate criticism of the appellant's credit but, as against this, there was no suggestion that any tax was avoided.
I also have some difficulty with his Honour's observation about the appellant trying out a number of occupations `as many people do at his age and he is seeking to capitalise on his motor accident'. There was no cross-examination of the appellant to this end, in particular no questions were directed towards the appellant exaggerating his disabilities in order to maximise his damages.

The findings and conclusions which his Honour came to clearly had serious implications for the assessment of past and future economic loss. They also had relevance to the assessment of non-economic loss, although an assessment of 22% may have been towards the lower end of the discretionary range.

I accept that it is a somewhat rare and unusual situation to conclude that a judge has palpably misused his advantage in making findings on credit. My conclusion that he did so is a result of anxious examination of the evidence and an awareness of his advantage over an appeal court. His Honour's unfortunate remarks about and reliance upon the appellant's hair style appear to have affected his assessment of economic loss, particularly in relation to past and present loss of income. It may also have played a part in his assessment of non-economic loss. The result is that a miscarriage of justice has been established which can only be remedied by a new trial limited to damages. This court is not in a position to make its own assessment.

There is another aspect of the decision which, when taken cumulatively with the matters I have already discussed, supports the conclusion that a new trial should be ordered. This relates to the almost complete failure of his Honour to make findings on the medical evidence.

A number of medical reports were tendered by each side. Also, as I have said,
Dr Kendall was called in the appellant's case. His Honour said that he had read the reports and did not propose to detail them. He observed that they supported the plaintiff's claim. He then proceeded to consider parts of Dr
Waller's report of 19 September 1996 which, it seems, he accepted. He mentioned Dr Kendall's evidence as painting a fairly dark picture of the appellant's future and noted that the defendant submitted that he ought reject
Dr Kendall. However, it does not appear that he did. His Honour quoted from a report of Dr Benanzio, but did not indicate whether he accepted his opinion or not.

The difficulty with his Honour's apparent failure to make findings on the medical evidence is that it affects the issue of economic loss, as well as his
Honour's finding that the appellant exaggerated his disabilities. For the most part, the medical evidence supported the appellant's evidence. Dr Waller thought that the appellant would benefit by the removal of the screws placed in the knee on its reconstruction. At the same time, he thought an arthroscopy could be performed to check what was going on. His Honour noted that this was performed in early 1997 but the appellant complains that the knee is worsening. His Honour identified the report of the operative procedure (Ex F) but did not take it further. The report, which was probably written by the surgeon, states that at arthroscopy there were some Grade 2 erosions in the articular cartilage of the femoral intercondylar groove and some scar tissue in the intercondylar notch of the femur. A chrondroplasty was performed and loose cartilage and scar tissue was debrided from the notch. The heads of the screws were removed and the balance left in position because they had become rigidly fixed in the bone. So far as we are aware, no doctor whose report was tendered, including Dr Waller, was apprised of this report. On its face, it lends support to the appellant's evidence of continuing problems with his knee some 10 months later when the trial was held.

The other issue of exaggeration relates to the doubtless strenuous diving engaged in by the appellant for 8 months in 1996, in particular, his obtaining of four certificates as a Master diver. Absent from consideration was the fact that a number of doctors recommended swimming for the appellant eg Dr
Benanzio, concurred in by Dr Kendall. Both Dr Benanzio and Dr Kendall were aware of his scuba diving training, as was Dr Ellis. None of these doctors suggested that the appellant was exaggerating his complaints or that diving would indicate that he was fit for his pre-injury employment.

In the absence of findings on the medical evidence, it is difficult to safely conclude that the appellant was exaggerating his disabilities as his Honour found. In my opinion, the appeal should be allowed and a new trial ordered limited to damages.

ORDERS ) Appeal upheld ) Verdict for appellant in the sum of $85,671 set aside together with
McLachlan DCJ's orders for costs.
 ) A new trial limited to the assessment of damages.
 ) Respondent to pay appellant's costs of appeal.
 ) Costs of the first trial to abide the new trial.
 * * * 
