

Butler versus Thompson - Estate J H A Butler Matter No 102558/96 [1997] NSWSC (18 September 1997) 
Last Updated: 27 February 1998 ` 
Butler versus Thompson - Estate of John Henry Adam Butler` ` 102558/96` `18 September 1997` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Probate Division` /96 BUTLER versus THOMPSON; ESTATE OF JOHN HENRY ADAM BUTLER 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff/cross defendant seeks probate of a will made by the late John Henry Adam Butler on 15 December 1978. The cross claimant defends that case by putting forward for probate one or more informal documents made about 1 September 1995, calling in aid s18A of the Wills, Probate & Administration Act 1898. The plaintiff/cross defendant replies by saying s18A is inapplicable and that even if it did apply, the cross claimant has not shown that on the balance of probabilities the late John Henry Adam Butler was of sound mind, memory and understanding at the time when he executed the document. 
The deceased had a history for some years of mental disorder involving strong mood swings from the manic to the depressive. He had been seen over many years by the medical profession and Dr Shand, who saw him on many occasions between and mid-1995, has given a fairly comprehensive history of his state. In the last three months of his life, he was seen by doctors skilled in mental illness in the Newcastle area. He was admitted for treatment in the manic stage of his illness to the James Fletcher Hospital in Newcastle on 9 June with the assistance of police. He was discharged from that hospital on 14
June 1995 and he then settled down with the help of treatment, but he was still under the care of the Lake Macquarie Mental Health team.

The cross claimant is a lady who commenced a serious relationship with the deceased in April 1995, though she had known him about 10 years before that date. She says that the deceased proposed marriage to her in May 1995. She was living with the deceased at Coal Point at the time of his death.

She says that on the Friday before the deceased's death, that is, on 25 August , the deceased had a telephone call and after that continually complained of a headache. On the Tuesday, 29 August, he saw Dr Jean Loveridge, his general practitioner. Dr Loveridge gave evidence by affidavit and was not cross-examined. She prescribed some tablets for depression though she does not actually say in her report that he was depressed.

On Thursday 31 August, Dr Newnham, attached to the Lake Macquarie Mental
Health team, visited the deceased. She spent about half an hour with him and conferred with him. She says that he stated that he was depressed and he was sleeping poorly. She directed her mind to whether the deceased was possibly suicidal and, indeed, she asked what she said was a routine question: "Do you feel like committing suicide?" The answer was, "No". She believed that he was not suicidal. The medical evidence is clear, that it is virtually impossible to make an accurate diagnosis of whether a person is suicidal or not, so that the fact that this diagnosis was made the day before the deceased did commit suicide has no significance at all. He was quite depressed, the doctor said, at that time, but not so bad as to be hospitalised. She considered that his conversation with her was completely rational.

On Friday 1 September, the deceased and the cross claimant behaved quite normally. They had breakfast, watched some videos, did the washing up and then they made a shopping list. The deceased wanted some fish, prawns and magazines. The cross claimant left home about 10.30 am and returned at 3.00 pm. At 3.00 pm she went into the house from the garage and saw blood on an internal staircase leading upstairs to the bedroom and then she saw the deceased lying on the floor in the loungeroom. He tried to stand up but could not. She saw that his neck was cut as well as his groin. She alerted authorities by asking neighbours to act and then she came back and nursed the deceased.

Just after 4.00 pm, the police attended and Constable van Hese saw the deceased, who was still alive but died in the constable's presence, about quarter of an hour later. The death was effected by cutting the throat with a knife but not only was there a cut throat, but there were also wounds to the groin and lacerations to the legs. Dr Shand said that this was unusual in a suicide by such means as normally one finds merely a wound to one particular area. The method of death suggests to Dr Shand that the deceased must have been in a great frenzy at the time when he killed himself. The police, including detectives, did look at the whole question of the death, and the whole of the evidence suggests, on the balance of probabilities, that it was a case of suicide.

Constable van Hese found a small writing pad on the servery of the kitchen, a few metres away from where the deceased died. The pad is in evidence as
Exhibit DX01. It contains three sheets on which there is writing, clearly the deceased's writing. The balance of the pad is blank. Starting from the top sheet, the documents are as follows. The first says: "Dearest Jane, Sorry it's me not you. I could not take my pain I didn't want you to be hurt I'll always love you. You are a wonderful person Forgive me. I don't blame you. It's my fault 
Love forever Adam" 
The second document says: "I Adam Butler give Jane Thompson immediate and full signatory authority on my
NAB cheque account.

J A Butler." 
The third document reads: "I Adam Butler give Jane Thompson all my monetary, property or any other entitlements (patents, etc, possessions). J A Butler." 
Jane Thompson is the name of the cross claimant.

The questions in the case are two: 
A. Does the third sheet or, alternatively, the combination of the sheets satisfy the test under s18A of the Act as constituting the last though informal will of the deceased? 
B. If the answer to A is yes, has it been shown that that will was the will of a testator of sound mind, memory and understanding? 
I will deal with each matter in turn.

A. Section 18A of the Act provides, so far as is relevant: "(1) A document purporting to embody the testamentary intentions of a deceased person, even though it has not been executed in accordance with the formal requirements of this Act, constitutes a will of the deceased person ... if the
Court is satisfied that the deceased person intended the document to constitute the person's will ..." 
As I have been reminded by counsel, the Court of Appeal in Re Masters [(1994) 33 NSWLR 446], particularly at page 455, said that three matters must be satisfied for s18A to apply. First the document must state the deceased's wishes or intentions as to how his property is to pass or be disposed of after his death. Secondly, the intentions must be defined by the deceased during his lifetime and, thirdly, the deceased must have intended that the document should constitute his last will. The wishes, of course, must be in documentary form.

Mr Cashion, for the plaintiff/cross defendant, says that given that there is no certainty as to when the documents were created, they are equally consistent with the deceased saying goodbye to the cross claimant permanently or temporarily rather than with a testamentary disposition. He points to the evidence that the deceased was a person who did tend to go away from time to time from his home and says that there would be nothing unusual in the deceased writing these pieces of paper as a goodbye.

I do not consider that that is likely on the balance of probabilities. The words "I could not take my pain" in the first note seem to suggest the headache or some mental disturbance rather than any argument that there had been between the deceased and the cross claimant because there is just no evidence of any such argument. In the absence of evidence of an argument, the only construction of the first piece of paper is, to my mind, that it is a suicide note. That being so, the second piece of paper would appear to provide immediately for the cross claimant after the deceased's death by giving her access to the deceased's bank account. The fact that, as a matter of law, it would not have that effect is neither here nor there. The third piece of paper then can only be a testamentary document, that is, it gives to the cross claimant the property after the deceased's death.

Accordingly, in my view, it is more likely than not that the third piece of paper fulfils the test in Re Masters and constitutes an informal will of the deceased.

B. This is, to my mind, a far more difficult question and, indeed, I believe this is a question very close to the borderline.

One starts consideration with some general principles.

The onus of showing that the document in question is the last will of a free and capable testator, a testator of sound mind, memory and understanding, is upon the cross claimant.

The cross claimant must establish the will on the balance of probabilities.

The fact that the deceased committed suicide does not give rise to an inference that there is testamentary incapacity; Re Hodges [(1988) 14
NSWLR 698], 707.

The court may consider that if the document proffered as the will is rational, on its face, then, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, it is the will of a person of competent understanding (Hodges'case at page 706).

In the present case, the evidence filed on behalf of the deceased is that the deceased's estate had a gross value of some $644,000. However, the plaintiff/cross defendant is also aware of liabilities, currently some $619,000, which would mean that the estate before costs are considered has only a nett value of $25,000. The deceased is alleged to have owed a company,
Bankview Pty Limited, half a million dollars. He had judgment debts from solicitors. He had some small liquor bills and a debt of $6,000 to some patent attorneys. It would appear that the deceased had been involved with an invention for which he was, at least, seeking a patent with respect to a hypodermic syringe. This is significant because when one looks at the will one sees that the deceased has referred to patents so that the document, on the face of it, shows that he had in mind what his property was.

Next, the fact that he made the cross claimant his beneficiary is not remarkable. He was living with her and was friendly with her and, although he had at least a mother and brothers alive, it was not unusual that he would have benefited the lady with whom he was living. Accordingly, the will itself tends to suggest that it is the will of a competent person.

Very often in this sort of case, the court is left with a series of conflicting medical opinions from eminent doctors, who have never seen the deceased during his life, supplemented, if the court is lucky, by some notes of hospital staff and the recollection of the deceased's general practitioner.
In the present case, the evidence is a little stronger in that two doctors saw the deceased a couple of days before his death and one of those doctors was trained in psychiatric medicine.

Dr Newnham says that she found the deceased rational on 31 August and spent half an hour talking with him. That would seem to suggest that he was a man of sound mind and understanding on that day because the doctor was looking particularly for mental abnormalities and suicidal tendencies. Dr Loveridge's evidence is not as strong because she gave a relatively incomplete picture, doubtless because the deceased gave her a relatively incomplete picture of his situation, but she did what was necessary to keep him afloat.

Dr Shand, in a very judicious piece of evidence, only goes as far as saying that there must be serious reason to doubt testamentary capacity at the time of writing if the documents found by the police and signed by the deceased were composed during the period of his depression. He considers that Dr
Loveridge's report is a little confused and says that she did not explore various matters. He says that without criticism, merely as a matter of fact.
However, Dr Shand did not in his report have access to Dr Newnham's evidence.
Dr Newnham gave oral evidence this morning before Dr Shand entered the witness box and it was significant that nothing that Dr Newnham said in evidence was put to Dr Shand for comment.

It seemed to me that Dr Shand very wisely said in the last lines of his report of 5 December 1996, that on the information available he was unable to give a confident opinion about testamentary capacity and he had serious doubts.

Having heard the evidence of Dr Newnham and in the light of the document itself, I consider that it is more likely than not that they are the product of a free and rational testator.

I should say that there is no actual evidence as to when the notes were written. I would have thought the reference to the pain must mean they were composed after 25 August 1995. It would be strange if they were written close to the time when the deceased cut his throat, which must have been shortly before 3.00 pm on 1 September 1995 because I consider Dr Shand is quite right in saying that, at that stage, the deceased must have been in quite a frenzy and that would be inconsistent with the tone of the documents, which show that, at that time, the deceased knew he had an account at the NAB and knew he had patents and apparently directed his mind rationally to what was to happen to his estate and how the cross claimant was to be looked after.

On the other hand, the documents do show that the deceased was contemplating suicide and when Dr Newnham saw him the day before, she did not think that he was. Again, his discussing with his live-in girlfriend that they will have prawns and fish for tea does not seem to indicate a suicidal tendency on the morning of 1 September. Accordingly, it seems to me that, on the balance of probabilities, the notes were made somewhere between 11.00 am and 1.00 pm on 1
September.

The upshot is that the third page of Exhibit DX01 should be declared to constitute the last will and testament of the deceased made on 1 September and the matter should be referred to the Registrar to complete, in the normal course. So far as costs are concerned, I think that the costs of both parties should come out of the estate. However, I am not too sure whether the estate really is worth only $25,000 or is worth more, and I should reserve further consideration on the question of costs so that I can re-examine the situation, if requested by either party, when the asset situation becomes clearer.

The exhibits, of course, must remain with the papers.
 * * * 
