

Regina versus Espiritu Matter No 70095/96 [1997] NSWSC 565 (17 November 1997) 
Regina versus Minerva Espiritu /96 November 1997 
Smart J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Criminal Law Division /96 R versus Minerva ESPIRITU 
SENTENCE 
On being arraigned for the murder of Vivian Espiritu (Vivian) at Canterbury on July 1996 Minerva Espiritu (Minerva) pleaded not guilty to murder but guilty of manslaughter. The Crown accepted that plea in discharge of the
Indictment. Correctly, it was common ground that at the time of the killing the prisoner suffered from diminished responsibility. The evidence to that effect was cogent. Minerva and Vivian had been friends since about 1978 when they were at the University. Vivian was Minerva's best friend and was married to Minerva's brother. Minerva, Vivian, her husband, her son and a cousin lived in a 4 bedroom house at Canterbury.

Minerva came to Australia from the Philippines in about 1987. She worked for 2 years in a supermarket and then ran a small labour intensive business which was transferred to her. That involved long hours and much hard work. In the first half of 1996 she sold that business. Vivian worked in a factory. She procured a job for Minerva as a process worker in the same factory. Although
Minerva had some reservations she took the job in about April/May 1996. Vivian was a team leader while Minerva worked on the production line.

A production Manager, Ms Y Tay placed Minerva under the supervision of Vivian.
Everything proceeded normally. The only problem Ms Tay had with Minerva occurred about 2/3 weeks before the incident on 25 July 1996 when Ms Tay corrected a work practice adopted by Minerva and more particularly by her co- worker. About 15-20 minutes later Ms Tay noticed that Minerva had tears in her eyes and was upset. Ms Tay asked Vivian to let Minerva know that the incident was not her fault. Vivian promised to do so. In the following days all appeared to be normal to Ms Tay. She stated that in the week prior to the incident Minerva telephoned her at home, advising that Vivian had "told her off" and that their friendship was in jeopardy. Ms Tay offered to transfer
Minerva to another line to help their relationship. Minerva accepted that offer. On one subsequent morning Ms Tay noticed that Minerva had come to work by herself. Ms Tay did not notice anything unusual. On 24 July 1996 at the fortnightly staff meeting Ms Tay announced that she was going to rotate the workers around in accordance with normal practice. The staff re-action was positive. Thereafter work continued normally. On 25 July 1996 Ms Tay switched
Minerva to another production line with the approval of that line's team leader. Ms Tay observed that Minerva worked on that line for the whole day without incident. Minerva left work at 4.00 pm, not staying for overtime.
Vivian finished at 6.00 pm.

Minerva saw events very differently and by 25 July 1996 had worked herself up into an abnormal state. She recalled the incident involving Ms Tay and her fellow worker. Minerva believed that she was being blamed for the mistakes of her fellow worker. Minerva became convinced that Vivian and Ms Tay were picking upon her and that her fellow workers were laughing at her and talking about her. She felt that the pressures on her had been building up over a week or more. On the morning of 25 July 1996 Minerva lost patience and could not bear things anymore. She asserted that those at work told her throughout the day that she was useless and that they kept laughing at her. She felt that they were led or encouraged by Vivian and Ms Tay. There was no justification for Minerva's beliefs. She believed that someone had deliberately left some faeces in a toilet bowl at lunch time to upset her. It did not occur to her that someone may have forgotten to flush the toilet. Process work could not have been to Minerva's liking. She had spent 5 years at University in the
Philippines studying science and engineering and had run her own small business. In her police interview she said that she felt belittled and deep personal hurt by what happened at work.

When Minerva gave evidence she was close to being speechless. She was upset, very tense, apprehensive and holding everything within herself. She could not continue for several minutes. When she did continue it was with great effort and she was unable to do justice to herself. She was much ashamed. Her condition precluded both effective examination in chief and cross examination.
The court waited to see if she was going to improve but that did not and was not going to happen. She found her period in the witness box endeavouring to go over the events beyond her.

During argument I remarked that the materials and her demeanour had left me with the impression that immediately prior to the killing she was like a simmering cauldron about to boil over.

Minerva arrived home about 5 pm and Vivian about 7 pm. Shortly after Vivian arrived home an argument developed between the two ladies while they were preparing tea. It appears that Minerva proposed to take a few days holidays and that Vivian objected. The argument became spirited and, according to what
Minerva told Dr Canaris, Vivian poked some kind of kitchen implement in
Minerva's face. Minerva began shaking.

A kitchen knife was lying on the sink. Minerva seized the knife and approached
Vivian, who was cooking, from behind. Minerva stabbed Vivian on the back of the neck. Minerva did not remember how many times she stabbed Vivian, who tried to grab the knife and wrestled with her. Vivian was initially standing but they fell over. Minerva stabbed Vivian while she was lying on the floor.
Vivian's son heard his mother call out. He saw the 2 women on the floor. His mother was on her back and Minerva was on top of her. The son grabbed Minerva around the shoulders and tried to pull her off his mother but Minerva was too strong. He contacted relatives. He returned a little later, observed that his mother was still on the floor on her back and that the 2 women were still wrestling. The son again tried to pull Minerva off his mother but could not do so because Minerva was holding his mother's hands.

During her attack on Vivian, Minerva used a barbell to drive the knife deeper into Vivian behind the neck. Minerva inflicted 15 stab wounds to the head, face and neck of Vivian and 10 stab wounds to the trunk and upper limbs. There were many other injuries. In her police interview Minerva stated that Vivian had never tried to hit her nor had Vivian threatened any violence towards her.
Minerva explained that she killed Vivian because they were all against her.
Again in her recorded interview Minerva stated that she intended to kill
Vivian and that she did it for revenge for the hurts which she had experienced.

Minerva was in a sustained frenzy when she killed Vivian in a lengthy and ferocious attack. She overcame Vivian's resistance and refused to stop despite the efforts of Vivian's son.

Minerva has no previous convictions. Some 17 references were provided, mainly by members of the Filipino community in Sydney. Two of the referees gave oral evidence. They spoke of her as a softly spoken, quiet and gentle person who had never been known to be violent, she had helped members of her family and played a large role in supporting her parents, often working long hours to do so. The effect of the references is that she was a good citizen. She has been in employment throughout her period of residence in Australia.

Four psychiatrists prepared reports, each of which has been helpful. Dr M
Giuffrida, the consultant psychiatrist at Mulawa Correctional Centre, first saw Minerva on 29 July 1996 and again on 5 August 1996. He formed the view at that time that she was suffering from a "delusional disorder, that is a psychotic illness characterised by prevailing persecutory delusions". He wrote "The predominant presentation was of delusional ideas with relatively mild thought disorder." Dr Giuffrida saw Minerva again on 20 August 1996. He did not see her again until 15 November 1996.

The doctor wrote of that consultation: "It became more clear by that time that Ms Espiritu was suffering from an underlying depressive illness and that this had probably predated the development of paranoid delusional ideas.

I commenced her on the anti-depressant medication Prothiaden at that time and this was gradually increased up to standard therapeutic dose of a 150 mg per day." 
His subsequent consultations and the history which he obtained in that time tended to confirm to him that she suffered from a serious depressive illness, probably of a major type from March 1996 onwards. She eventually developed paranoid persecutory delusions. He continued: "In the time that I have seen her she has improved substantially with regard to those persecutory delusions and depressive phenomena. She remains somewhat withdrawn and tentative in her manner. She has been studying her English which has improved remarkably.

When I saw her last on the 7th October 1997, she had substantially abandoned the previously held delusional ideas." "... Ms Espiritu was probably mentally ill within the meaning of the Mental
Health Act of NSW at the time of the offence in that she suffered from delusional ideas and included the belief that her sister-in-law was conspiring against her and became increasingly enraged over a period of time to the point that she impulsively stabbed her sister-in-law. It was clear that she intended to stab her sister-in-law at the time, although she had not planned to do it.

The motivation however to do this was based on delusional beliefs for which she thought was justified in acting her rage upon her sister-in-law.

At the present time she is essentially recovered and is no longer mentally ill within the meaning of the Mental Health Act, although she will obviously require ongoing psychiatric supervision and treatment with the use of anti- depressant medication.

Dr Boettcher, a consultant psychiatrist, saw Minerva for 2 hours on 15 October
In his lengthy report he concluded that at the time of the offence
Minerva was suffering from "a serious and substantial abnormality of the mind, namely, major depressive episode and delusional disorder which substantially impaired her capacity to understand events and to control herself. I also believe that her capacity to judge whether her actions at the time were right or wrong would have been lessened by these illnesses." 
Dr CA Canaris, a consultant psychiatrist, saw Minerva for about 2 1/2 hours, on 16 October 1997. He obtained a detailed history and carefully assessed the contents of her medical file. Dr Canaris thought that her presentation was consistent with her diagnosis of major depression and that her depression was in substantial but not complete remission. She complained of periods of sadness, there was a continued degree of flatness of affect and psychomotor retardation. She has responded to treatment with an anti-depressant medication. Dr Canaris was unable to say whether at the time of the offence she was suffering from a delusional disorder. However, even if she were not, it was highly likely that at the time of the killing Minerva's judgment was significantly impaired. Her capacity to control her anger following critical remarks made by Vivian and restrain her impulse to attack Vivian would have been substantially less than that of a normal person.

Dr Canaris pointed out that in the severely depressed individual the anger has an explosive and uncontrollable quality. Dr Canaris also attached importance to Minerva having already been suicidal. Dr Canaris thought that Minerva could probably avail herself of the defence of diminished responsibility on the evidence available to him. Dr Canaris believed that Minerva would have known at the time that grabbing the knife and stabbing Vivian was wrong irrespective of how she perceived Vivian's behaviour towards her. The defence of not guilty by virtue of mental illness was not available to her.

Dr Canaris concluded: "I see her risk of reoffending as being very low bearing in mind that there is no evidence of anti-social personality disorder or anti-social personality traits. Furthermore, given the very substantial contribution of her illness to the killing, the fact that she has made a substantial recovery and has much better insight into her mental state at the time is strongly consistent with a very low risk of re-offending." 
Dr J R Strum, a consultant forensic psychiatrist, saw Minerva on 31 October for about 2 1/4 hours. He obtained a very detailed history and has approached his assessment in a very analytical way. His report contains perceptive observations. Dr Strum thought that at the time of the attack
Minerva was suffering from a major depression, a severe psychiatric illness which left her with an abnormality of the mind: 
Dr Strum has written: "Basically, what happens is this: whatever part of the brain is affected in a
Depressive Illness the feeling that is evolved is one which, when turned outwards into the world, takes the form of aggression and which, when turned inwards upon the self, is that of depression. Depression takes the form of "I hate me" and aggression takes the form of "I hate something in the outside world". This is usually accompanied by paranoid thinking. Paranoia and distorted thinking are a part of Depression." 
And: "... a depressed person with anger turned inwards and with paranoid thinking can find themselves in a situation with another person. The other person says something which is perceived to be provocative, perhaps not to the ordinary man, but provocative to the depressed person who then looses (sic) control. As impulse control evaporates, internalised rage becomes externalised leading to an aggressive act. Usually the force of the aggression is out of all proportion to the incident and can go on for a period of time. It is not necessarily merely a reflex action. It can be carried through a period of time when ruminations about the `insult' can keep the feeling alive. The person may go to another room to get a weapon but once a weapon is used the episode goes on and on until there is a conclusion and the rage is dissipated.

I believe that this is what happened in Ms Espiritu's case." and: "The abnormality of mind encompasses the mechanism which I have described, including paranoia, poor impulse control, mood disturbance, perceptual disturbance and emotions out of all proportion to what was happening in the world. I believe that Ms Espiritu's ability to control the situation and her actions at the time were substantially impaired due to that abnormality of mind.

Because of the above, I believe that the Court may well consider the appropriateness of the partial defence of diminished responsibility in this case. I do not believe that Ms Espiritu was psychotic to the extent where a
M'Naghton's defence would be applicable.

As to Ms Espiritu's prognosis I believe that she appeared to be shattered by what has happened. I do not believe that there is any indication that it was a planned or a wanted thing although I understand that in the Record of
Interview Ms Espiritu indicated that at the time of the incident she very much wanted her sister-in-law dead. I think this was part of the rage surge which she felt at the time. I do not see Ms Espiritu to be a danger to anyone in the community. A provision to this, however, is that she remain in treatment. Ms
Espiritu is still depressed and has very little insight into what happened. I think it is essential that she remain in treatment until such time as her
Depressive Illness remits and even beyond that because she would then have to deal with the consequences of what has happened to her. The illness from which
Ms Espiritu suffers is one which is amenable to treatment. Nevertheless where there is a clear biological basis to that illness, as in the case here, recurrences can occur. I think that these can be prevented with adequate supervision. I think the overall prognosis is reasonable." 
I share the view that Minerva has relatively little insight into what happened and why and that while there has been improvement in her depressive illness condition she still has some considerable distance to travel. She will need extended supervision upon her release to ensure that she takes her medication and that any depressive illness remains in remission. At the sentence hearing it was not disputed that special circumstances existed and that Minerva would need extended supervision upon her release. That was and is my view.

I have earlier noted the previous positive good character of Minerva, her usually gentle disposition and the high regard in which she was held in the
Filipino community. She is remorseful and desires to do the best she can to make amends. I was informed that at the time of the committal proceedings, which proceeded on the papers, Minerva indicated her intention to plead guilty to manslaughter. Her plea before this court has saved the cost of a trial estimated to take 8-10 days. Her plea was also indicative of remorse and contrition. Her statements to the police were direct and frank. She regrets that she can no longer help to support her parents. She will need to become less tense. Her intensity and rigidity in the witness box were marked.

Minerva did not plan this crime. She lost control of herself. Nevertheless, it was dire in its execution and at the time she intended killing Vivian by way of revenge.

The support which Minerva's family and the Filipino community have been giving
Minerva is likely to continue. There is evidence that members of Vivian's family had extended forgiveness to Minerva and saw this tragic event as completely out of character.

Counsel for the Crown referred me to the decisions of the Court of Criminal
Appeal in R v. Troja, unrep, 16 July 1991, R v. Chayna, unrep., 8 June , R v. Barton, unrep, 28 July 1995, R v. Blacklidge, unrep, 12
December 1995 and R v. EJ, unrep, 24 March 1997. Counsel for the prisoner relied upon the decisions in R v. Shephard, unrep, CCA, 15 July 1991, R v.
Lean, Matthews J, unrep, 13 August 1993, R v. Halbert, Ireland J, unrep, 1
July 1994 and R v. Cassel, Bruce J, unrep 14 March 1997. I would add a reference to the decision of R v. Carlson, CCA, unreported, 25 November .

The principles to be deduced from the cases include: 
As the circumstances which may give rise to a conviction for manslaughter are so various and the range of degrees of culpability so wide, there is no established sentencing tariff which can be applied in every case of manslaughter; the starting point in considering the penalty and a key element in assessing the gravity of the objective circumstances of the case is the felonious taking of a human life; where the basis of manslaughter is diminished responsibility what, is usually involved is that the taking of human life was the consequence of a deliberate and willed act, performed with intent to kill or cause grievous bodily harm or with reckless indifference to human life (the present case was one of a deliberate and willed act with intent to kill).

The reduction in the capacity for self control which results from the abnormality of mind diminishes the offender's responsibility for the act but does not negate such responsibility. Nor does it excuse the act.

In a case of diminished responsibility, the aspect of general deterrence usually plays a less significant role than in ordinary cases. That is the present case.

The severity of the illness of the offender and the extent to which the offender's responsibility was diminished will usually be important factors to take into account.

I apply the foregoing principles in the present case. Counsel for Minerva submitted that this would be an appropriate case to impose a sentence having a relatively modest minimum term, for example, a minimum term of 3 years. The
Crown submitted that this would be inadequate. It relied heavily upon the remarks of the Chief Justice in Blacklidge which are incorporated in the summary of the principles which I have applied.

While a person's self regard is important it is disturbing that the prisoner's view of the incidents could lead her to kill Vivian, and to do it so savagely, albeit that the depression had been building up for some months and there were the contributory factors mentioned by Dr Strum such as the sale of her business, her tiredness, her loss of interest, her need for a break and a position which she found unsatisfactory.

Despite the absence of planning this was a killing in which Minerva persisted despite Vivian's 14 year old son being present in the house and trying to get her to stop. The killing took some time and was quite ferocious. Vivian's son and husband have suffered a severe loss. Minerva was seriously ill and that illness had been building up since about March 1996 and was the result of a combination of factors. There was the plea of guilty and the remorse and contrition of Minerva along with her favourable subjective features. There is also the family and community support which will help her both in gaol and on her release. I cannot put aside the objective gravity of the offence and that a human life was deliberately taken with an intent to kill.

In the whole of the circumstances Minerva Espiritu is sentenced to a term of imprisonment of 8 years 6 months comprising a minimum term of 5 years 3 months starting on 25 July 1996 and ending on 24 October 2001 and an additional term of 3 years 3 months starting on 25 October 2001. The conditions of her release on parole should require continued medical supervision and the taking of the requisite medicines.
 * * * 
