

Molloy versus Regina Matter No Cca 60427/97 [1998] NSWSC 277 (29 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 12 August 1998 
MATTHEW EDWARD MOLLOY versus REGINA 
CCA 60427/97 May 1998 
Studdert J, Black AJ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
Severity Appeal 
MATTHEW EDWARD MOLLOY versus REGINA 
JUDGMENT 
BLACK AJ: On the 12 August 1997 the applicant was sentenced by his Honour Judge Nield in respect of count 1, escape from lawful custody, to a period of two years imprisonment; in respect of counts 2, 3 and 7, armed robbery, to periods of four years, six years and three years respectively; in respect of counts 4, 5 and 6, stealing, to one year. The sentences were all concurrent and in relation to count 3 there was an additional term of four years, commencing on 22 January 2003, expiring on 21 January 2007, his Honour having found special circumstances in relation to the sentence in particular on count 3. 
As counsel for the applicant has said, his Honour gave detailed reasons for his sentence running to some 11 pages of transcript and he commenced his observations on sentence by saying: "It is unfortunate to say the least to see a person so young as is the prisoner appearing in this Court for sentence for so serious offences as three armed robberies." 
His Honour then went on to deal with the various offences and it is perhaps necessary to repeat those descriptions. They are not seriously challenged insofar as they describe the seriousness of the offences. In relation to the escape from lawful custody his Honour says this: "Shortly stated this is what happened. The prisoner was an inmate at Parklea
Correctional Centre. He was serving concurrent sentences of one year three months for an offence of breaking entering and stealing and an offence of stealing a motor vehicle. The minimum term of each sentence was nine months from 22 May 1996 to 21 February 1997 and the additional term was six months from the 22 February 1997 to 21 August 1997. On 3 January 1997 he left the
Centre by walking away from the recreational area, the Centre being a minimum security centre without physical barriers. His reason for escaping is stated in Exhibits 1 and 2. However there is nothing to confirm or support his stated reason. He did not complain to anyone before escaping. What he did after escaping does not support his reason." 
I shall return to the last four sentences of that passage which are relied upon by counsel for the applicant in support of his grounds of appeal. His
Honour said: "The circumstances of the armed robbery offence of the 11 January are that the prisoner and his co-offender Benjamin Banks arrived at the Briggs liquor supply shop in Day Street, St Marys, at about 1.50pm on 11 January 1997. They arrived there on a motorbike. The prisoner stayed with the motorbike. Banks entered the shop. He was wearing a black balaclava on his head covering his face and he was carrying a sawn-off single-barrelled rifle. Banks ordered the shop's two customers to lie on the floor, which they did. He ordered the shop's proprietor to open the cash register, which he did, and to put the money into a plastic bag, which he also did. He then took the plastic bag containing the money and left the shop and returned to the prisoner at the motorbike. The prisoner drove the motorbike, with Banks on it, away. The prisoner and Banks stole $838 from the shop's proprietor. None of the stolen money was recovered." 
I continue to quote from his Honour's reasons: "The circumstances of the armed robbery offence of the 14 January 1997 are referred to in various exhibits. Shortly stated this is what happened. As the night manager of the Colonial Hotel at Werrington was leaving the hotel at about 12 midnight on the 19 January 1997 after having locked up the hotel and turned on its alarm, he was accosted by the prisoner. The prisoner was wearing a black balaclava on his head covering his face and he was carrying a sawn-off shotgun in one hand and a knife in the other hand. He ordered the night manager to switch off the hotel's alarm, which he did, and to open the doors, which he also did. He then forced the manager into the office and ordered him to open the hotel safe, which he did. He then ordered the manager to lay on the floor, which he did, and he tied the manager's hands together using plastic ties. He removed $7,076 from the safe. None of the stolen money has been recovered.

The circumstance of the armed robbery and stealing offences on 19 January 1997 shortly stated are as follows; at about 11pm on 19 January 1997 the manager of the Colyton Hotel in Colyton and a number of other employees of the Hotel were in the Hotel's lounge bar preparatory to conducting a routine stocktake when the prisoner and his co-offender Ricky Ross entered the lounge bar from the public bar. Each was wearing a black balaclava on his head covering his face and carrying a weapon. The prisoner had a sawn-off shotgun and Ross had a .22 semi-automatic rifle. The prisoner ordered everybody to lie on the floor, which they did. Then the prisoner walked from the lounge bar into the office leaving Ross in the lounge bar. In the office the prisoner confronted the
Hotel's duty manager Mr Glen Berntsen.

At this point I pause to say that there is a dispute between the duty manager and the prisoner as to what happened between them, and I say that I accept what Mr Berntsen said in his statement as I cannot see a reason to reject the version of the victim given to the police shortly after the robbery in favour of a slightly different version given by the robber. However, having said that, I note that the differences between Mr Berntsen's version and the prisoner's version are minor and they do not lessen the objective seriousness of the robbery or the prisoner's participation in it. The prisoner ordered Mr
Berntsen to open the safe, which he did, and then he ordered Mr Berntsen to lie on the floor, which he also did. Then the prisoner was joined by Ross and they put money from the safe into a bag. After they had got what they wanted either the prisoner or Ross ordered the people in the lounge bar and the office to stand up, which they did, and the prisoner ordered them to go into the safe, which they also did. Then the door to the safe was closed locking in those inside.

Before leaving the Hotel the prisoner and Ross stole the wallets of three people. After they had been in the safe for 10 or 15 minutes police arrived at the Hotel and released the people from the safe. The prisoner and Ross obtained $20,393 from the safe and smaller amounts of money from the wallets.
Only $1,800 was recovered on the arrest of the prisoner." 
Having given that description his Honour went on to say this: "These are serious offences, the armed robbery offences being the most serious. One does not need to have experienced being threatened with a shotgun or a rifle or a knife to appreciate the fear that being so threatened can instill in a victim. I do not doubt that the victims of the prisoner's threats and those of the prisoner's co-offenders were fearful for their safety and the safety of others who were present and it does not reduce or relieve the fear to be told later that the shotgun or rifle was unloaded or could not be fired.

The community expects, as it is entitled to do, protection from people who use arms, whatever they might be, in the robbery of citizens and demands, again as it is entitled to do, that those who commit an armed robbery, or in the case of the prisoner, armed robberies, be dealt with by the imposition of appropriately salutary punishment, one which brings home to the offender the seriousness of the offence or offences and that stands as a warning to others who may think of doing the same thing for the seriousness of such conduct." 
His Honour then went on to list a number of matters which he took into account in arriving at the sentences to which he did, to some of which I shall return.

A basic argument on behalf of the applicant is that the letter Exhibit 2 which was read on to the transcript during the course of his evidence before his
Honour during the sentencing proceedings has, in his contention, not been taken into account or rejected by his Honour. That letter runs to just over two and a half pages of transcript.

It is not necessary for the purpose of this judgment to go into the full details of it; suffice it to say it is an account by the applicant of conduct he was faced with prior to his decision to escape from Parklea which he understandably found unacceptable and repulsive.

He explains in the letter he didn't feel there was anything he could do about it other than to escape. That is subsequently amplified by telling the Court, and indeed in particular the psychologist, that his sole motive, having escaped, or once he had escaped, was to obtain an amount of drugs and use it to commit suicide.

The argument on behalf of the applicant is that his Honour either found against the contents of that letter or did not consider them in a way that he should. In my judgment his Honour clearly did have that letter and its contents in his mind, not only in the further proceedings and evidence before him relating to sentence, but also in his reasons for sentence.

Shortly after that letter had been read by the applicant before his Honour, his Honour said this at page 17 of the transcript of the proceedings on sentence: "Q. Mr Molloy this letter of yours, did you write it? 
A. Yes, I did.

Q. Although there were spelling mistakes and there are grammatical errors in it, it is obvious that you are not a foolish young or not a stupid young man? 
A. No, I am not stupid, your Honour." 
Then the following occurred: "HIS HONOUR Q. But what you did was stupid, you know that, don't you? 
A. Yes, I do.

Q. And you know, don't you, that I have just got to send you to gaol? 
A. Yes, I know that, your Honour.

Q. And you know it's going to be for years? 
A. Yes, I do." 
It seems to me for my part that his Honour is saying although you may have had your reasons as stated in your letter for escaping, the fact is that you went on to commit serious armed robberies which can in no way be excused by a reason for escaping from Parklea.

When one looks again at the effect given to that letter, which was Exhibit 2 before his Honour, in the reasons for sentence, as counsel for the applicant has already said, that exhibit is first referred to at page 3, and I would agree with what was said by Mr Justice Studdert during argument that when his
Honour says: "His reason for escaping is stated in Exhibits 1 and 2. However, there is nothing to confirm or support his stated reason. He did not complain to anyone before escaping. What he did after escaping does not support his reason." he is doing no more than stating what is apparent from the facts in this case.
He did not complain to anyone before escaping. For that he has given reasons.
What he did after escaping does not support his reason. That again is inescapable from the material before his Honour, because instead of carrying out his expressed intention, the appellant engaged in the offences of armed robbery with which I have just dealt.

There is further reference to that letter, showing that it was in his Honour's mind, later on in the reasons. At page 7 of the transcript of those reasons it is referred to in relation to the second matter which his Honour took into account where his Honour says: "(2) He committed three very serious offences whilst on the run, to use the word that he used in Exhibit 2. This cannot be overlooked. It's one thing to escape and be at large before surrender and recapture, it's quite a different thing to escape and commit offences, particularly such serious offences as armed robbery offences whilst on large (presumably meaning at large) before recapture." 
Again later in these reasons his Honour said this: "Although he has said that he is sorry for what he has done, see Exhibit 2, I doubt that he feels any sorrow for his victims. I doubt that because I doubt that he accepts responsibility for what he has done." 
And then there is further discussion in support of that relating to that letter and an express quote from the letter where the applicant said: "I honestly believe I am a victim of circumstance. Peer pressure led me to take part in these crimes and I also believe that I am in some way a victim of, a victim of our so-called prison system." 
Then, as we have already been reminded by counsel for the applicant, the fact of the future sentence being served in protection has already been referred to by his Honour.

There is further reference to the applicant's evidence before his Honour in relation to the question of rehabilitation and then, having listed 12 factors in all, his Honour said this: "Before passing sentence on the prisoner I add this, 'I have referred to his past, that is his background and upbringing, his education and his employment, his abuse of alcohol and drugs and his criminal history. Perhaps everything that has happened to him has combined to make him the way he is today'. All life's experience has effect in some way but he cannot blame anyone else other than himself for what he did. He decided to escape from prison. He decided not to surrender but to remain at large. He decided to obtain the weapon to use and that his co-offenders used in the armed robberies. He decided to use the weapons to use to threaten people to rob them of their money. He decided how t spend the money that he had stolen. He cannot go through life blaming others, his mother, father, stepfather, the prison system and society. He must take the blame for what he does." 
In my judgment it is clear in that particular passage that his Honour there is very much dealing with the contents of Exhibit 2, putting it in perspective in relation to what was appropriate to take into account in the sentencing process and what was not, and in my view his Honour clearly dealt with the contents of it, in no way in my judgment saying that he did not accept what the applicant was saying as to what led him to escape in the first place.

If that be right it means that the foundation for the two matters put forward on behalf of the applicant fail, because his Honour did not fail to take into account a material consideration, and by reason of the passage I have quoted in the transcript shortly after that letter was written, where his Honour is saying "the letter, if I may paraphrase, shows that you are not stupid, you do realise that I have to pass a sentence of many years" indicates his Honour was clearly stating that the relevance and significance of the letter was of limited application in this matter.

Accordingly, I find no basis for inferring or finding any form of procedural unfairness as is contended for by the applicant. In those circumstances I would respectfully propose that although leave be granted to appeal, the appeal should be dismissed.

STUDDERT J: I agree. The order of the Court therefore will be as proposed by Mr Acting Justice Black. * * * 
