

Cahill versus Ekstein and Whelan t/as Andrews [1996] NSWSC 443 (20 September )

CAHILL versus EKSTEIN AND WHELAN T/AS ANDREWS /94 
FRIDAY 20 SEPTEMBER 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
SMART J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: Timothy John Cahill has sued Paul George Ekstein and Mark Ambrose Whelan in contract and in tort for damages for professional negligence arising out of the conduct by Andrews of his claim for damages for personal injury suffered on 27 April 1983.

After the case of the plaintiff on liability was completed it emerged that despite being given notice the plaintiff's solicitors had not arranged for his doctors to attend for cross examination. To avoid a waste of hearing time and costs the parties agreed that I should sever the issues of liability and damages and just deal with the liability issue.

About 6.40am on the day of the accident the plaintiff left the home at which he had been staying at 77 Briellat Street, Annandale. After closing the back gate he proceeded a few paces down Briellat Street, when he tripped, stumbled or slipped on a flagstone in the paving of the footpath. He believed that one part of the flagstone was projecting upwards. He said that the flagstone went underneath his foot, he went up, lost his balance and crashed to the ground.

The plaintiff was on his way to his work as a rigger at Garden Island. He returned to the house, possibly with some assistance, and saw Dr Bartlett later that morning.

Briellat Street is quite steep and the footpath is flagged for safety reasons.
There are a number of 6 inch steps spaced at intervals of about 10 yards. The flagstone on which the plaintiff stepped forms part of the top level of the step and is at the top edge. It appears to be a few yards from the back gate to the step which was situated at the end of a concrete strip which covered a trench.

According to the plaintiff it was raining, it had been windy and there were leaves on the footpath which was wet. He claimed that he did not slip on the leaves which were lying around but on the slab or flagstone which moved. This made him lose his footing.

Dr Bartlett treated the plaintiff for some weeks and issued medical certificates that he was unfit for work. The doctor classified the plaintiff as fit for work as from 23 May 1983. He returned to work and suffered another accident some weeks later and was off work again.

The plaintiff was not sure when he first consulted Mr Ekstein. He estimated that it was about May 1983 whereas Mr Ekstein thought it was about September having regard to a bill which he rendered. There may have been a conference after May but before September. Mr K. Herd, an employed solicitor, was present at one of the early conferences and Mr Ekstein explained that Mr
Herd would be handling the matter.

The plaintiff said that he told Messrs Ekstein and Herd that he had come out the back gate of his home one morning on his way to work. It was raining. The next thing he was on his back. He had slipped and the pavement went. He mentioned that one of the flagstones had collapsed. He claimed that he mentioned a PMG manhole. I think that the manhole was probably mentioned at a later meeting but not at the initial meeting. He was asked to take some photographs and return. That was a prudent first step.

The plaintiff took the photographs and returned to see his solicitors and discussed them with Mr Herd or Mr Ekstein. The plaintiff said that he told his solicitors that the footpath was in a bad condition. He pointed out to them the PMG manhole next to the back gate and how bad the area was which he had marked in photograph 8 of Ex F. That extended from the manhole along to the step and beyond. He also mentioned that an area had collapsed.

The plaintiff claimed that he illustrated to his solicitors how Telecom was at fault by showing them the photographs and discussing the salient features. The
PMG manhole is visible in the photographs as is a reasonable section of the footpath. Most of the footpath looks rather old (and that is confirmed in a portion of the report of the works engineer of Leichhardt Council). Extending from the manhole in a relatively narrow strip is some different coloured concrete. It does not appear to be as old as the flagstones comprising the remainder of the footpath. The appearance strongly suggests that underneath the concrete strip a trench has been dug and later filled. The concrete strip appears to run along a lengthy portion of the street and this in conjunction with the manholes suggests that there are probably telephone cables underneath. A Telecom plan confirms the validity of that inference. Any reasonably competent solicitor looking at the photographs would have inferred that the original flagstones had been chipped or cut away, a trench dug, cables laid, the trench backfilled and concrete poured on top.

Mr Ekstein did not recollect whether the plaintiff produced the photographs at the December 1983 conference. I think it is improbable that they were produced at that conference as there is no reference to them in the statement of the plaintiff which Mr Ekstein dictated or wrote that day. Relevantly, it reads: "On 27th April, 1983, at 6.40 a.m., I left my residence at 77 Briellat Street,
Annandale to proceed to work. It was a wet day with overcast skies and there had been recent heavy winds. This had blown a considerable amount of leaves up on to the footpath in Briellat Street, Annandale. I left my front step and stepped on to the pavement. As I walked towards the bus stop, I lost my footing in Briellat Street and fell over on to the footpath. I was knocked out by the impact and my friend, who came out some short time later, assisted me into my house, being 77 Briellat Street, Annandale." 
I think that the photographs were delivered either prior to or after 1
December 1983. If they had been delivered prior to 1 December 1983 I would have expected some reference to be made to them in the statement and that it would have been fuller. Mr Ekstein said that to the best of his recollection the statement represented what took place at the conference.

According to Mr Ekstein, the plaintiff indicated that the flagstone on which he slipped was towards the other end of the step close to the roadway and not in the concrete strip which was close to the boundary of the property. Mr
Ekstein made no record of this and was relying on his recollection of what the plaintiff indicated about 13 years ago. There are only about 2 yards between the two positions. In the early days most of the plaintiff's dealings were with Mr Herd. I think that Mr Ekstein's recollection is probably incorrect.
The plaintiff, of course, has personal knowledge of where he slipped. In a letter of 19 June 1986 prepared by Mr Herd and sent to the Legal Aid
Commission, it is written that Mr Cahill was not certain how the accident happened although he had reconstructed the events since the accident and it appeared that the footpath was in poor condition.

The letter continues a little later: " . . . it appears that the footpath has been repaired sometime in the past possibly by the Postmaster's General's Dept or Telecom as it is now known. We are not certain of the exact time these repairs were effected. The upshot of the repairs is that the footpath has been rendered defective." 
By 1986 (if not long before) Mr Herd understood that the repairs or restoration (understood to have been possibly effected by Telecom) were an important part of the plaintiff's case. Mr Herd was not called so that it is not possible to know from him when he was told of or realised the importance of the Telecom repairs or restoration. There is, of course, the plaintiff's evidence. He raised the matter very early.

Counsel for the defendants attached considerable importance to the variations in the plaintiff's description of what actually caused the accident. He referred to tripping on the projecting flagstone, slipping on the flagstone, slipping on wet leaves and the flagstone moving as he stepped on to it and his losing his footing in Briellat Street and falling over on to the footpath. I did not think that the variations were of great consequence as to credit but it does make it more difficult to pinpoint any negligence. The flagstone may have been projecting slightly. It was probably slippery. It may have moved slightly. The rain and the leaves in the vicinity would all have helped to make the flagstone slippery.

In October 1984 the solicitors acting on behalf of the plaintiff issued a statement of claim out of the District Court against Leichhardt Municipal
Council alleging breach of statutory duty, negligence and nuisance.

Mr Cahill claimed that when he raised the question of Telecom's responsibility his solicitors said that he had no claim on Telecom because it did not carry any public liability. It is inherently improbable that either Mr Ekstein or Mr
Herd would have made a comment to this effect and I do not think that they did so. It would not matter whether Telecom had any public liability insurance. Mr
Cahill is confused as to what was said and misunderstood what he was told. He may have been told that the footpaths were the Council's responsibility and that Telecom was not usually liable.

Mr Cahill agreed that he was told that it was necessary for him to prove negligence before he could succeed against the Council. Further, he agreed that in about 1986 a conference was held with counsel who advised him that on the existing materials his prospects of success against the Council were poor.
Counsel thought that the plaintiff had little chance of success. The plaintiff did not want to accept this advice.

Counsel for the defendants submitted that the credit of the plaintiff was seriously impaired in relation to these proceedings and that is correct. He told lies to the doctors. At one stage he was simultaneously receiving full compensation from a past employer and a current employer. He did not tell his present solicitor the true employment position. The plaintiff's reply that he was not asked was not a satisfactory answer. The position as to the non production of copies of his taxation returns was also not satisfactory. I have approached the evidence of the plaintiff with reserve in view of these matters but as I have earlier indicated there are some matters on which he is probably correct.

The central complaints in the plaintiff's statement of claim were that the defendants had failed to join Telecom as a party prior to the expiry of the limitation period and that they had failed to act on the photographs provided by the plaintiff which clearly indicated that the flagstone in question had given way because of a trench which had been dug.

Counsel for the plaintiff relied on the defendants serving a subpoena on
Leichhardt Council about 6 May 1988 returnable on 9 May 1988. The Council objected that it had been given insufficient notice and produced nothing. It seems that this subpoena was, for no good reason, never pursued. Instead, a
Freedom of Information Request was later served on the Council. This was done on counsel's advice. The request yielded nothing of use. The defendants were having considerable difficulty in ascertaining what work, if any, the Council had done in the vicinity of 77 Breillat Street, Annandale and when such work was done. The defendants drew blanks.

No subpoena was served on Telecom by the defendants. Application was made under the Freedom of [Information
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ia144/) to Telecom for access to all those documents relating to the repair, maintenance or other activity conducted on Breillat Street, Annandale particularly in the vicinity of no. 77 on or before 27 April 1983 by Leichhardt Municipal Council or with the Council's permission. By letter of 9 July 1991 Telecom advised that a search for the requested documents had been unsuccessful. Some Schedules were forwarded by Telecom which suggested that the documents requested would have been destroyed.

Mr Cahill concluded that the defendants were getting nowhere. He then made some enquiries relying on contacts which he had. In February 1993 he obtained a plan of Telecom installations in Breillat Street and Pritchard Street. That plan was prepared as at 15 November 1972. I cannot read the date to which it has been revised. The plan contains no notations of any works or amendments since 15 November 1972. That plan shows cables running along Breillat Street in the vicinity of the concrete strip and the trench close to the street boundary of each property.

Mr Cahill said that an officer at Telecom had explained to him that there was an agreement between Telecom and councils which usually applied whereby when
Telecom excavates trenches the council will then fill in the trenches and make good. Telecom paid council for the work done by the council. Mr Cahill said that he relayed this information to Mr Dymock, the clerk who was then handling the matter for Mr Ekstein. Mr Cahill also gave Mr Dymock the Telecom plan.

Mr J.J. Collier, Communications Officer, Grade 6 had worked for Telecom since gradually moving to more senior positions. He was knowledgeable, experienced and highly credible. He was the field manager with a number of staff under him. He said that the type of construction for the cabling shown on the plan was used from roughly about the mid-sixties onwards. Mr Collier stated he would expect the cabling shown on the plan to be in the area shown on the photographs (Ex F, photos 8 and 9). The manhole appeared to be a PMG manhole. He agreed that there appeared to be a lot of cabling going all the way along Breillat Street. He would expect all the cabling along Breillat
Street to have been laid at the one time. From a study of the plan he assessed that extra cables had not been laid at a subsequent time. It was probable all the cables had been laid at the same time. His analysis (at T98) in support of that conclusion was convincing.

Mr Collier said that if any work had been done after 1972 it would be noted on the plan. That was the usual and probable situation. He could not speak with % certainty. The fact that there was nothing noted on the plan indicated that nothing of a major nature had probably occurred in the area covered by the distribution plan since 1972. As to the work shown on photographs 8 & which led to or from the manhole, he would have expected that work to have been noted on the plan. If some work requiring excavation had been carried out it should have been noted on the plan.

Mr Collier explained that the usual procedure was for the design section of
Telecom to issue a minor works authority to the field staff. They carry out all the necessary work, that is, digging up the footpath, excavating the trench, laying the pipes or cables, backfilling and temporary re-instatements.
This involves compacting the soil and laying down some cold mix (a form of black soft bitumen) on top. A re-instatement advice and authority is issued by
Telecom to the local council within about 1 week of Telecom finishing its work. This requests the council to arrange for the re-instatement of the surfaces which have been disturbed and to debit the cost to Telecom. The authority contains a sketch of the area in question. The authority is a standard form. The one produced by Mr Collier indicates that it originated or was printed in April 1979. The council then attends, removes the cold mix and restores the pavement to the standard determined by the council.

By its letter of 5 January 1996 (but dated 1995) in answer to a subpoena in these proceedings Telecom referred to general agreements made between Telecom and metropolitan councils regarding restoration works. Telecom also advised that its policy was to keep restoration records for seven years only and that no records for specific works were available for the period 1972 to 1983.
Telecom did not have any pages in its register of works prior to June 1983.

Amongst the records produced by Leichhardt Municipal Council in these proceedings there is a note from the engineering department to the Town Clerk that Briellat Street, road and footpath was completed in 1967.

The effect of all this material is that probably all the work by Telecom was carried out prior to 1972 and that no work of any consequence has been carried out since that date. It is also probable that the restoration of the footpath was carried out by the Council using its normal quality of concrete. The concrete strip on the top of the trench was probably as a result of work done by the council.

I appreciate that it took a long time to uncover the true situation but in the end it is reasonably clear that there is no sustainable cause of action against Telecom. Perhaps if enquiries had been made of the local engineering or works office of Telecom the true position would have been ascertained earlier. There is no material capable of suggesting that Telecom did the restoration work and not the council. Indeed, there is material suggesting that the cables were laid as early as 1966/1967 and the footpath and road restored in 1967.

Apart from the note in the council file to which I have referred the remainder of the material in that file leads to the conclusion that it was unlikely that the council did any work in the vicinity of 77 Briellat Street between 1967 and 1983.

Even if the date of 1972 is taken because of the date on the Telecom plan it would not be possible to decide on the present materials whether any defect in the area of the concrete strip and the step in 1983 was due to lack of maintenance, natural wear and tear or negligent execution of the restoration work when the footpath was re-surfaced after the cables were laid.

In July 1993 the plaintiff withdrew his instructions from the defendants and as from the end of September 1993 retained Stacks as his solicitors. When Mr S
Firth left Stacks the plaintiff instructed Firths.

On 4 March 1994 Firths issued the statement of claim on behalf of the plaintiff against the defendants relying on their not joining Telecom and not acting on the photographs. On 5 May 1994 in the District Court proceedings against the council Firths wrote to the solicitors for Telecom stressing the importance of Telecom producing relevant documents. On 11 May 1994 a subpoena was issued out of the District Court addressed to Telecom requiring the production of documents as to work performed outside 77 Briellat Street,
Annandale at any time prior to 27 April 1983. The subpoena is couched in very wide terms. I do not know what response was made by Telecom.

The District Court case against the council was listed for hearing before an arbitrator in the District Court in September 1994. The matter was resolved by consent on the basis of a verdict for the council and it agreeing to pay $7000 on behalf of the plaintiff's costs. The present proceedings against Telecom remained on foot. This was a surprising course of action because if the plaintiff had any rights they were likely to be against the council in respect of the restoration and the plaintiff had been told of the situation which generally prevailed. Perhaps Firths did not appreciate the true position.

No engineer or other qualified person appears to have inspected the scene on behalf of the plaintiff either shortly after the accident or at any time. No expert evidence was led which would point to negligence on the part of the council or Telecom. In my opinion the plaintiff has not demonstrated any even arguable case in negligence against Telecom. He has not demonstrated any provable case. Nor is it a situation where discovery or interrogatories were likely to advance the plaintiff's case. The more the matter is investigated the clearer it becomes that there is no case. The case against Telecom had no prospects of success.

No relevant negligence has been shown against the solicitors and their actions or lack of them did not lead to the plaintiff suffering any damage. The case alleged by the plaintiff in his statement of claim has not been established.
In reality, the plaintiff's prospects, if any, came to an end when he agreed on advice to a verdict being entered in favour of the council in the District
Court proceedings.

Counsel for the defendants contended that in any event the plaintiff should have made an application to extend the time within which to sue Telecom.
Counsel for the plaintiff submitted that such an application would have failed. In view of the findings which I have made it is not necessary to deal with this issue.

Mr Cahill was told that he had an awkward and difficult case. The present case is another illustration of the difficulties which a plaintiff has in succeeding against an authority in respect of the condition of streets (or parts of them) under its control. There will be a verdict for the defendants.
 * * * 
