

Regina versus Deahm Matter No 60305/95 [1997] NSWSC 439 (29 September 1997) 
Regina versus Alan Hugh Deahm /95 September 1997 
Gleeson CJ, Sully J, Dunford J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal /95 REGINA versus Alan Hugh DEAHM 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: On 18 April 1995 the applicant pleaded guilty before Saunders DCJ to several counts involving allegations of sexual offences. On 26 May 1995 Saunders DCJ imposed certain sentences, the detail of which need not be examined. On 27 May 1995 the applicant appealed to this Court against the severity of the sentences. The appeal was heard and dismissed on 27 March 1996. 
In accordance with Rule 53 of the [Criminal Appeal
Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/) the orders of this Court were noted on the relevant District Court records on 11 April
That fact is proved by the affidavit of Kimberley Sobb sworn 26
September 1997 and filed in the present appeal.

In June of this year the applicant made an application, purporting to be under s24 of the Criminal Procedure Act, complaining of alleged errors in sentencing by Saunders DCJ. The application came for hearing before Freeman
DCJ at Wagga Wagga on 5 June 1997. We have before us the records of the proceedings before Freeman DCJ.

The appellant was unrepresented. Freeman DCJ explained at some length to the applicant that he appeared to be under a misapprehension as to the nature of the jurisdiction that he was invoking. He took considerable pains to explain to the applicant the reasons why he felt obliged to dismiss the application and those reasons appear from the exchanges that occurred between the judge and the applicant.

On 18 July 1997 the applicant filed in this Court the present appeal. The notice of appeal describes the appeal as alternatively one from Saunders DCJ or Freeman DCJ and it is convenient to deal with it upon that basis.

In so far as the appeal is an appeal against the decision of Freeman DCJ, it has no merit. The reasons which Freeman DCJ gave and explained to the applicant as to why the jurisdiction under s24 of the Criminal Procedure
Act could not assist the applicant in the circumstances of the case are clear and compelling.

There is no error in the manner in which Freeman DCJ dealt with the application before him. In truth, the application was an attempt, and the present appeal is an attempt, to re-litigate the merits of the sentencing proceeding before Saunders DCJ.

The case of Grierson versus The King <case>; [(1938) 60 CLR 431] is authority for the proposition that when an appeal has been heard upon its merits and finally disposed of and judgment perfected, this
Court has no jurisdiction to re-open the appeal.

The same principle was recently re-affirmed by the High Court in the case of
Postiglione versus The Queen <case>; [(1997) 71 ALJR 875] in the joint judgment of Dawson and Gaudron JJ at 877 and then the judgment of McHugh J at 886.

In so far as the present appeal is an appeal against the sentencing decision of Saunders DCJ, the court has no jurisdiction to entertain it.

I propose that the appeal be dismissed.
 
SULLY J: I agree.
 
DUNFORD J: I also agree.
 
GLEESON CJ: The order of the court is that the appeal is dismissed.
 * * * 
