

Attorney General for New South Wales versus Ivan Robert Marko Milat Nos. Cca /95; Cr D 70114/94 Criminal and Procedure - Administrative Law - Legal
Practitioners [1995] NSWSC 88 (19 October 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
GLEESON CJ, KIRBY P AND MAHONEY JA
HRNG
SYDNEY, 5 September #DATE 22:9:1995 #ADD 19:10:1995 
Counsel for the Appellant: (Attorney General)           K Mason QC (Solicitor General)/
C L Lonergan 
Counsel for the Respondents:
Milat            B W Walker SC/
R J Brender (Crown Prosecutor)   
M A Tedeschi QC (Submitting appearance) 
Solicitors for the Appellant: (Attorney
General)           I V Knight (State
Crown Solicitor)
Solicitors for the Respondents:
Milat            Boe and Hogan (Brisbane)
S E O'Connor (Solicitor for Public Prosecutions)
ORDER
Appeal allowed; and
Orders made by Hunt CJ at CL set aside.
JUDGE1
GLEESON CJ, KIRBY P AND MAHONEY JA This is an appeal under [s5F](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5f.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act 1912](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) against an order of Hunt CJ at CL staying the trial of the respondent, Ivan Milat, until funds are provided for the legal representation of the respondent in accordance with a formula set out in his
Honour's reasons for judgment. In making such an order, his Honour relied upon the decision of the High Court in Dietrich versus The Queen <case>; [(1992) 177 CLR 292.]
The respondent has been committed for trial in the Supreme Court upon charges of having murdered seven persons between December and April 1992, and of having attempted to murder another person in January 1990. There is also a charge of armed robbery in relation to that last person. Hunt CJ at CL has been assigned as the trial judge, and, in that capacity, has dealt with a number of interlocutory matters.
The trial will be lengthy and complex, and will place considerable demands upon the capacity of the lawyers representing both the Crown and the appellant. Central to the issue raised in this appeal is the appellant's right to a fair trial. Quite apart from that, however, it is obviously most undesirable that such a trial should proceed with an unrepresented accused.
If that were to occur, the length, and cost to the community, of such a trial would be increased greatly, as would the risk that a second trial might become necessary. The State has a substantial interest in seeing that the respondent is provided with proper legal representation. However, it is not that interest which is in question in the present proceedings, and it is not the court which is, at least directly and prospectively, the guardian of that interest.
The evidence disclosed a history of negotiations between the legal representatives of the respondent, and the Legal Aid Commission of New South
Wales, in relation to the provision to the respondent of legal aid. Subject to one qualification, that history was not of direct relevance to the application for a stay of proceedings. The qualification is that the relations between the respondent and the Legal Aid Commission were regarded by the primary judge as relevant to an evaluation of one of the four alternative offers of legal aid current at the time of the hearing of the stay application. That matter will be considered in more detail below.
At the time of the hearing of the application, the position was as follows.

Conduct of the trial had been assigned to a Brisbane firm of solicitors,
Messrs Boe and Hogan, who had represented.
the, respondent throughout most of the committal proceedings. Approval had been given, to briefing two barristers, Mr T D Martin of the Brisbane Bar, and Ms C M Traill of the Sydney
Bar.
The Legal Aid Commission, on 24 July 1995, having previously made other and different offers of legal aid, made the following four alternative offers: 
Assignment of the case to Mr Boe who would brief Mr Martin and Ms
Traill, the three of them to be remunerated at rates which will be set out below.

The provision of a Public Defender of Senior Counsel status, a junior counsel of the applicant's choice, and an in-house solicitor from the
Commission.

Assignment to a private solicitor briefing two junior counsel (one of whom was to be the leader), all of the applicant's choice.

Assignment of a private solicitor of the applicant's choice, briefing a
Public Defender, leading a junior counsel of the applicant's choice.
In relation to the first of the four alternatives, there were to be allowances for travel and accommodation for Mr
Martin and Mr Boe, but these were not the subject of dispute. There was, however, a dispute as to the rates of remuneration offered, and it was the unacceptability of those rates that was the immediate cause of the application for a stay of proceedings.
The rates offered by the Legal Aid Commission were as follows:
For Mr Martin (as leading counsel):
Preparation, pre-trial hearing and first day of trial (allowing twenty five days)             $19,000
This is the equivalent of a daily rate of        $760
For the balance of the trial - a daily rate of     $840
For Ms Traill (as junior counsel): 
Preparation, pre-trial hearing and first day of trial (allowing twenty five days)             $12,000
This is the equivalent of a daily rate of        $480
For the balance of the trial - a daily rate of     $680
For Mr
Boe (as solicitor):
Preparation, view and pre-trial hearing (allowing twenty nine days)             $19,000
This is the equivalent of a daily rate of        $655
For the balance of the trial - a daily rate of     $586
The daily rate was to include all conferences.
In relation to the other alternatives, the fees payable to the junior counsel in each of (2), (3) and (4) were to be the same as those offered to Ms
Traill. In relation to alternative (3), the senior of the two counsel was to be paid the same fees as those offered to Mr Martin. In relation to the private solicitor in each of the alternatives and (4), because such solicitors had not been involved in committal proceedings, the fee for preparation would be $30,000, in lieu of $19,000.
The respondent's notice of motion seeking a stay of proceedings was filed on 11 July, prior to the offers of 24 July. The offers were varied after the notice of motion was filed. However, the matter was argued upon the basis of the offers made on 24 July. The respondent in effect sought a stay of proceedings unless and until the Legal Aid Commission increased the amounts payable in connection with alternative (1) to certain substantially higher amounts set out in the notice of motion.
For reasons that will need to be examined in some detail, Hunt CJ at CL rejected all four alternative offers as inappropriate or inadequate, but, as invited by the notice of motion, framed an order related primarily to alternative (1). His Honour examined the adequacy of the fees offered to Mr
Martin, Ms Traill and Mr Boe. He did not accept the level of fees contended for in the respondent's notice of motion, but he concluded that the
Commission's offer was inadequate, and that to be adequate it would need to be increased as follows: 
The daily fees offered for the trial would need to be increased: 
For the leading junior counsel from $840 to $1,000 
For the second junior counsel - from $680 to $750 
For the solicitor - from $586 to $850 
The time offered for the preparation would need to be increased: For counsel - from twenty five to thirty days 
For Mr Boe - from twenty nine to forty days 
For another solicitor - from forty six to fifty seven days 
The fees offered for preparation of both counsel and solicitor would need to be increased by the same percentage as the daily rate for the trial was being increased.
The order made was that the trial be stayed until funds were provided for the respondent's legal representation at the trial in accordance with the formula set out above.
The Solicitor-General, representing the appellant, submits that what has occurred in the present case is nothing more or less than a de-facto review by a trial judge of an administrative decision committed by the relevant legislation to the Legal
Aid Commission, and a usurpation by the trial judge of the powers and functions of the Commission. Furthermore, it is argued, even if such an exercise as that undertaken at first instance were warranted in law, his Honour fell into error in rejecting the offers made by the Legal Aid
Commission as inadequate. There was material error, it was said, in, his
Honour's evaluation of each of the four alternative offers.
In considering these submissions, it is necessary to begin with the decision of the High Court in
Dietrich. The effect of that decision was discussed by the High Court in the later case of New South, Wales versus Canellis ((1994) <case>; [181 CLR 309).]
Dietrich established the following propositions: 
Australian law does not recognise that an indigent accused on trial for a serious criminal offence has a right to the provision of counsel at public expense.

However, under Australian law, an accused has the right to a fair trial or, perhaps more accurately, a right not to be tried unfairly.

The courts have an inherent jurisdiction which extends to a power to stay proceedings in order to prevent the prosecution of a criminal proceeding which will result in a trial which is unfair.

Each case needs to be examined in the light of its own particular circumstances. However, ordinarily, where an indigent person has been charged with a serious criminal offence, if, by reason of lack of means and the unavailability of other assistance, that person is denied legal representation, the trial will be unfair.

Accordingly, where an indigent person has been charged with a serious criminal offence, and he or she is denied legal representation by reason of lack of means, and the unavailability of other assistance, the court has jurisdiction to stay the proceedings until he or she is provided with legal representation necessary for a fair trial, or with the resources necessary for such representation.
The effect of the decision in Dietrich was summarised in Canellis (181
CLR at 328) as follows: "The principle established by the decision in (Dietrich) is that a court has jurisdiction to grant an adjournment or order a permanent stay of proceedings at a trial until such time as an indigent person charged with a serious criminal offence is provided with legal representation necessary for a fair trial or resources for such representation. As the majority judgments made clear, that principle is based on, and derives from, the accused's right to a fair trial".
There is nothing in Dietrich to suggest that an indigent accused can frustrate attempts to bring the accused to trial simply by rejecting offers of legal aid or other assistance. Mason CJ and McHugh J (177 CLR at 311) emphasised that the circumstances of each case need to be considered, and
Deane J (at 337) related the principle in question to denial of legal representation by reason of an accused's lack of means and the unavailability of other assistance.
It was conceded at first instance, and on this appeal, that the court should deal with the stay application upon the basis that Mr Milat is indigent, and lacked the means to pay for his own representation. The issue was whether, in the circumstances, which included the offers from the Legal
Aid Commission set out above, he ought to be regarded as a person who, by reason of lack of means, and the unavailability of other assistance, was denied legal representation.
Mr Milat has not, so far, been unrepresented. Every time his matter has come before a court, he has had lawyers appearing for him. However, the lawyers whom he wishes to represent him at his trial have informed the Legal
Aid Commission that they are unwilling to act for the fees offered to them by the Commission.
The respondent did not seek to make a case based on proof of unsuccessful attempts to retain other lawyers, and inability to find suitable representation.
It is important to note the character of the proceedings before Hunt CJ at CL, and, in that connection, to distinguish them from other types of proceeding.
The [Legal Aid Commission Act 1979](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laca1979183/), in [s39](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laca1979183/s39.html), empowers the Commission to determine the fees to be paid by it to private legal practitioners to whom work is assigned by the Commission.
[Section 12](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laca1979183/s12.html) specifies certain obligations of the Commission in respect of the provision of legal aid, which might take the form of assigning work to private legal practitioners, or having work done by the Commission's own legal staff. One of those obligations, for example, is to ensure that legal aid is provided in the most effective, efficient and economical manner. The Commission is charged with the responsibility of allocating necessarily limited resources in accordance with its statutory duties and the priorities it establishes from time to time. (It should be added that the relevant decisions in this case were made by the Commission itself; not by a delegate.
The Commission consists of ten commissioners, including nominees of the Minister, the Commonwealth Attorney-General, the Bar
Association and the Law Society.)
There is no procedure for an appeal against a decision of the Commission to make offers of the kind here in question, and the court was not dealing with an application to review the decision on administrative law grounds. Nor was his Honour presiding, as an arbitrator or a mediator, over a dispute between the Commission and the respondent's chosen lawyers for the purpose of seeing that the latter were adequately remunerated.
In the context of dealing with an application to exercise a power to stay proceedings in a criminal trial, his Honour was deciding whether, in the circumstances revealed by the evidence, including the offers of legal aid made by the Commission on 24 July, the respondent had shown that he was unable to obtain proper legal representation and that his trial would therefore be unfair.
The first of the principles established in Dietrich, as summarised has important implications. In considering, and rejecting, the suggestion that
Australian law recognises a right in an accused person to counsel provided at public expense, Mason CJ and McHugh J (117 CLR at 310) pointed out some difficulties associated with such a proposition. One difficulty referred to was that it would involve arguments as to the degree of experience and competence of counsel who might otherwise be available to an accused person.
It is not required by the decision in Dietrich, and would be inconsistent with it, for trial judges, in dealing with stay applications, to embark upon a detailed exercise of assessing the relative degrees of competence and experience of lawyers potentially available to act for an accused person. Of course, lawyers vary in ability; accused persons obtain better representation from some lawyers than from others, just as trial judges obtain better assistance from some lawyers than from others. But the principle in Dietrich turns upon whether legal representation is unavailable to an indigent accused.
It would be a serious criticism of a qualified lawyer, regularly practising in the criminal area, to say that representation by such a person was the equivalent of being relevantly unrepresented.
The principle in Dietrich concerns persons being, or about to be, tried for serious criminal offences who are, to use the language of one of the leading judgments (177 CLR at 311), "forced on unrepresented". It does not concern an accused person's supposed right to competent counsel; the existence of such a right was denied by the decision in Dietrich. That does not mean.
that questions of competence are entirely irrelevant to the application of the
Dietrich principle. They are, however, to be put in their proper perspective.
It may well be that, in a given case, if the only representation available to an accused is manifestly inadequate to the task, it would be appropriate to regard the accused as being, for practical purposes, unrepresented. That, however, is not the present. case.
The circumstances in which the stay application came before Hunt CJ at CL involved elements which had the potential to distract attention from the real issue to be determined. Dietrich, it should be recalled, came before the High
Court in a relatively uncomplicated manner. An accused person, who had been refused legal aid, (for reasons that would not arise in this State), had appeared unrepresented at his trial and had been convicted. The present case, however, is more complex. There is a team of lawyers, suitable to the respondent, and available to appear for him. They have rejected the fees offered to them by the Legal Aid Commission as being too low. They want to be paid more. There are other alternative forms of legal assistance on offer.
That is the factual background against which the respondent claims that legal representation is unavailable to him. It is understandable that a trial judge would be frustrated by a stand-off between the respondent's chosen lawyers and the Legal Aid Commission, especially if the judge formed an impression that the Commission was taking an unreasonable approach on the question of fees.
However, the judge's function is not to approve or disapprove of the conduct of the Commission; it is to decide whether, in the events which have occurred, the respondent has shown that he is a person to whom legal representation is unavailable. There could, no doubt, be cases where the legal aid being offered was so inadequate, or subject to such restrictive terms and conditions, that it would be right to conclude that a person to whom legal aid was offered has been left relevantly unrepresented.
But when a stay application is made in the present circumstances, there is a risk that a trial judge will be drawn into a form of arbitration between lawyers and the Legal Aid Commission.
In considering the issue whether the respondent had established that he was a person unable to obtain legal representation, Hunt CJ at CL addressed, in turn, each of the four alternative offers of legal aid which had been made by the Commission 24 July. This was being done, of course, in circumstances where the respondent had not actively sought representation other than by Mr
Martin, Ms Traill and Mr Boe.
Nevertheless, as his Honour's approach to the matter impliedly and correctly recognised, if the application, for a stay were to proceed, the respondent had to show why he ought to be regarded as unable to obtain representation when, on the face of it, any one of the four alternatives involved an offer of representation, or of funding for representation.
His Honour first addressed the second alternative. The problem there was not one of money, or of professional competence. A Public Defender of senior counsel status, briefed with a junior counsel of the respondent's choice, would undoubtedly have the experience and competence to conduct the respondent's trial. The Public Defenders in this State are amongst the most able practitioners in the criminal law field. As to the in-house solicitor from the Commission, once again, no question arose as to competence, and no issue of money was involved. There was evidence to the effect that the
Commission has on its staff approximately 210 solicitors, of whom approximately 170 appear in all jurisdictions, including criminal law matters.
Of those 170 solicitors, some 80 practise solely within the criminal jurisdiction.
The reasoning which led Hunt CJ at CL to conclude that he was entitled, for the purpose of the stay application, to put this alternative offer to one side, was based upon a conclusion that the past conduct of the Legal Aid
Commission, and an officer of the-Commission, Mr Humphreys, towards the respondent and Mr Boe, was such that any solicitor from within the Commission would be "tainted", and that "a trial in which (the respondent) is forced to accept a solicitor tainted by the conduct of the Commission would not be a fair one". For that reason, the applicant would be justified in rejecting the second alternative offer. This appears to involve a questionable assumption that, if the applicant could obtain no other legal representation, he would nevertheless reject the second alternative. However, it is unnecessary to pursue the validity of that assumption.
There were, in his Honour's view, two aspects of the previous conduct of the Commission, and Mr Humphreys, towards the respondent which tainted all in-house solicitors in the Commission. A third possible aspect raised in the course of evidence was considered, but finally left out of account.
The first matter concerned a disagreeable incident in which Mr Humphreys, who was dealing, on behalf of the Commission, with Mr Boe's representations in relation to legal aid, accused
Mr Boe of infringing [s41](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laca1979183/s41.html) of the [Legal Aid
Commission Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laca1979183/) and thereby exposing himself to penal liability. The full detail of this episode is set out in his Honour's reasons for judgment, and need not be repeated here. On the information before him, his Honour concluded, correctly in our view, that Mr Boe had not infringed [s41.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laca1979183/s41.html) Mr
Humphreys was not called to give evidence in the stay application, the
Attorney General's principal witness being Mr Murphy, who had taken over the conduct of the Commission's dealings with Mr Boe from about April 1995. Hunt
CJ at CL made the following finding concerning the attitude that had been adopted towards Mr Boe by Mr Humphreys: "Whatever view Mr Humphreys may perhaps genuinely have had of the matter when he first threatened a prosecution, he must soon thereafter have been fully disabused of that view. His conduct in threatening a prosecution was itself petty in nature, and his resistance to the many attempts to have him justify his attitude was obdurate, even bloody-minded. His failure to withdraw the serious and unjustified allegations of criminality which he made demonstrates an attitude of intransigence which is unworthy of him".
Let it be assumed, for the purposes of the present appeal, that Mr
Humphreys behaved towards Mr Boe in the manner characterised by his Honour.
The conclusion that 170 solicitors in the Commission are tainted by that conduct is one which we cannot accept. Each of those solicitors has his or her individual professional responsibility to the clients, and to the court. Each solicitor is an officer of the Supreme Court of New South Wales. There is no warrant for a conclusion that any one of those solicitors would do any less than his or her professional duty if required to act for Mr Milat. Nor, if one is to look at the matter from the point of view of Mr Milat, would any other conclusion be reasonable. Mr Milat, of course, has never said that he would not trust an in-house solicitor from the Commission, but even if he were to say that, his views, or the views of some disinterested observer, would not be relevant, unless they were reasonable and fair minded.
The same observations apply in relation to the second incident arising out of what his Honour described as "the unhappy history of the relationship between (the respondent) and the Commission".
The Commission originally required that
Mr Milat contribute an amount of $50,000 as a condition of being granted legal aid. This led to a vigorous dispute between Mr Boe and the Commission, and a controversy about certain financial transactions between Mr Milat and members of his family. Ultimately, without giving any explanation, the Commission, on 13 July 1995, waived the requirements that Mr Milat contribute $50,000. His Honour said: "I do not make a finding against the Commission that the contribution requirement was waived by it only because it was finally obliged by (certain) publicity to face up to the fact that it could not justify the maintenance of that requirement.
I do not do so despite the strong indications in the evidence that this was indeed so, because such a finding is unnecessary for the purposes of this application. It is sufficient to say that, on the material provided to the applicant, that must clearly have been the impression conveyed to him".
Thus his Honour found that Mr Milat must have been given the impression that the Commission waived its contribution requirement of $50,000 because it could not justify it. In other words, Mr Milat would have been given the impression that the Commission originally made a requirement, then found itself in public dispute about the requirement, deciding that it could not justify the requirement, and withdrew it. Once again, how all this tainted the in-house solicitors in the Commission who deal with criminal matters from time to time is unclear.
The Commission is an independent statutory body, whose membership is as outlined earlier in these reasons. We do not doubt that, from time to time, the Commission, and individual officers of the Commission, come into dispute with applicants for legal aid about the terms and conditions upon which legal aid will be granted. It may also happen that, on occasion, the Commission, or officers of the Commission, will behave in a manner which is wrong-headed and unreasonable. That, however, does not justify a conclusion that an accused person is thereafter entitled to reject the services of any in-house solicitor employed by the Commission.
We agree with the submission of the Solicitor-General to the effect that the two matters relied upon by his Honour did not provide a basis for disregarding the second of the alternative offers made on 24 July. That conclusion alone justifies a reversal of the finding that the respondent had demonstrated that he was unable to obtain legal representation. However, we will go on to examine the way in which his Honour dealt with each of the other three alternatives offered.
The fourth alternative involved assignment to a private solicitor of the respondent's choice, briefing: a Public Defender (assumed by his Honour to be of senior counsel status) leading a junior counsel of the respondent's choice.
In dealing with this alternative, his Honour acknowledged that Public
Defenders of senior counsel status are usually advocates of a very high quality, and, taking the position of leader in isolation, the applicant would be well represented. However, there was a problem about the other members of the team.
His Honour, in relation to the junior counsel, said: "In the present case, complex (and difficult) as it is ... I am not satisfied that the trial would be unfair if the funds provided were adequate only to retain junior counsel of less than considerable experience. Because there will nevertheless still be experience, skill and judgment of a reasonable order required, I do not suggest that anyone with less than, say ten years practice in the criminal jurisdiction would be adequate for the position of junior counsel in a case such as this. The offer made by the
Commission is insufficient for such a counsel.

More importantly, perhaps, the Public Defender of Senior
Counsel status must have the back-up of a solicitor of the quality to which I have already referred. There is an unfortunate tendency for some private solicitors who practise in the criminal jurisdiction to think that it is sufficient to leave a junior solicitor or even a clerk in court with counsel whilst they are themselves engaged elsewhere. A case such as the present demands the full time attendance of an experienced solicitor with those qualities".
It will be apparent from the foregoing that his Honour's reasoning in relation to this fourth alternative was influenced by his views as to the adequacy of the fees offered by the Legal Aid Commission, and that in turn was central to his consideration of alternatives 1 and 3. Before coming to the manner in which he dealt with alternatives 1 and 3, however, we should observe that the proposition that it was necessary to assume that the junior counsel would be a person of not less than 10 years' standing at the Bar involves an error of principle of the kind considered above when discussing the first proposition established by the decision in Dietrich. In the light of the first matter that was decided in Dietrich, it is impossible to accept that the High
Court's decision is authority supporting an approach under which a trial judge says, in effect, that unless an accused person has, in addition to a Public
Defender: of senior counsel status, a junior counsel of not less than 10 years' standing, the accused is to be regarded as relevantly unrepresented.
His Honour's reasoning in relation to the first and third of the alternative offers was as follows. He identified the amounts of the fees offered to Mr Martin,
Ms Traill and Mr Boe. These have been set out above.
Then he referred to evidence of market rates for corresponding legal services that had been given by a practising solicitor. These were of the order of $2,500 per day for senior counsel, $1,500 per day for junior counsel, $1,500 per day for a senior solicitor, and $900 per day for a junior solicitor. It was noted that the respondent was not suggesting that he was entitled to have representation funded at those rates. Nevertheless, there was a large gap between the amounts offered by the Commission, and the amounts contended for in the notice of motion.
Reference was made to [s39](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laca1979183/s39.html) of the [Legal Aid Commission Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laca1979183/), which requires the Commission to determine the fees paid to private legal practitioners for particular legal services at a figure less than the ordinary professional cost of those services.
Noting that he was not concerned with the Commission's general policies,
Hunt CJ at CL said: "I am concerned only with what is required to ensure that the applicant is competently represented, and whether the trial is likely to be unfair if a certain level of public funding is not provided".
Reference was made to some evidence, of a rather unsatisfactory nature, relied upon by the Attorney General, in support of the proposition that there are many legal practitioners in Sydney who would be willing to conduct this trial on the basis offered by the Legal Aid Commission, and who were competent to do so. His Honour inferred that the offers from such practitioners were based upon an inadequate amount of information as to what was involved in the proposed trial. No weight was placed upon their willingness to act. His Honour rejected submissions that he should infer that some competent legal practitioners would be willing to act out of a sense of duty, and others would be willing to act out of a desire to attract favourable publicity.
He then said: "Taking all of these matters into account, I am satisfied that the amount of legal aid offered by the Commission is not sufficient to enable the applicant to retain appropriate or competent legal representation to defend him in this trial so far as his current team are concerned, or any similar team of private Practitioners of (the respondent's) choice. That disposes of the offers made in pars (1) and ".
It is also of significance to note the concluding portion of his Honour's reasons. He went on to determine for himself what would be an adequate offer of legal aid, and ultimately arrived at the formula referred to at the commencement of this judgment, and incorporated by reference in his order. In broad terms, the formula referred to in his order increased the daily fee offered for leading junior counsel by about twenty percent, the daily fee offered for the second junior counsel by about ten percent, and the daily fee offered for the solicitor by about thirty percent. The time for preparation was also increased, in one case from twenty five to thirty days, in another case from twenty nine to forty days, and in another case from forty six to fifty seven days.
 .
The Solicitor-General submitted that all this involved the trial judge in doing the very thing he was not entitled to do, that is to say, treating the proceedings as an appeal from, or an administrative review of, the decision made by the Legal Aid Commission, and setting alternative and (only moderately) higher rates of remuneration offered to the respondent's lawyers.
Attention was directed to the order of the magnitude of the increase in the fees involved in his Honour's formula. If the fees proposed in his Honour's formula were regarded by him as adequate, how could it be said that the fees offered by the Legal Aid Commission were so low as to leave the respondent relatively unrepresented?
It is convenient to refer at this point to a submission argued on behalf of the Attorney General which was rejected, and in our view rightly rejected, by Hunt CJ at CL. It was submitted that, having regard to the provisions of the [Legal Aid Commission Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laca1979183/), and the powers and functions of the Commission, the requirements of Dietrich were satisfied in this State, and it should be taken to be the intention of the legislature that a person who has been offered legal aid by the Commission could never obtain a stay of proceedings on Dietrich grounds.
There is nothing in the [Legal Aid Commission Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laca1979183/) which takes away, or qualifies, the right of an accused person to a fair trial, or which deprives courts of the inherent jurisdiction to stay proceedings on the ground considered in Dietrich. The powers and functions of the Legal Aid Commission, and the powers and functions of a trial judge, are separate and distinct, even though they may have a close practical relationship. The reasons advanced by the Solicitor-General in support of the proposition that it was no part of the function of Hunt CJ at CL to second-guess the Legal
Aid Commission in determining what offer or offers to make to the respondent have, as their corollary, the proposition that it is not for the Legal Aid Commission to decide whether there has been an infringement of the respondent's right to a fair trial. That is for the judge to decide, in the light of what has been done by the Legal Aid Commission. Their respective functions are separate and independent.
Whilst Hunt CJ at CL disclaimed any intention to review the policies and practices of the Legal Aid Commission, or to substitute his own opinion for those of, the Legal Aid Commission as to what was a proper level of funding for the representation of the respondent at his trial, it is difficult to escape the impression that the focus of his Honour's attention was the reasonableness of the Commission's decision. It may be that the circumstances in which the matter came before him, and the background to the application for a stay of proceedings, made it difficult to look at the problem from any other point of view. It is likely that his Honour's calculation of a suitable alternative formula was undertaken in an effort to make a practical contribution to the resolution of what he saw as an impasse which, unless resolved, would be blot on the administration of criminal justice in this
State. If that be what he was seeking to achieve, then we feel obliged to express our sympathy with that objective. If the progress of this important trial were seriously disrupted by a dispute over the amounts of money involved in the difference between what the Legal Aid Commission offered, and what Hunt
CJ at CL proposed in his alternative formula, the position would be intolerable.
However, the issue raised by Dietrich was not the setting of a reasonable rate of remuneration for the respondent's legal representation. The question was whether the respondent had proved, by evidence, that he was unable to obtain legal representation and that his trial would be unfair. We do not consider that, on the evidence placed before Hunt CJ at CL, the respondent demonstrated that he was in that position.
Our conclusion on the foregoing makes it unnecessary to consider the separate challenge to the costs order made by Hunt CJ at CL.
The appeal should be allowed, and the orders made by Hunt CJ at CL set aside. As far as the evidence extends on this point, there is no reason why the trial should not proceed. The proceedings will be returned to the Criminal
Division of the Supreme
Court.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/88.html  
