

Young and Rubicam Australia P/L versus Neil Lawrence [1997] NSWSC 255 (10 July )

YOUNG & RUBICAM AUSTRALIA PTY LTD v. NEIL LAWRENCE /97 January 1997 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
SMART J 
INTERIM JUDGMENT 
I have reached a conclusion as to the course which should be followed pending the final hearing.
 
Detailed reasons for judgment will be published next week. Their preparation is well advanced.

There are a number of areas of factual dispute and some difficult legal issues which need to be resolved.

On any view the maximum notice period is 6 months from 10 January 1997. There is no realistic prospect of a full hearing and a final decision for some months. This case would not warrant substantial priority or the displacement of other matters in the list.

There are substantial issues including whether the contract of 31 March 1993 as amended has been repudiated by the plaintiff and whether the defendant was able to accept that repudiation. There are also difficult questions as to what injunctive relief, if any, the plaintiff is entitled. I am being merely illustrative.

The contract of employment is cast in terms which reflected the special nature of the position and the special relationship which was to and did exist. It did not contain any express negative stipulations or restrictive covenants.

It is not reasonably possible to determine or forecast the final result of the proceedings at this stage. It is a case in which the balance of convenience plays an important part and the interim result which I reach with that consideration in mind does not reflect upon either of the parties or bear upon the final result.

The court is prepared to accept the following undertakings from the defendant without admissions pending the hearing of the suit: a) To refrain from divulging any secret or confidential information relating to the business of the plaintiff or its related bodies corporate to any other company or person; b) To refrain from using any intellectual property belonging to the plaintiff or its related bodies corporate.
 c) Not to solicit any existing clients or staff of the plaintiff up to 10 July .

In addition, either undertakings should be given by the defendant or orders made to this effect against him: 
Up to 10 July 1997 not to take over and perform any advertising work placed with the plaintiff by its clients on or before 14 January 1997, without the consent of the plaintiff or the court.

Up to 10 July 1997 not to make statements to the representatives of the media criticising adversely the plaintiff, its related bodies corporate and the businesses of each.

I am not prepared to grant the plaintiff the interim relief which it sought.

I am prepared to set a timetable and, if desired, to consider a reference to a referee under SCR Pt 72.

YOUNG & RUBICAM AUSTRALIA PTY LTD v. LAWRENCE /97 February 1997 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
SMART J 
JUDGMENT 
Neil Thomas Lawrence is skilled in the creative aspects of advertising. He was keen to set up his own advertising agency and made arrangements to do so.
These had crystallised shortly before 10 January 1997. The new agency is to be known as Whybin Lawrence TBWA. However, he was employed by Young & Rubicam
Australia Pty Ltd, part of a large multi-national advertising agency. From about 1990 to March 1993 he was the Creative Director of the plaintiff's
Adelaide agency. On 31 March 1993 the plaintiff appointed him to be its
National Creative Director and the Creative Director of its wholly owned subsidiary, Young & Rubicam Sydney Pty Ltd. This meant that he was the
Creative Director of the plaintiff's Sydney agency. As from April 1996 he has held the positions of Regional Creative Director and Vice Chairman. The position of Regional Creative Director incorporated the positions of National
Creative Director and Creative Director of the plaintiff's Sydney agency.
Lawrence has never been a director of the plaintiff nor been invited to attend directors' meetings. The title of "Vice Chairman" was apparently to emphasise the important role which Lawrence played in the company.

For some days in early January 1997 the advertising world was rife with rumours that Lawrence was leaving the plaintiff. Late on 10 January 1997
Lawrence saw PM Asche, Area Director & Chief Executive Officer, Australia & New Zealand, of the plaintiff and wrote to him. In Lawrence's letter he confirmed his resignation as Regional Creative Director and Vice Chairman with effect from 10 July 1997 and stated that he would like to establish his own advertising agency in Sydney and work in a smaller, more personal environment.
He asserted that during the six months notice period he would continue to fully perform all of his obligations to Y & R Australia as Regional
Creative Director. This resignation was unwelcome.

According to Lawrence at least 70% of his time was spent on the work of the plaintiff's Sydney agency as its Creative Director but not more than 30% on regional duties. As the Creative Director, Sydney he handled some major client accounts. He knew the client's needs and their executives.

The letter of appointment of 31 March 1993 spoke of Lawrence as "a catalyst of a renaissance of Young & Rubicam in Australia" and the "Young and Rubicam which you and I lead." One of the tasks of Lawrence specified in the letter was to lift the new business performance of Young & Rubicam, Sydney.

The letter (as varied) constituted the contract of employment. It was not for a fixed term but was to continue indefinitely until determined for cause or by either party giving the other 6 months notice in writing to this effect. The major salary package recognised Lawrence's skills. As he had to move from
Adelaide to Sydney he was also to receive a housing allowance and a further allowance until he relocated his family from Adelaide to Sydney later in 1993.

The letter (as amended) further provided: "In the unlikely event that Young & Rubicam terminates this agreement, other than for cause, the maximum payment which we will make is the equivalent of 6 months total salary package. This payment will be in full and final settlement of all claims. In addition, Young & Rubicam will pay for your family's relocation and business class airfares to Adelaide or Melbourne.

However, should you resign from the company before the end of this assignment, to accept a position with a direct competitor of the company or any of its subsidiaries, you will be responsible for all your relocation costs." 
I am not sure what is meant by the words "the end of this assignment." Does it refer to the period of his secondment in Sydney? That appears to be open ended. Does it mean during the currency of the agreement including the 6 months notice period? 
Unusually, the letter contains no express negative stipulations prohibiting
Lawrence doing certain types of work for certain periods. I would be reluctant to imply such stipulations as Lawrence may not have agreed to them.

The letter stated that the final responsibility for the company's creative performance rested with Lawrence and that no creative staffing decisions would be made without prior consultation and agreement with him.

The letter does not require Lawrence to devote the whole of his time and efforts to the work of Y & R. He could do other work but not that precluded by his duties of loyalty and fidelity. He could not have done advertising work for a competitor or on his own behalf if in competition with
Y & R. Practically, the discharge by Lawrence of his duties was unlikely to leave much time for anything else.

Y & R sought the following relief on an interlocutory basis against Mr
Lawrence, his servants or agents restraining them from: "(b) Either on their own account or for any third party, directly or indirectly in competition with the Plaintiff or its related bodies corporate, performing any services for, entering into any transactions with, soliciting or approaching for the purpose of securing business from any third party which is or was a client of the Plaintiff or its related bodies corporate during the course of the Defendant's employment with the Plaintiff until 10 July 1997 or until such further order; c) Either on their own account or for any third party endeavouring to solicit or entice away from the Plaintiff or its related bodies corporate any employee of the Plaintiff or its related bodies corporate until 10 July 1997 or until such further order; d) Making any comments to the media which have or may have the effect of adversely affecting the business interests of the Plaintiff or promoting the interests of any of the Plaintiff's competitors until 10 July 1997 or until such further orders." 
On any view the relief sought in sub-paragraphs (b) and (d) is too wide and should be narrowed.

At the meeting of 10 January 1997 Lawrence told Asche that his decision to establish his own agency was "a done deal". Asche, after noting that Lawrence had given 6 months notice and agreed to fulfil his obligations to the agency in that time, asked Lawrence what he really wanted to do. Lawrence stated that the timing was up to Asche and Kearley (the Managing Director of Y & R
Sydney) and that he had not had a chance to consider timing issues and his future plans in detail.

Lawrence stated that Asche replied that they should both think about the timing and the exit strategy over the weekend, that he would like to discuss this further in Melbourne next Tuesday and that in the meantime he would like
Lawrence to keep his resignation to himself. According to Lawrence, he said that this was not reasonable or realistic given the amount of quite accurate rumour in the market place and amongst Y & R staff and it would be unfortunate if those who were close to him found out about the matter from people other than him.

Asche, who left for overseas shortly before the proceedings were started but when the proceedings must have been in contemplation will, according to Y & R's solicitor, say that Lawrence did not make the last mentioned remark but said that he did not think that Asche would be able to keep it quiet and that he (Asche) responded that they should try, that he did not want either of them to say anything to anyone until after they met in Melbourne on Tuesday and agreed on a plan for Lawrence's departure and that Lawrence did not respond. Asche will claim that he took this to mean that Lawrence had agreed to his (Asche's) request. Asche was not able to be cross examined on his version. Nor could he be asked about a number of other pertinent points. The lack of evidence from him and its testing by cross examination placed the plaintiff at a disadvantage.

Lawrence agreed that he spoke to a number of Y & R personnel over the weekend and told them that he had resigned and of his intention to set up his own agency. These included the National Media Director, the head of Client
Services, the Strategy Planning Director and Shaun Branagan the Deputy
Creative Director, Sydney.

Lawrence spoke with the Chief Operating Officer of News Ltd but in more extended terms. Lawrence told him of his resignation, that he had given six months notice, that he was not sure how it would work out in practice but that he would fulfil the tasks outstanding. Lawrence also spoke with the Chief
Executive Officer of Foxtel. I see no difficulty in Lawrence telling these executives that he had resigned and had given 6 months notice. Much depends upon exactly what he said and how he said it, especially as to the new agency and whether he tried to solicit their business. The best soliciting is often done subtly and deftly. The executives needed to know promptly that Mr
Lawrence would not be at Y & R after 10 July 1997 as it could affect what they did.

A journalist from the Australian Financial Review apparently spoke with Scott
Whybin, an intended or actual partner of Lawrence on Sunday 12 January 1997.
On 13 January 1997 the Australian Financial Review published some paragraphs to the effect that Lawrence of Y & R had been headhunted to set up a
Sydney Office for international agency TBWA and that he was believed to have resigned on Friday from Y & R which had won the title of "Agency of the
Year" twice under his direction. Details of TBWA and its present and future operations were included.

On the morning of 13 January 1997 Asche, Kearley and Laing (Chief Financial
Officer) met. It was decided to appoint Branagan to the office of Creative
Director, Sydney.

Y & R was worried. Lawrence had been the major point of contact with major clients in Sydney and the creative mainspring of Y & R. Shortly before lunch the senior staff were advised of Lawrence's resignation and Branagan's appointment and shortly after lunch all staff were advised. At least one meeting was held. A memo was issued by Asche and Kearley to key executives in
Australia and New Zealand of Y & R. It read: "Neil Lawrence has resigned from Young & Rubicam to establish a new advertising agency in Sydney. We have accepted his resignation and wish him well for the future.

Effective immediately, Shaun Branagan assumes leadership of the Young &
Rubicam's Sydney Creative Department...

In time, we will also be making an announcement concerning the Regional
Creative Director's role to ensure that Young & Rubicam's commitment and leadership in creativity continues unabated..." 
During the course of 13 January 1997 a journalist with the Sydney Morning
Herald contacted Whybin, Lawrence and Asche. The article in the Herald of 14
January 1997 recorded that Lawrence was a driving force behind turning around the fortunes of 
Y & R's Sydney office three years ago, taking the agency's client billings from $20 million a year to more than $100 million. The journalist quoted
Lawrence as stating: "I believe there is a void in Sydney for a strong, creatively focussed advertising agency. I think most agencies are too focused on revenues instead of paying attention to the core business function: advertising." 
Asche was quoted as saying that Y & R had a terrific team which would carry on and that Lawrence was only one person. Asche was trying to control the damage flowing from Lawrence's resignation and to minimise the effect of losing him. Y & R took particular exception to the quoted comments of
Lawrence regarding them as disloyal. Lawrence said that that the passage quoted was a bad misquote and not an accurate record of what he said. It was out of context.

Lawrence claimed that when he learned of Branagan's appointment on the Monday he believed that there had been a serious breach of contract. He also had some discussions with his solicitors and that view had been provisionally expressed. His solicitors confirmed on Tuesday that Y & R had repudiated the contract.

Lawrence said that about mid-day on 14 January 1997 he telephoned Asche and complained that the announcement to all Sydney staff and all Y & R staff in Australia and New Zealand that Shaun Branagan had been appointed to his position of Creative Director of the Sydney Office with immediate effect made his position untenable. Asche allegedly replied that Y & R had no choice because of Lawrence's story in the Financial Review on Monday. When Lawrence replied that he had nothing to do with it Asche stated that Lawrence's people in Melbourne were quoted in it. Reference was made to Lawrence speaking with people over the weekend.

Lawrence re-iterated that his position was untenable and said "the vast majority of my role has been as Creative Director of Young & Rubicam,
Sydney and that position has now been taken away." Asche replied that he had legal advice that this was not the case. Asche told Lawrence that it would not be possible to resolve that issue during that conversation.

Shortly before 4.20pm on 14 January 1997 Lawrence's solicitors forwarded a letter to 
Y & R claiming that its action in appointing Branagan constituted "a fundamental repudiation" of Lawrence's contract of employment and evinced an intention on the part of Y & R no longer to be bound by the contract. The solicitors advised that that repudiation was accepted as bringing that contract to an end and that Lawrence had accordingly taken all necessary steps to sever his relationship and dealings with Y & R. Payment of his full salary package for 6 months was demanded.

About 4.30pm that day Lawrence telephoned Kearley, referred to the conversation with Asche earlier that day and stated that it became difficult.
Lawrence continued that the appointment of Branagan to his position as
Creative Director of the Sydney office had made his position untenable and that he could not enter into further discussion with 
Y & R as the matter had become a legal one. Kearley acceded to Lawrence's request that his personal assistant could pack his belongings and deliver them to him. This was done. Lawrence and Y & R had parted.

By letter of 15 January 1997 Y & R's solicitors denied that it had repudiated the contract or evinced an intention not to be bound. The letter suggested that since April 1996 
Y & R wanted Lawrence to concentrate more on his regional role and less on the local Sydney office. That suggestion was made at the hearing. However, there was no evidence contradicting Lawrence's evidence that 70% of his salary was debited to 
Y & R, Sydney. At a final hearing the books of account of Y & R
Australia and 
Y & R Sydney would be available. These will reveal where Lawrence's salary was debited and the billings of the Sydney office over the years. Something was made of a document entitled "1997 Key Tasks to Accomplish". It was not inconsistent with Lawrence spending 70% of his time on his work as Sydney
Creative Director and it was in fairly general terms. It was one of those corporate documents which is kept on the file but appeared to matter little in the present dispute. The evidence pointed to the conclusion that as at January Lawrence spent about 70% of his time on his work as the Sydney Creative
Director.

I do not propose to canvass the terms of the correspondence which passed between the solicitors.

Y & R wanted to remove Lawrence from most of the work that he had been doing and ensure that he no longer remained the major point of contact with the major clients of the Sydney agency. The executives of Y & R did not discuss the proposed appointment of Branagan with Lawrence or how they might work together. In the normal course Branagan would have reported to Lawrence as the Regional Creative Director but Kearley said that Branagan would continue to report to Lawrence "in those aspects that were appropriate." That obscure answer was not explored.

Kearley was guarded about the role of Lawrence over the next 6 months and uncomfortable when giving evidence about it. He was in a difficult position.
Counsel for Y & R told the court that Y & R would continue to pay
Lawrence up to 10 July 1997 even if he did not attend the office. It was apparent that Y & R did not want Lawrence operating in the advertising world in Sydney over the next 6 months.

Commercially, it would make little sense for Y & R to allow Lawrence to remain as the major point of contact with its major clients when he was due to leave on 10 July 1997. The trouble was that was his job. Y & R did not want Lawrence to continue as previously. There were exceptions when Lawrence had to be brought in to keep the client happy and the job going. On the other hand Lawrence wanted to go as soon as possible.

However smoothly formulated and expressed, statements of intention to observe contractual obligations whether in or outside the court should be treated with scepticism. The commercial interests of the parties and their longer term objectives as to clients are safer guides as to their conduct and intentions.

I do not accept that Y & R was bound to consult Lawrence about the appointment of his successor and seek his approval to that appointment. That would be unreal and extraordinary. However to comply with the agreement, Y & R was bound to consult with Lawrence about the persons with whom it wanted him to work on the regional and Sydney work, and endeavour to reach some agreement. Lawrence was in a special position. He had to be consulted about creative staffing decisions prior to them being made and his agreement secured. Lawrence would not have been entitled to act unreasonably. Unilateral announcement and action including removal from most of his work do not march easily with the terms of the contract. During the consultation there may well have been discussions about handling and sharing the creative work and the transfer of the work and clients. The way in which Y & R dealt with the matter made it difficult for Lawrence who was effectively sidelined. That was not envisaged by the contract.

Y & R sought to justify the course which it took by relying upon Lawrence speaking to senior executives of major clients of the agency and some of the agency's staff over the weekend contrary to Asche's request and not keeping his departure quiet until a press statement could be agreed. It relied upon him stating that he was going to set up a new advertising agency which would inevitably be a competitor, the comments of his partner to the press and the paragraphs in the Australian Financial Review. Those paragraphs, amongst other things, stress the skill of Lawrence and his importance to Y & R.

Y & R contended that Lawrence had forced its hand and that it had to respond to protect its position and its business. Y & R submitted that
Lawrence behaved in an opportunistic way by creating a crisis adversely affecting Y & R and then seeking to take advantage of its response.

My provisional view is that the clients were entitled to know promptly that
Lawrence was leaving Y & R. Nor could he be restrained from saying what he proposed to do. While Y & R may have wished that the paragraphs in the
Australian Financial Review had a different tenor they do not of themselves justify removing the major part of Lawrence's work, even if they could be attributed to him in whole or in part.

There is a substantial issue to be tried on the question whether Y & R repudiated the contract. On the present evidence my provisional view is that Y & R probably did but that view could change on fuller evidence and further argument.

The further question is whether Lawrence was entitled to accept the alleged repudiation of Y & R. Was he an innocent party? Lawrence spoke to a journalist on the Herald called Andrew Horney on 13 January 1997. If he made the remarks attributed to him that most agencies paid too much attention to making money and not enough to the core function of advertising and that there was a void in Sydney for a strong creatively focussed advertising agency, such remarks to the press would probably constitute a serious breach of his duties to the employer.

The attributed remarks appeared in the Sydney Morning Herald of 14 January
It was after 4pm on that day that Lawrence purported to accept that alleged the repudiation. There is a substantial issue to be tried whether
Lawrence was entitled to accept the alleged repudiation.

In summary, Y & R's case was that Lawrence was a talented employee in a position of special influence and that Y & R was entitled to have Lawrence work out his full period of six months notice so it could protect its business, re-organise and find suitable replacements. Lawrence was not entitled to walk out and start up in opposition.

Y & R contended that Lawrence was putting in place arrangements to start a new competitive advertising agency while employed by Y & R, that he endeavoured to recruit key staff handling the accounts of Y & R's major clients, that he liaised with key clients in a seductive way, that he made it known that he would be carrying on in competition, that he disregarded his employer's wishes by making it known immediately to employees and clients that he was leaving to set up in opposition, and acted so that it would become public knowledge and failed to endeavour to agree on a joint public statement with his employer. A loyal employee would assist to introduce and prepare his successor.

There was nothing to stop Lawrence making arrangements to establish a competitive advertising agency at the end of 6 months. A critical consideration was whether Y & R was prepared to allow Lawrence to discharge his normal duties or whether is proposed to take him out of the front line and sideline him for the six months only allowing him to deal with major clients when it could not be avoided in Y & R's own interests.

Lawrence relied on the following submissions: 
As the contract did not contain any express provision restricting Lawrence working outside his employment with the plaintiff any restrictions had to be implied. There was no sufficient reason at law to imply a covenant that
Lawrence would not work in advertising and related fields; 
The six months' notice period meant that Y & R must continue to employ
Lawrence in the duties to and for which he had been appointed for that period and that Lawrence must continue to discharge those duties. Y & R could neither significantly vary the duties nor reduce the period and Lawrence could not walk out; 
The contract provided that the consequences of wrongful termination on either side sounded in damages. Injunctive relief was not available to either party. Lawrence stressed that absence of mutuality as he could not obtain an injunction to compel Y & R to perform its obligations; 
Y & R was seeking to enforce a contract for personal services involving creativity, trust and confidence. It was not a case of enforcing negative stipulations as there were none; 
Y & R repudiated the contract on 13 January 1997. Lawrence relied on the events earlier narrated and, in particular the appointment of Branagan "effective immediately" and the staff memorandum; 
Lawrence had not breached his obligations as an employee of Y & R.
Even if he had, Y & R was also in breach. Thus neither party was entitled to enforce the contract and each was relegated to an action for damages.

Both parties addressed substantial arguments on the balance of convenience.
Both contended that the case of the other was devoid of merit. Y & R contended that it was intolerable that Lawrence should be able to compete with it during the six months period.

This is the kind of case where the true facts may never be fully known. I would be surprised if either party wished to involve the executives of the major clients of Y & R with whom Lawrence dealt. Further, if the interlocutory hearing is any guide there is likely to be some special pleading on both sides. The placement of future advertising work will probably depend on the quality of work done by the various advertising agencies as assessed by the clients.

As I remarked in my interim judgment it is not reasonably possible to determine or forecast the final result of the proceedings at this stage. The issues of repudiation by 
Y & R and whether Lawrence was entitled to accept that repudiation will probably loom large and much will depend on the ultimate findings of fact.

The period of notice expires on 10 July 1997. The is no realistic prospect of a full hearing and a final decision for some months. Kearley said that
Branagan would be able to perform the functions of Creative Director, Sydney effectively. This case would not warrant substantial priority or the displacement of other matters in the list. On any view the granting of injunctive relief is one of some difficulty.

It would be incorrect to grant the interim relief sought when the prospect of the final injunctive relief sought being granted is so doubtful. On the other hand it would run contrary to the tenor of the agreement for work of Y & R placed with it prior to 14 January 1997 to be taken over and performed by
Lawrence. It would also be contrary to the obligations imposed upon Lawrence for him or his agents or servants during the 6 month period to be making statements critical of Y & R.

The combination of circumstances earlier mentioned led me to the view that relief should be granted in the terms set out in my judgment of 31 January
On that day I also ordered that the costs of the application be costs in the cause, each party having experienced a measure of success and of failure. Substantial issues were raised and their ultimate determination will probably depend on the findings of fact made at the trial.

If desired, I will set a timetable for the future conduct of the matter. One matter requiring resolution is whether the matter should proceed by way of oral or affidavit evidence. Subject to hearing the parties I am inclined to prefer the latter.

Both parties are to have liberty to apply on 24 hours notice.
 * * * 
