

Cecily Rhind versus Westside Car Carrying Pty Limited [1997] NSWSC 97 (27 March )

Cecily RHIND versus WESTSIDE CAR CARRYING PTY LIMITED /97 
Thursday 27 March 1997 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
HIDDEN J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an appeal by way of stated case from the decision of a
Local Court magistrate in proceedings for property damage arising out of a motor vehicle accident. The appellant, Cecily Rhind, was the plaintiff in those proceedings which she had brought against the driver of the other vehicle involved, Steve Abdelmessiah, and the owners of that vehicle, three individuals who traded in partnership as Mal Morris Motors. Also joined as a defendant was the respondent to this appeal, Westside Car Carrying Pty
Limited, and it is the question of that company's liability to the plaintiff which is the subject of the appeal.

The respondent carried on the business of transporting vehicles on the backs of trucks, and it retained truck drivers for that purpose. One of those drivers was Andrew Abdelmessiah, the brother of Steve Abdelmessiah. Steve
Abdelmessiah himself was not employed by the respondent. On 17 July 1992, Mal
Morris Motors (to which I shall refer as "Morris") entered into a contract with the respondent whereby the respondent was to arrange for two vehicles, one of which was owned by Morris, to be transported by truck from the premises of a motor dealer at Waitara to the Morris premises at North Manly. The respondent arranged for Andrew Abdelmessiah to undertake that task.

That same day, Mr Abdelmessiah arrived at the premises at Waitara in his truck, accompanied by his brother, Steve. It seems that there was insufficient room on the truck to fit both the cars that were to be picked up, and Andrew
Abdelmessiah arranged for Steve to drive one of them, the vehicle owned by
Morris, behind his truck. In the course of the journey to North Manly, Steve
Abdelmessiah lost control of the vehicle and it skidded to the wrong side of the road, colliding with the plaintiff's vehicle. That the accident was the result of the negligence of Steve Abdelmessiah was not in issue and his
Worship entered judgment for the plaintiff against him. However, he entered judgment for Morris and the respondent on the basis that neither was vicariously liable for the damage.

The respondent forbade its truck drivers to drive motor vehicles to be transported by them except for the purpose of getting them on and off the trucks. There was evidence that the respondent was covered by insurance only if cars were transported on the trucks. Accordingly, Andrew Abdelmessiah had requested his brother to do that which he himself was expressly forbidden to do.

According to the stated case, the learned magistrate entered judgment for the respondent upon the basis of the following findings:
Andrew Abdelmessiah was an independent contractor, not an employee of the respondent;
The respondent contracted with Morris, not merely to deliver the subject vehicle from one place to another, but to do so by transporting it on the back of a truck;
Neither Steve nor Andrew Abdelmessiah were the servants or agents of the respondent in the act of driving the subject vehicle to North Manly.

For the appellant, it was argued that judgment should have been entered against the respondent on the basis that, applying the relevant principles to the primary facts as he found them, his Worship should have concluded:
That Andrew Abdelmessiah was an employee of the respondent, rather than an independent contractor; and
That Andrew had implied authority to retain his brother to do what he himself was forbidden to do.

The principles governing the decision whether a person is an employee or an independent contractor were considered by the High Court in Stevens v
Brodribb Sawmilling Company <case>; [(1985-86) 160 CLR 16.] Mason J (as he then was) said (at p 24): "A prominent factor in determining the nature of the relationship between a person who engages another to perform work and the person so engaged is the degree of control which the former can exercise over the latter. ...

But the existence of control, whilst significant, is not the sole criterion by which to gauge whether a relationship is one of employment. The approach of this Court has been to regard it merely as one of a number of indicia which must be considered in the determination of that question ... Other relevant matters include, but are not limited to, the mode of remuneration, the provision and maintenance of equipment, the obligation to work, the hours of work and provision for holidays, the deduction of income tax and the delegation of work by the putative employee." 
Wilson and Dawson JJ were also of the view that the degree of control was relevant but not decisive. Their Honours went on (at pp 36-37): "The other indicia of the nature of the relationship have been variously stated and have been added to from time to time. Those suggesting a contract of service rather than a contract for services include the right to have a particular person do the work, the right to suspend or dismiss the person engaged, the right to the exclusive services of the person engaged and the right to dictate the place of work, hours of work and the like. Those which indicate a contract for services include work involving a profession, trade or distinct calling on the part of the persons engaged, the provision by him of his own place of work or of his own equipment, the creation by him of goodwill or saleable assets in the course of his work, the payment by him from his remuneration of business expenses of any significant proportion and the payment to him of remuneration without deduction for income tax. None of these leads to any necessary inference, however, and the actual terms and terminology of the contract will always be of considerable importance.

Having said that, we should point out that any attempt to list the relevant matters, however incompletely, may mislead because they can be no more than a guide to the existence of the relationship of master and servant. The ultimate question will always be whether a person is acting as the servant of another or on his own behalf and the answer to that question may be indicated in ways which are not always the same and which do not always have the same significance." 
In the stated case the learned magistrate listed the primary findings of fact upon which he determined the relationship between Andrew Abdelmessiah and the respondent, some of which pointed towards his being an employee, and some away from it. Those favouring the inference that he was an employee were as follows:
The trucks driven by the respondent's drivers were all painted in the promotional colours of the respondent and bore the company's logo;
The respondent did not permit its drivers to take work from other sources, except on weekends when they could do country jobs;
The respondent required its drivers to give notice if they wished to take holidays;
The respondent obtained insurance for its driver's trucks;
The respondent dealt with the customers and invoiced them;
The respondent instructed its drivers to keep their trucks roadworthy, to obey all the road rules, to be well presented and not to argue with the customers.

The fact earlier referred to, that the respondent required its drivers to convey a vehicle from one place to another only on the back of a truck, is also relevant on this question. In addition there was evidence that, when a job was allocated to a driver, he could not do it in his own time but was expected to attend to it straight away. There was also evidence that an amount was deducted from the wages of Andrew Abdelmessiah towards payment for the damage to the Morris vehicle.

The facts found by his Worship pointing towards the classification of Mr
Abdelmessiah as an independent contractor were these:
The respondent's drivers used their own trucks;
They were paid on a contract basis according to the distance travelled by them;
They did not have paid holidays or sick leave;
The respondent made monthly prescribed payments to the Australian Tax
Office on behalf of some of its drivers, but no PAYE tax was taken from the payments to any of them, nor was any payroll tax paid in respect of them.

Counsel for the appellant submitted that the preponderance of those primary findings led to the conclusion that Mr Abdelmessiah was an employee, rather than an independent contractor, and that it was not open to his Worship to have found otherwise. On the other hand, counsel for the respondent relied upon the factors tending to point away from an employment relationship and referred also to evidence that Mr Abdelmessiah paid for the maintenance and running costs of his truck. There was evidence also that, although the drivers were required to give notice if they wished to take time off, there was apparently no limit on the amount of time they could take.

For the respondent it was also submitted that the fact that the respondent insisted that cars be transported on the backs of trucks arose from the requirements of its insurance policy, and was not indicative of an employer/employee relationship. As to the other matters tending to point towards such a relationship, counsel relied upon the recent decision of the
Court of Appeal in Vabu Pty Limited versus The Commissioner of Taxation (unreported, 6 September 1996) in which it was held that the drivers retained by a courier company were independent contractors. There were a number of relevant similarities between the working conditions of those drivers and the drivers retained by the respondent. They also were required to accept the work allocated to them by the company and to perform it as the company directed.
They were required to wear uniforms, to be neat and tidy, to replace their vehicles when the company considered them unsatisfactory, to observe a starting time, and to work a prescribed number of hours. Nevertheless, this evidence led Meagher JA only to the following observation: "The cumulative effect of these conditions certainly gives the Company a deal of control over its courier. However, a man may supervise others without becoming their employer." 
The similarities do not end there. In Vabu the company provided telephones, uniforms and signage. However, the couriers used their own vehicles and bore the expense of maintaining them. They received no wage, but were paid a prescribed rate for the number of successful deliveries they made: a fact which Meagher JA considered to be a "very important indicium" of the fact that they were independent contractors.

In my view, adopting the approach enunciated in the cases, the primary facts found by his Worship amply justified the conclusion that Andrew Abdelmessiah was an independent contractor, rather than an employee.

Counsel for the appellant acknowledged that, if Mr Abdelmessiah were not an employee, it would be more difficult to make good the second submission, that he had implied authority to retain his brother to drive the Morris vehicle, even though he himself was forbidden to do so. It was said that that implied authority might be inferred, whether Mr Abdelmessiah was an employee or an independent contractor, from the fact that what he did was reasonable in the circumstances and in the respondent's interests. There was evidence that the
Morris vehicle was what was described as a "lemon": an old Mazda of relatively little value. It could not be fitted onto the truck and it needed to be transported the substantial distance from Waitara to North Manly. If Mr
Abdelmessiah had not arranged for his brother to drive it, it would have been necessary for him to make the journey to North Manly to deliver the other vehicle and then return to Waitara to transport the subject vehicle, thereby causing inconvenience and delay and incurring additional expense. On the other hand, there was evidence that Morris did not require prompt delivery of that particular vehicle.

The fact is that the respondent, for sound financial reasons, forbade Andrew
Abdelmessiah to drive the vehicle rather than conveying it on the back of his truck and, as a matter of common sense, that prohibition extended to his arranging for some other person to do so. It does not appear to me that, in the face of that prohibition, the matters relied upon by counsel for the appellant fairly give rise to the implied authority for which he contends.
Counsel for the respondent submitted that the evidence did not establish any of the situations in which a person might be vicariously liable for the wrongdoing of an independent contractor: see J G Fleming, The Law of Torts (8th Ed) at pp 388 ff, and I do not understand counsel for the appellant to have submitted to the contrary.

For these reasons, I am of the view that the learned magistrate's determination should be affirmed and the summons dismissed.
 * * * 
