

Hong Thi Dao versus NSW Insurance Ministerial Corporation [1996] NSWSC 216 (21
June 1996) 
HONG THI DAO versus NSW INSURANCE MINISTERIAL CORPORATION /95; DC 29483/86 June 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
HANDLEY, SHELLER, COLE JJA 
CATCHWORDS: MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENT - evidence of witness - findings of fact of trial judge should not be disturbed 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Ex tempore 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed with costs 
JUDGMENT 
SHELLER JA: This is an appeal from a decision of his Honour Judge H H Bell, given on 2 March 1995 in proceedings brought by the appellant, Ms Hong Thi Dao, against the party responsible for the acts of the driver of a vehicle which struck Ms Dao in Marrickville Road on 27 June 1986. In that accident Ms Dao was seriously injured.

His Honour, having carefully reviewed the evidence, found a verdict for the respondent defendant. In so doing he said that he could not accept the appellant's account of the events and accepted the evidence given by the driver of the car, Ioan Olaraiu, and an independent witness, Rona Florence
Cox.

In the course of his finding his Honour said that the plaintiff in crossing from the south to the north of Marrickville Road had emerged from the line of traffic proceeding north which he described as a position of danger and then crossed the centre line running in front of the other driver's car. His Honour said that the bus and the semi-trailer which were proceeding north and between which apparently the appellant had come, must have taken up virtually the whole of the number two traffic lane so that when the appellant emerged from behind the bus she was virtually on that centre line. She kept running and must have been hit by the insured vehicle within a matter of two or three strides when she appears to have collided with the front of the grill.

Mr Tregenza, who appeared for the appellant, accepted that if his Honour's finding in this respect was correct, the verdict in favour of the respondent must follow. In a careful argument, he sought to make the point that consistent with the evidence given by Mrs Cox the respondent driver must have had, if keeping a proper lookout, a view for a greater space of time than his
Honour's judgment suggested and certainly a sufficient view to have avoided the accident.

Despite the care with which the argument was put, I am not persuaded by it. It depends upon treating parts of the evidence of Mrs Cox with a degree of precision which goes beyond what I would regard as an appropriate approach to her evidence. The argument was put to his Honour below and rejected. It seems to me that in accordance with authority in that circumstance it is not open for us to interfere and contradict the finding of fact that his Honour made.

Accordingly in my opinion the appeal should be dismissed with costs.

HANDLEY JA: I agree.

COLE JA: I also agree.
 
HANDLEY JA: The orders of the Court will be appeal dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
