

Gonsalves versus Debreczeni Matter No 1452/98 [1998] NSWSC 588 (4 December )

Last Updated: 8 December 1998 
GONSALVES versus DEBRECZENI /98 December 1998 
Young J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiffs sue for orders to atone for alleged breaches of fiduciary obligations and provisions of the [Fair Trading Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/). The first defendant is a real estate agent: the second defendant is his wife. 
In November 1997, the plaintiffs signed an authority for a company controlled by the first defendant, Clover Enterprises Pty Limited, trading as "Clover
Real Estate: The Professionals", to sell their property. The evidence is that it is common practice for estate agents who are engaged to sell property to find out the intention of their customer as to where the customer intends to live after the sale. Estate agents find this practice often produces further business. The evidence is that it is so prevalent that it is in fact taught to putative estate agents at their training colleges.

In the present case, the plaintiffs had placed their property at 61 Old Ferry
Road, Illawong in the hands of Clover Real Estate for sale. The person who had the most to do with the transaction on the part of the plaintiffs was the second plaintiff, Mrs Gonsalves. Clover Real Estate was based at Alfords
Point. Its principal was the first defendant, Peter Debreczeni. Clover Real
Estate worked in close conjunction with another real estate agent, Andrew
McKenzie whose principal office was at Menai. The first defendant was the principal representative of Clover Real Estate in its dealings with the plaintiffs, though Mrs Vickie Fisher its sales manager, Judy Wren its customer service manager and perhaps a junior salesman were also involved. The second defendant, Susan Debreczeni is the first defendant's wife: she was not connected with Clover Real Estate.

Mrs Gonzalves' evidence is that, since August 1997, the plaintiffs had been extremely interested in a vacant block of land at Lot 1 Hector Street
Illawong. The vendor of this land was John Young. She further deposes that, from mid-November 1997, she was in almost daily contact with the first defendant. Some of this contact was to do with the sale of their property, but some also was to do with viewing possible properties for purchase. I will need to return to this in more detail in due course.

The present dispute came about because after long negotiations, Mr and Mrs
Young instructed their solicitors, Klees Chicken & Associates, to issue a contract for purchase of the land to the plaintiffs. The plaintiffs received this contract on 2 February 1998 from Ellen Klees, who described herself as a conveyancing secretary, employed by that firm.

The plaintiffs' solicitor, Mr Morahan, made an appointment with Ms Klees to exchange at 10 am on 10 February 1998. However, at 9:55 on that morning, Ms
Klees exchanged contracts to sell the property to the defendants. I will deal with the detailed evidence later in these reasons. The plaintiffs say that the defendants' purchase came about by breach of fiduciary duty and breach of statutory duty under the [Fair Trading
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/) on the part of Mr Debreczeni. They claim that the estate agent, in whom they reposed trust and confidence, gazumped them and he and his wife, who was a volunteer, should hold the land on constructive trust for them.

A summary of the essential allegations in the plaintiffs' statement of claim is as follows:
By 27 January 1998, there existed a state of trust and confidence between the plaintiffs and the first defendant such that the plaintiffs placed trust in the first defendant to deal with them honestly and in good faith; 
The first defendant was told on 27 January 1998 that the plaintiffs had reached an agreement to purchase Lot 1 Hector Street for $415,000 and that the vendors' solicitors were Klees Chicken & Associates; 
The defendants purchased Lot 1 Hector Street in breach of that duty.
The first defendant impliedly represented in trade and commerce that the plaintiffs could repose trust and confidence in him and that he would not act contrary to their interests; 
The defendants, in purchasing Lot 1 Hector Street, acted in a deceptive way.

At the hearing, Mr V Gray appeared for the plaintiffs and Mr S Burchett for the defendants. The hearing took a slightly different track to what one would have anticipated from the pleadings. The case on general equitable grounds fell into two parts: (a) whether the first defendant was a fiduciary who derived a personal benefit from the relationship; and (b) breach of confidential information. This second part also shifted during the hearing from prime reliance on a conversation of 27 January 1998 between Mrs Gonsalves and Mr Debreczeni to prime reliance on a relayed message which Mr Debreczeni received on 7 February 1998.

At the conclusion of the oral hearing it seemed to me that some awkward questions of fact and law arose and it would be wiser to reserve my decision.

There are a series of questions that I need to consider which I will list and then answer in order.
What is the true position factually and, in particular, did the first defendant know on or before 9 February 1998 of the plaintiffs' position re Lot Hector Street?
Did the plaintiffs repose trust and confidence in the first defendant, and if so, to what extent did he owe them fiduciary duties?
Did the first defendant make a personal benefit out of the relationship?
Was there any obligation to keep information confidential?
Was there any breach of any general equitable duty by the first defendant?
Has there been any breach of the [Fair Trading Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/)?
How is the second defendant affected by any breach of the first defendant?
What remedy, if any, should be awarded the plaintiffs, and what is the result of these proceedings?
Mrs Gonsalves says in her affidavit that, in late November 1997, the first defendant took her husband and herself to inspect a block of land at 13 Hector
Street, Illawong. She says that after the first defendant had shown them that property, she and her husband took the first defendant to see Lot 1, when the following conversation took place. I will use in conversations "DG" for Mrs
Gonsalves, "MJG" for her husband and "PD" for the first defendant.

DG: "This is the land we have decided to buy. We have had plans for a house drawn up." 
PD: "The vendor is a `cuckoo'. The price is too high. These people are not really serious, they have had the land on and off the market for years." 
Mrs Gonsalves then said that on many occasions when discussing the sale of her present house with Mr Debreczeni she would also discuss the plans that the plaintiffs had for building a house on Lot 1 Hector Street. She further says that on many occasions she told Mr Debreczeni that she was not interested in buying other properties as "You know I want Mr Young's land in Hector Street" to which Mr Debreczeni said, "Come and look anyway, it is better to keep an open mind." 
Mr Debreczeni denied that these conversations took place. Mr Burchett also put why would a busy man like Mr Debreczeni waste his time showing people property that they were not likely to buy. An answer to this is that estate agents are always born optimists.

Mrs Gonsalves then says that on 27 January 1998, the first defendant left a message on the plaintiffs' answering machine to the following effect: "I'm back from a few days away and I'm making a courtesy call in seeing how things are going in that regard." 
Mrs Gonsalves said she returned his call later in the day and the following conversation took place: 
DG: "I have spoken to the people selling the land and we agreed on $415,000 and they're getting their lawyers, Chicken & Klees to send us the contract. Mark and I have designed a home to fit on our block. It would be nice if our house would sell soon. I'll show you a copy of our plans next time we meet." 
PD: "We'll do what we can." 
In her later affidavit, Mrs Gonsalves gave a slightly different version of this conversation.

DG: "I have come to an agreement with the Youngs for $415,000 on the land. You underestimated my powers of negotiation." 
PD: "I still have my doubts, but if you say you have come to an agreement, we will see what happens in that regard. I told you that the land faces south." 
DG: "If the land faces south, the other side must face north." 
Mr Gonsalves gave almost identical evidence to his wife about the inspection of Lot 1 Hector Street immediately after the inspection of 13 Hector Street and the "open mind" conversation. Mrs Cymbeline Rao, who is 
Mrs Gonsalves' mother, says that she can remember that in late 1997 the first defendant came to the house in which she was living with her daughter and son- in-law and she heard either her daughter or son-in-law say to him, "We are selling because we want to buy a block of land in Hector Street and build."
She remembers the inspection of No 13 Hector Street and remembers her daughter and son-in-law saying "We're not interested in this block, we want to buy the other block"; the party then moved to Lot 1 and her daughter or son-in-law said to the first defendant "I have spoken to the Youngs about buying this land" to which the first defendant replied "Oh those people are crazy. They have been putting it on the market for the last (the mentioned number I do not recall) years. Every time they get a buyer, they raise the price. They don't really want to sell." 
Mrs Rao also said that on numerous occasions when seeing properties, either her daughter or son-in-law said "We prefer Hector Street" to which the first defendant would reply, "First things first, we have to sell your home first." 
The plaintiffs gave their evidence precisely and were completely untroubled in cross examination. They both appeared to be extremely competent business people who were very self assured. However, the other evidence in the case makes me take the view that I could not accept Mrs Gonsalves on everything she says.

I have a difficulty in accepting that Mrs Gonsalves directly informed Mr
Debreczeni on 27 January 1998 that she had agreed to purchase the property.
Indeed this problem was so obvious that, in his address, Mr Gray put more emphasis on the scenario that by 7 February 1998, Mr Debreczeni knew from his dealings with the plaintiffs in circumstances where he would not otherwise have known, that he needed to act quickly to gazump the plaintiffs and what sort of price he would need to offer.

The first defendant does not deny that he telephoned Mrs Gonsalves on his return from his summer holidays. This, he says, was about 12 January 1998.
However, as the plaintiffs had not negotiated their deal with the Youngs until the middle of January, it is clear that the response which Mrs Gonsalves says she made telling Mr Debreczeni that he was wrong and that the Youngs had agreed to sell could not have been made on 12 January.

The evidence which makes me suspect whether this occurred or not is that Mr
Debreczeni said that he was out fishing all day on 27 January. This was supported by a certificate (unsworn) from a game fishing charter company that
Mr and Mrs Debreczeni fished from a boat chartered by him departing 7 am and returning at 5 pm. It is extremely strange that this evidence is merely put in by way of certificate obtained at the last moment when it must have been obvious from the affidavits that what happened on 27 January was of key importance. However, the evidence was not challenged and I feel that I should accept it.

On 27 January 1998, the first defendant suffered a heart attack in the evening. He did not come back to work for some time afterwards. On Saturday 7
February, Mr Debreczeni called into the office to pick up his daughter who was working as a receptionist. During the time that Mr Debreczeni was away from the office, Mr McKenzie, presumably because he was the licensed person, was spending some time in the Alfords Point office and was supervising the staff.
He gave evidence that on that afternoon, he had a casual conversation with the first defendant part of which was as follows (I will refer to Mr McKenzie as "AM" his initials): - 
AM: "The Gonsalves have signed up for an auction with Vicki and Judy. Did you know they are buying the block of land in 
Hector Street?" 
Mr McKenzie noticed that at this the first defendant's demeanour changed and appeared to be more tense and less light-hearted and the conversation then proceeded: 
PD: "Oh really and how much are they paying?" 
AM: "About $420,000 but check with Vicki she'd probably know." 
PD: "I will. Where is Vicki now?" 
AM: "She is out on an appointment and then she's going home." 
PD: "I'll try to catch up with her tonight." 
Mr McKenzie says also that in mid-February he was discussing this matter with the first defendant by telephone and the first defendant said "It's a shame they found out so early. I wish we had sold their house before they had found out." He also said on another occasion "I didn't tell anyone about Hector
Street because I didn't want the office to be aware or involved" and also when asked by Mr McKenzie "Why didn't you tell me that you were buying Hector
Street?" the first defendant answered "Because of the connection with the
Gonsalves." 
On the balance of probabilities, Mrs Gonsalves was mistaken in that telephone call on 27 January. Because of the first defendant's heart attack the same day in the evening it was impossible to say that the conversation happened later.
Because the deal with the Youngs was only done mid- February, it was not able to be put that Mrs Gonsalves had merely mistaken the date. Accordingly, the statement of what happened on 27 January must be considered to be a complete invention or, at the very least, a compilation from different conversations on different dates. If a person can convince herself of such a conversation, then despite the fact that she was unaffected by cross examination, considerable doubt must be put on her evidence generally.

I should note here that a further attack was made on Mrs Gonsalves' credibility because she consistently said that she did not really want to inspect further properties, but that the first defendant was pressing her to do so. Yet the records of Clover Real Estate show that she was in fact still telephoning that firm to arrange the inspection of further properties in the first week of February. I do not consider that the material proffered by the defendants in this respect is of sufficient weight for me to discount evidence that was clearly given and withstood cross examination and was obviously the clear present recollection of Mrs Gonsalves.

However, even discounting the second plaintiff's evidence, the plaintiffs' case is well supported not only by the evidence of Mrs Gonsalves, which is accepted, but also by the evidence of Mr Gonsalves plus that of Mrs Rao, Mr
McKenzie and Mrs Fisher to which I have referred.

Mr Burchett attacked Mr McKenzie's credibility. First of all he attacked his credibility because some months before he swore the affidavit which was read by the plaintiffs he had sworn a short affidavit for the defendants. Mr
Burchett strongly criticised Mr McKenzie for not giving the information contained in that later affidavit to the defendants' solicitors when he was being interviewed for the short affidavit he swore for the defendants (which was never read before me). Mr McKenzie's defence was that he was never asked by the defendants' solicitors about those matters, he was only asked about the one thing that was to be put in the affidavit he was giving to the defendants.
He thought that the solicitors would rather not know about the matters that he later put in the affidavit sworn on behalf of the plaintiffs. I accept this evidence.

There was considerable discussion about this matter during submissions. The inference which Mr Burchett wants me to draw is that Mr McKenzie's affidavit is a matter of recent invention. I do not draw this inference. As I said to Mr
Burchett, I would have thought that this submission involved examining the duty of a solicitor who is taking an affidavit to put before the court to ensure that the affidavit is the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth. Mr Burchett countered by saying that his submission was that it was up to the witness to tell the solicitor the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth, and if the witness did not do so, then his credibility was affected. I would reject Mr Burchett's submission. However, as there has not been a proper enquiry into what really did happen when Mr McKenzie called at the defendants' solicitors' office, it is better not to say anything more about the matter.

The other reason why Mr Burchett criticised Mr McKenzie's credibility was because the co-venture was terminated by Mr Debreczeni in circumstances where
Mr McKenzie might well feel bitter. It was put to Mr McKenzie that his evidence was biased because of his bitterness about the circumstances of the termination and bitterness about the fact that Mr McKenzie was earning very little by way of commission at Menai, whereas Mr Debreczeni was earning about $239,000 per year out of the Alfords Point office by way of commissions. Mr
McKenzie did not deny the basic facts, but he did deny, and I accept this denial, that they affected his evidence in any way. As I said to Mr Burchett during submissions, the mere fact that a person has grounds for giving biased evidence is only the first step along the way of showing that the witness' evidence should be discredited. To discredit a witness, counsel usually has to move beyond the possibility of motive affecting a person's evidence and submit that on the whole of the witness' presentation the witness should not be accepted. Of course, if the witness denies obvious motive, or is generally unsatisfactory in demeanour, the inference of unreliability is more easily drawn. However in the instant case there was nothing about Mr McKenzie that would make me draw inferences of unreliability. Indeed, it seemed to me he gave his evidence honestly, being torn between his disgust of what happened and his general regard for the first defendant.

The defendants' case can be fairly simply stated. The first defendant says that he became aware of the existence of Lot 1 Hector Street in about May
He took his wife to see it and they agreed that it was an excellent piece of land. However, they had recently purchased a block of land at Bangor and had visited some display homes at Hoxton Park and had selected a project home which would fit that block of land with which they were happy. They currently live on quite a sloping block of land. In July 1997, Mr Debreczeni had taken Mr McKenzie to see the land. When Mr Debreczeni had his heart attack on 27 January 1998 he thought deeply about his lifestyle and when he was released from hospital, determined that he would buy Lot 1 Hector Street on which he would put the project home. He denies that there was any inkling that this was the block of land that the Gonsalves had determined to buy or that he was influenced by anything that Mrs Gonsalves said. He felt able to transact business somewhere around about Saturday 7 February when he tried to ring the
Youngs to make an offer. On Sunday 8 February he made an offer to Mrs Young to purchase Lot 1 Hector Street for $425,000. He agrees that he made the offer in the name of "Lewis" because it was hard to get "Debreczeni" across on the telephone. Lewis in fact is Mr Debreczeni's middle name. He subsequently raised his offer to $430,000 and obtained a draft contract which his daughter picked up from Ms Klees' office and which his wife exchanged the next day.

It is a fairly clear inference from what occurred that Mr Debreczeni must have been aware, at least on Monday 9 February that there was a competing bidder.
The haste in exchanging contracts cannot be explained in any other way. The block at Lot 1 Hector Street had electricity transmission lines across it and a person who is considering building on the lot would, one have thought, spent a lot more time measuring and working out how the building would fit on the land and considering the implications of the electricity easement etc before exchanging contracts unless other factors made this impossible.

Did, however, Mr Debreczeni know that the Gonsalves were the competing bidders? 
I must return to the plaintiffs' narratives.

Ms Klees, on instructions from the Youngs, issued a contract to the plaintiffs which they received about 2 February 1998. On that day, Mrs Fisher and Ms Wren from Clover Real Estate, called on Mrs Gonsalves because they were concerned about her complaints that Clover Real Estate were not being active enough in selling the plaintiffs' property. It is clear that at that meeting Mrs Gonsalves told Mrs Fisher and her companion that she had in her hand a contract to purchase land in Hector Street. There was some banter between the ladies. Mrs Fisher said that Mrs Gonsalves was reluctant to give her any information, and she (Mrs Fisher) jokingly remarked that Mrs
Gonsalves might be thinking that Clover were going to buy the land from under her. Mrs Gonsalves then said that the purchase price was about $415,000.

I am fairly sure that Mrs Fisher's account is accurate. I am of the view that the primary reason Mrs Fisher wanted the information was to keep her eye on prices in the neighbourhood. It is more likely than not that at a staff meeting the next day Mrs Fisher informed those members of the staff who were present (which did not include Mr Debreczeni, the first defendant) of this and that on the following Saturday, 7 February 1998, Mr McKenzie informed Mr
Debreczeni.

As I have said, on Sunday 8 February, Mr Debreczeni made an offer to Mrs Young to purchase Lot 1 Hector Street for $425,000 using the name "Lewis". On 9
February, the Youngs instructed Ms Klees to issue a contract to "Mr Lewis". Mr
Debreczeni asked his wife and daughter to pick it up from her office. When
Klees Chicken & Associates opened the next morning, Mrs Debreczeni saw Ms
Klees, paid the deposit, amended the contract to add the word "Debreczeni" and contracts were exchanged. In due course Mr and Mrs Debreczeni became the registered proprietors of Lot 1 Hector Street Illawong.

There were two vacant blocks of land in Hector Street at the relevant time.
Hector Street is a cul de sac with only 13 lots in it. Of the two vacant lots, one was being sold through Clover Real Estate, the other, Lot 1, was being sold privately. Although Mr Burchett put that any knowledge that the first defendant may have had of the plaintiffs buying land in Hector Street must have been vague and could have referred to either lot, I prefer the submission of Mr Gray that as Clover Real Estate must have known they had not sold the other lot, the land referred to must be Lot 1.

On about 4 February 1998, the plaintiffs signed an offer to purchase the land and paid a $1,000 holding deposit to their solicitors. The evidence about the holding deposit only came out towards the heel of the hunt. I do not really consider that this takes the case any further, and indeed there is no evidence to show that the first defendant knew about this. The holding deposit would appear to be only an earnest gesture of good faith without any other significance; see eg Commissioner of Taxation versus Guy [(1996) 67 FCR ], 77 and Sydney Harbour Casino Holdings Ltd versus NMBE Pty Ltd (C/A 23
October 1998, unreported).

The evidence from the plaintiffs and their solicitors was that they had signed a contract to buy the land for $425,000 and had left the 10% deposit with their solicitor, Mr Morahan by 6 pm on Monday 9 February 1998. Mr Morahan had rung Ms Klees to make an appointment to settle, and on being told by her that her office only opened at 9.30 am made an appointment for his clerk to attend at 10 am. When he was driving to Sutherland Court at about 9.45 am on Tuesday February, his office called him on his car phone. He then stopped and rang
Ms Klees and found out that she was about to exchange with another purchaser for $430,000. That other purchaser was in fact the defendants who exchanged contracts at 9.55 am.

Even putting aside the evidence of what Mrs Gonsalves said happened on 27
January (and even forgetting about the prior evidence of interest), on the balance of probabilities the answer to the question as to whether the first defendant was aware by 7 February, 1998 that the Gonsalves were about to sign a contract to purchase Lot 1 Hector Street from the Youngs must be "yes" if I accept, as I do, the evidence of Mr McKenzie and Mrs Fisher. There is no doubt at all that Mrs Fisher was told on 2 February that Mr and Mrs Gonsalves had a contract and that the price was either $415,000 or $420,000. There is no room to disbelieve that Mr Debreczeni was told that news on 7 February and that when he heard it his demeanour changed.

Moreover, the use of the name "Lewis" reinforces the view that Mr Debreczeni knew that what he was doing was not completely according to Hoyle, if I can use that expression. I cannot see any other rational reason for using the name
Lewis. What would it matter that Ms Klees would recognise the name Debreczeni as an estate agent unless it was because she might have used that name to Mr and Mrs Young or to Mr and Mrs Gonsalves and this would have repercussions that Mr Debreczeni did not want? 
Accordingly, I find on the balance of probabilities that Mr Debreczeni was aware because of what had been told him both by Mrs Gonsalves and by officers of Clover Real Estate (who in turn had found the information from Mrs
Gonsalves) that the Gonsalves had agreed to buy Lot 1 Hector Street in the sense that they had negotiated a price and contracts had been sent to them and that the purchase price was in the range of $415,000 to $420,000.
The next matter to consider is whether the plaintiffs reposed confidence in the first defendant so that he was a fiduciary agent.

Although this is a convenient way of stating the question, a moment's consideration will see that it is inadequate. Merely because a person reposes faith, confidence and trust in another does not necessarily mean that that other will have fiduciary duties. For instance, one may have faith, confidence and trust in a bus driver that one will be conveyed from point A to point 
B. There may be duties of care and contractual duties involved, but even if faith, confidence and trust is established, no fiduciary duties will arise.
Again, a person may have faith, confidence and trust reposed in him or her without knowing it. For instance if a barrister of good reputation gives an opinion to X and X passes the opinion on to Y, Y may very well repose faith, confidence and trust in the barrister and in his or her opinion, but there will be no fiduciary duty unless the circumstances are such to show that the barrister was well aware this might happen.

Even if there is a reposing of faith, confidence and trust in another and a fiduciary duty arises, that fiduciary duty is not necessarily co-terminous with the expectations of the person who reposes the trust. As P D Finn (as his
Honour then was) said in his Fiduciary Obligations (Law Book Company,
Sydney, 1977) para 15 p 9, "For a person to be a fiduciary he must first and foremost have bound himself in some way to protect and/or to advance the interests of another." A fiduciary relationship may be created if the fiduciary "has assumed a position which requires him to act for or on behalf of that other in some particular manner." Fiduciary obligations can be imposed by contract and indeed, usually are. However, in the instant case, any contract with the Gonsalves was made by Clover Enterprises Pty Ltd. It is quite clear that the plaintiffs put forward Mr Debreczeni as owing fiduciary obligations personally and not as an officer of Clover Enterprises Pty Ltd.
This has certain significance in the case, including of course, the way in which Mr Debreczeni became acquainted with the alleged confidential information.

There is no doubt that an estate agent owes its principal fiduciary duties within the ambit of its agency; see eg Mahesan versus Malaysian Government
Officers' Co-operative Housing Society Ltd [[1979] AC 374.] 
The authorities seem to suggest (though none actually deal with the point in open discussion), that the fiduciary duty of a licensed real estate agent who is employed by a corporation is exactly the same as that of the corporation.
It is almost as if for fiduciary purposes the corporate veil is lifted.
Examples are Blundell & Brown Ltd versus Gathergood [1989] ANZ Conv Rep , affirmed by the New Zealand Court of Appeal as Gathergood versus Blundell & Brown Ltd [[1991] 1 NZLR 405] and
Council of Auctioneers & Agents versus G J Alexander Pty Ltd [[1972] 2
NSWLR 375.] This is in accordance with principle, because as Finn says, op cit, at para 411, "Any person employed, or engaged as agent, to assist or to advise a fiduciary in the discharge of the fiduciary's duties to his beneficiary will himself be held to be in a confidential relationship with that beneficiary." Prime examples are Ex parte James <case>; [(1803) 8 Ves 337]; [32 ER 385] and De Bussche versus Alt [(1878) 8 Ch D 286.] 
Mr Gray rightly submits that fiduciary relations may arise other than from contract. This is well put by the Supreme Court of Illinois in Commercial
Merchants' National Bank & Trust Co versus Kloth [196 NE 214], 218 (1935). The fiduciary relation "does embrace every possible situation where confidence is reposed on the one side with the resulting superiority on the other. Where the facts reveal that trust is confided in one and accepted by him, the fiduciary relation is created. The character and the duty of the relationship are immaterial." 
It must always be remembered when speaking about fiduciaries, that the term "fiduciary" is a very elastic one and it is almost always necessary to look to see what is the particular fiduciary duty concerned. In Chan versus Zacharia <case>; [(1984) 154 CLR 178], 195,
Deane, J said, "Fiduciary relationships may take a wide variety of forms and may give rise to a wide variety of obligations. Ordinarily, in determining whether a constructive trust of a particular property has arisen as a consequence of the existence or breach of a fiduciary obligation, it is necessary to identify the nature of a particular fiduciary relationship and to define any relevant obligations which flowed from it ...".

Deane, J referred to the judgment of Fletcher Moulton, LJ in Coomber v
Coomber [[1911] 1 Ch 723], 728-729. What the learned Lord Justice said on that occasions is as follows: "It is said that the son was the manager of the stores and therefore was a in a fiduciary relationship to his mother. This illustrates in a most striking form the danger of trusting to verbal formulae.
Fiduciary relations are of many different types; they extend from the relation of myself to an errand boy who is bound to bring me back my change up to the most intimate and confidential relations which can possibly exist between one party and another where the one is wholly in the hands of the other because of his infinite trust in him. ... in some minds there arises the idea that if there is any fiduciary relation whatever any of these types of interference is warranted by it. They conclude that every kind of fiduciary relation justifies every kind of interference. Of course that is absurd." 
In the instant case, there was a particular fiduciary relationship between the plaintiffs and the first defendant in and about the sale of their house. In so far as the relationship involving the purchase or possible purchase of another property was concerned it is not necessarily the case that the obligations that flowed from that fiduciary relationship carry over into their role as sellers' agent and prospective purchaser. As Mason, J said in Hospital
Products Ltd versus United States Surgical Corporation <case>; [(1984) 156 CLR 41], 98, "...it is well settled that a person may be a fiduciary in some activities but not in other." The position of a person who makes some remarks or gives away some confidences collateral to a fiduciary role would seem to be an a fortiori case.

The evidence does show that the plaintiffs trusted the first defendant and had confidence in his advice with respect to what they should do about selling their own house. That does not necessarily translate into having confidence in him when showing them other properties. As quite acute business people, as I am sure they are from the way in which they gave evidence and their general background revealed in the evidence, they must have been aware that the agent did owe duties to the vendors on whose behalf he was trying to sell properties and other persons. Even if there had been some fiduciary duty owed to them, that duty would have been modified by the fact that those other duties existed and were known to the plaintiffs to exist; cf Kelly versus Cooper [[1993] AC .] 
I consider that on the evidence there was considerable rapport between the plaintiffs and the first defendant which carried over into their relationship generally. It is tempting to say that that gave rise to a fiduciary obligation so that had, for instance, the first defendant seen a property which he knew the plaintiffs were likely to buy at any price and he himself had a nominee purchase it from the vendor and onsold it to the plaintiffs at a profit, he would probably have been liable not only to the vendor, but also to the plaintiffs as purchasers. There are obviously some difficulties here because there is little case law in the area and it seems rather bizarre that the fiduciary should have to pay twice for his breach of duty. However, that is not the present case.

The crux of the matter is that there was never any express or implied undertaking by the first defendant that he was acting on behalf of the plaintiffs in any way in the matter of the plaintiffs acquiring property. This is the core of a fiduciary relationship.

Putting aside the question of whether there was a misuse of confidential information with which I will deal under a separate heading, I cannot see any fiduciary obligation which would prevent the first defendant gazumping the plaintiffs.
Did the first defendant derive a personal benefit from his relationship with the plaintiffs? 
Bowstead and Reynolds on Agency 16th ed (Sweet & Maxwell, London, 1996) in article 49 at p 239 put this proposition, "An agent may not use his position to acquire for himself a benefit (ie a secret profit) from a third party. He must account to his principal for any benefit so obtained." This seems to limit the benefits for which an agent is accountable to profits acquired. The cases digested in that book all tend to be in that area. One of them, Cook versus Deeks <case>; [[1916] 1 AC 554], featured in the submissions in this case. That, however, was a profits case. 
But are cases in this category limited to situations where the fiduciary makes a money profit or a secret profit? 
Mr Gray referred me to Volume 36A of Corpus Juris Secundum pp 388-9, particularly to footnotes 65 and 66. The learned editor says that the cases support the statement "Anyone acting in a fiduciary relation shall not be permitted to make use of that relation to benefit his own personal interest except with the full knowledge and consent of the other person." That is a wide statement, as are some statements to be found in the cases cited in those footnotes, such as Mallory versus Mallory-Wheeler Co 23 A 708,710 (1891) (Conn) where the court said, "It is a thoroughly well-settled equitable rule that any one acting in a fiduciary relation shall not be permitted to make use of that relation to benefit his own personal interest." However, I have read most of the cases referred to in those footnotes and they all are cases where the fiduciary actually made a monetary profit.

There is at least one case where the benefit is not a profit in the usual sense and that is the situation where a fiduciary renews a lease for his own benefit. These are the cases which stem from Keech versus Sandford <case>;
Sel Cas T King 61; <case>; [(1984) 154 CLR 178], 198, Deane, J spoke of "The general principle of equity requiring a person in a fiduciary relationship to account for personal benefit or gain." 
In Szarfer versus Chodos [(1986) 54 OR (2d) 664] the defendant was the plaintiff's former solicitor. In the course of acting for the plaintiff in proceedings for wrongful dismissal, the defendant became aware that the plaintiff was suffering marital problems. The plaintiff's wife was a temporary employee of the solicitor. This knowledge assisted the solicitor to seduce the plaintiff's wife. Callaghan, ACJ held that the information about the state of the client's marriage was confidential. He said at 677c, "In engaging in sexual intercourse with the plaintiff's wife, the defendant was acting in his own interest and to his personal benefit. I cannot help but conclude that his actions were also to the detriment of his client's interest. Upon discovery of the affair, the client's trust in the solicitor was destroyed. Such conduct which vitiates trust, the essential element of a solicitor-client relationship, and results in physical injury to the client, is a breach of the conflict-of-interest rule referred to above. The defendant has not discharged the onus of proving that he acted reasonably in the circumstances. That in itself is sufficient to hold him liable for damages.
 "Furthermore, however, I am satisfied that he used confidential information for his own purposes in order to obtain the delights and benefits of the affair." The court awarded exemplary damages.

This case is the only one which I have found where the fiduciary obtained a "benefit" which could not be the subject of an account of profits, cf Hewson v Smith (1870) 17 Grant 407 where the fiduciary was a debtor to the trust bought, at a discount, a judgment debt recovered against an insolvent who was a residuary beneficiary and so almost cancelled out his debt.

The wider principle accords with the oft cited rationale for the rule that fiduciaries must be restrained from yielding to temptation. As Pomeroy's
Equitable Jurisprudence says at volume 3 page 807 para 958 (5th ed 1941), "The policy of equity is to remove every possible tempation from the trustee."
It also accords with cases such as Newsome versus Flowers <case>; [(1861) 30 Beav 461]; [54 ER 968] that a seceding congregation of a church cannot get the benefit of having compatible trustees of the church by breach of fiduciary duty.

In my view "personal profit" does extend more widely than cases where the fiduciary has made a pecuniary profit. Even were this not the case, it must always be remembered that the mere fact that a person buys property at the top of the range does not necessarily mean that he or she has not made a profit out of the transaction. Value is a very nebulous concept and the potentiality of a particular property may indeed show that its true or fair value is greater than its market price. Thus in the situation that existed in Chan v
Zacharia (supra) where one former partner got hold of the lease in which the medical practice was formerly carried on, that partner secured a benefit even though the lease may have been obtained at the full market value.

Thus, I consider that the "personal benefit" which is denied a fiduciary extends to cover benefits which cannot be assessed in money. However, it is not every case where the plaintiff perceives that the fiduciary has secured an advantage that the plaintiff will succeed. To take two obvious examples. A trustee is introduced to the beneficiary's girlfriend at a party and subsequently marries her to the emotional damage of the beneficiary. A trustee on a trip to Bathurst to inspect a trust property stops in at a Bathurst newsagency and buys a winning pools entry. In neither case could the beneficiary succeed. Nor would the beneficiary succeed in a case like the present where there is no material to suggest that possession of this particular piece of land had anything more than a sentimental value. The plaintiffs have not established that, by their gazumping, the defendants have obtained a benefit for which they must account. Apart from the aspect of misuse of confidential information to which I will pass shortly, the case does not appear to me to be one which fits within the principle that a fiduciary must not make a personal benefit out of the relationship.
Because of the way the case was presented, I have split my consideration into two heads. However, it should be realized that they are really two aspects of the same rule that prevents a fiduciary from taking advantage of his or her relationship.

Mr Burchett says there was no confidential information involved in the instant case. He says that confidential information connotes what a reasonable person would have thought in the circumstances was confidential and refers to the well-known statement by Megarry, J in Coco versus A N Clark (Engineers) Ltd [(1968) 1A IPR 587], 590-591.

The evidence strongly suggests that the plaintiffs thought that the information was confidential but the fact that they had that thought or even that they might have expressed it (and there is no evidence of expression in this case) would not of itself make the material ipso facto confidential. I listed the authorities for this proposition in my judgment in Kone Elevators
Pty Ltd versus McNay [(1997) 19 ATPR 41-563] at p ,824. Furthermore, as McInerney, J said in Mense versus Milenkovic <case>; [[1973] VR 784], 801, "If the information is not of a confidential nature ...
then it would seem clear that no amount of `swearing to secrecy' can impose an obligation of confidence." 
Putting aside the telephone conversation of 27 January because I do not accept it took place, the plaintiffs relied on (a) the indication to Mr Debreczeni made at the time when the other lot in Hector Street was inspected that they intended to buy Lot 1; and (b) the communication via Mrs Fisher and Mr
McKenzie of 2 February received by Mr Debreczeni on 7 February that they had a contract to sign for a price of $415,000 to $420,000. Neither of these matters is inherently confidential. The fact that X may be contemplating buying a property may, of course, be confidential in some circumstances such as where a large supermarket chain is intending to buy space in a suburban shopping centre or an established goldmining company is to buy the plaintiff's land.
However, the present is not that sort of case. The information about purchase is not something that is likely to affect the value of neighbouring properties.

On the other hand, it can very easily be seen that if the facts of this case were that the first defendant knew that Mrs Gonsalves had her heart set on this piece of land and bought it so that he could sell it to her at a profit, one would be tempted to say that the information was confidential. However, it would be more appropriate to say that such a case would more appropriately fall to be considered under the general principles dealt with in [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s2.html) above.

There are authorities which get close to the present one though neither counsel nor myself have been able to find any case which is exactly like it.

In the old case of Carter versus Palmer [(1842) 8 Cl & F 657], a legal adviser who was intimately acquainted with his principal's financial affairs purchased some securities owned by the principal whose value depended upon the fall of various life estates to about one-third of their value. The legal adviser was made to account for the difference. The case is really one involving purchase by a fiduciary, but it involves the use not only of the position but also of the information that was acquired about the principal's property. Lord Cottenham, LC remarked at ER 277 that what enabled the legal adviser to purchase the property was "the information he had acquired as agent ... such information, therefore, was applied by him to defeat the negotiation in which he himself had been engaged for his client ...".

In Carter's case the information may not have been confidential in the
Coco versus Clark sense but the possession of the information which had been provided by the principal enabled the legal representative to make the valuation from which he could benefit at the expense of his client.

An obvious difference between Carter's case and the present is that
Carter's task appears to have been to have realized money for the principal by selling part of his property so that the action of using the information was contrary to the purpose of the agency. In the instant case, the purpose of the agency was to sell the plaintiffs' existing property. The information was used not about the property that was being sold, but other property that was being purchased.

Perhaps the closest case to the present on the facts is Schering Chemicals
Ltd versus Falkman Ltd [[1982] QB 1.] In that case, a journalist was employed by the plaintiff in a damage control exercise when a drug being used for pregnant women produced birth defects. As a result of what the journalist found out during his employment, he was able to be involved in a film as to the problems caused by the drug. The defendants wished to exhibit the film. The Court of
Appeal maintained the injunction that was granted below. At 27, Shaw, LJ said that there had been communication in a commercial context of information which at the time was confidential and the journalist should not be allowed to make use of it to his profit. At 37, Templeman, LJ said that the information was given and received for one purpose only and he used that information for another purpose for his own gain and to the detriment of the plaintiff was something which was against the duty imposed on the journalist when he received the information.

It seems to me that this case does go a little way towards the view that I was attracted to in argument that outside the trade secrets sphere there may be a class of information which is to be protected by equity as confidential even though it did not come under the Coco versus Clark test. Many of these situations are in fact dealt with in other branches of the law such as the privilege against disclosing communications between legal adviser and client and the right to prevent publication of what was said between husband and wife during marriage: Argyll (Duchess) versus Argyll (Duke) [[1967] Ch 302.] There may be some situations where these particular protections do not apply yet it would be unconscionable for the recipient of information to reveal it. Apart from recording these thoughts to show that they have not passed me by, I do not need to take them any further. The Schering case itself is not authority for the proposition as the information involved in that case was confidential.

Information will be confidential because it is clearly confidential by its content or because the circumstances in which it was communicated indicate that it is confidential or there may be a combination of both. However, the mere fact that a person utters what he or she thinks is a secret does not, for the reasons already given, amount to confidential information.

The present case is complicated by the fact that three separate communications of the allegedly confidential information must be considered. First there is the statement made on the inspection of the other land in Hector Street. I accept the plaintiffs' version of this statement. However, there is nothing in the inherent nature of what was said, nor in the surrounding circumstances to make me find that it was confidential.

Secondly, there was the alleged telephone conversation of 27 January 1998. For the reasons adumbrated above, I am not satisfied that this conversation in fact took place.

Thirdly, there is the relayed information via Mrs Fisher and Mr McKenzie which was received by Mr Debreczeni on 7 February 1998. It is more difficult to find that relayed information has the appropriate degree of confidentiality to be worthy of protection as the number of people who have access to it along the relay will often mean that any initial confidentiality is destroyed. Where information is relayed, it is usually necessary to examine the facts at the time and in the circumstances when it first passed into circulation. It seems to me in the instant case that a reasonable person would not have thought that the information given to Mrs Fisher and Ms Wren was confidential. The information was given reluctantly, but without any restriction. It was passed to Mr McKenzie without any restriction. If the test is whether when Mr
McKenzie relayed it to the first defendant the first defendant should have realized the information was confidential, the answer is the same.

It must always be borne in mind that the information in the instant case was not some secret formula or State secret, but rather that Mrs Gonsalves had finally convinced the Youngs to sell and that she had a draft contract which she proposed to exchange in the near future.

Accordingly, I do not consider that this is a case of misuse of confidential information.
As there has not been a breach of fiduciary obligation or misuse of confidential information, I have to find that there was no breach of fiduciary duty by the first defendant.
The plaintiffs allege that there has been a breach of the [Fair Trading
Act, 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/) because the first defendant represented by silence that he was a person who could be trusted and would not act contrary to the plaintiffs' interests but in purchasing Lot 1 the first defendant acted contrary to this.

There is no doubt at all that in the appropriate circumstances a person's silence may give rise to a representation. In Demagogue Pty Ltd versus Ramensky <case>; [(1992) 39 FCR 31], 41, Gummow,
J when giving the legal judgment in the Full Federal Court said, with respect to the corresponding provision in the Trade Practices Act, "The question is whether in the light of all relevant circumstances constituted by acts, omissions, statements or silence, there has been conduct which is or is likely to be misleading or deceptive." 
The thing that is different about the present case to the ordinary case, if there be such a thing as the ordinary case, is that the estate agent's conduct was not in relation to the property that was being sold but rather in respect of property which the seller was contemplating purchasing.

It is very easy to be too compartmentalised in one's thinking about estate agents' duties. Traditionally, the estate agent is the agent of the vendor and owes fiduciary duties to the vendor alone. Even then the fiduciary duty to the vendor may be cut down because the agent also acts for other vendors with conflicting interests; see eg Kelly versus Cooper [[1993] AC 205.] 
However, the practice of real estate agents in New South Wales in the present decade is that many do have as well a fiduciary relationship to the purchaser.
Not only is it standard practice as referred to earlier for vendors' agents to try and interest the vendor in other property, but also a commercially astute agent will realise that if the purchaser purchases a property and appreciates the agent, when the purchaser in turn seeks to sell the property he or she may very well retain the same agent. Accordingly, it may well be that an estate agent's duty to the vendor may, under the Kelly versus Cooper type principle, be cut down if a vendor knows sufficient of the market to be aware that this practice goes on so as to expect the estate agent within reason to also keep confidences of the purchaser.

Accordingly, there is nothing really unusual in an estate agent owing fiduciary obligations to the purchaser and the fact that a purchaser may also have a fiduciary relationship to the same estate agent as a vendor does not really affect the matter.

Accordingly, one can have a situation where a purchaser expects of an estate agent that the estate agent will keep information confidential or will not make use of it himself and will abide by the conventions of "honesty" in the trade. An agent who steps outside these bounds may well be liable under the
Trade Practices Act or the [Fair Trading
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/).

In the instant case the plaintiffs showed in their evidence that they did repose trust and confidence in the agent and accepted his advice on very many matters concerning their own property. They developed a rapport with the agent. They say the agent must have known about that rapport and that they relied on the agent. They then say that in all this the agent's conduct was false and deceptive because he was going to buy the property they wanted out from under them, reinforced by the information they had given during the relationship on the basis that the agent would act in their interests.

I should note that during an exchange with me, Mr Burchett said that everyone must know that anything they tell a real estate agent may well be passed on to the person employing the agent and perhaps other persons as well. I retorted by saying that I would have thought that if that was the law then people would expect estate agents to draw attention to that fact in their offices because to allow people to express themselves freely to agents without that matter being drawn to their attention might well be misleading conduct in trade and commerce. Obviously Mr Burchett's proposition is correct sub limine the limits being that to the extent that everyone knows that there is a duty to pass on information to the vendor it is correct. However, the proposition was expressly disowned by Mr Debreczeni when he got into the witness box so that I need say nothing more about it.

In Rhone-Poulenc Agrochimie SA versus UIM Chemical Services Pty Ltd [(1986) 12
FCR 477](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281986%29%2012%20FCR%20477 "View LawCiteRecord" ), 490, when dealing with the allegation that non-disclosure was deceptive within the meaning of <case> of the Trade Practices Act, Bowen, CJ said that it is often useful in determining these cases to look to see what would have been the situation under the general law though he pointed out that a court under that section is not restricted to those situations.

This thought was taken up by the Full Federal Court in Walker Corporation
Ltd versus Australia NID Pty Ltd <case>; [(1995) 59 FCR 327] at 330, where the Court said, "Notwithstanding that many persons may regard the practice of `gazumping' as deceitful, the mere act of a vendor in agreeing to sell real estate to one person when the vendor has already orally agreed to sell the property to another for a lesser sum would not ordinarily be a breach of <case>." The Court further said that the vendor was not obliged to disclose to the first purchaser the negotiations that it was carrying on with the second purchaser.

I find these observations of benefit in the instant case. I also consider that one must be very careful in translating feelings of trust and confidence in and about advice given on the sale of the plaintiffs' house to situations where the plaintiffs were in the role of purchasers. A fortiori this is so because the plaintiffs' consistent position was that they were just humouring
Mr Debreczeni in seeing properties which he wanted to show them because they had already made their minds up.

The present case is somewhat analogous to Garvey versus Vamamu Pty Ltd [[1998]
ACL 30] NSW , involving misleading conduct at an auction. There the Court of Appeal held that, despite the misleading conduct, there was no sufficient link between the conduct and the loss. Indeed it is even difficult to identify a loss in the present case except a sentimental loss as there is no evidence that the property had a greater value than the price paid.

So far as the statements made at Hector Street when the other block of land was being viewed that the plaintiffs had their hearts set on Lot 1 is concerned, it does not seem to me that they were said as a matter of confidence. Nor were they said after any representation by silence by Mr
Debreczeni that he would either keep the knowledge confidential or at least not make any use of it himself personally. No doubt the plaintiffs did not contemplate that Mr Debreczeni would make any use of the information, but that is not sufficient for the purposes of this case.

When the information was disclosed to Mrs Fisher on 2 February and she then disclosed it to Mr McKenzie and Mr McKenzie to Mr Debreczeni, again it does not seem to me that anyone made any implied representation that the information would not be acted on. It is certainly the situation that Mrs
Fisher and Mrs Gonsalves joked when Mrs Gonsalves was a little reluctant to give Mrs Fisher the information about Mrs Fisher buying the property out from under her, but neither party took that seriously.

I also take into account that the first defendant traded under the name "The
Professionals". Unless one can assume, which I do not, that using a name is just puffery, I think there is something to be said that a company that uses the name "The Professionals" or "Fair Deal" or some such words, does send out vibrations to customers that they will be dealt with using the highest ethical standards. Again, it would not be right to emphasise this factor to the detriment of the whole picture.

It is clear from the reaction of Mr Debreczeni's former partner and his staff that his action in purchasing Lot 1 Hector Street was not appreciated and was not thought to be in accordance with the best principles of the practice of a real estate agent. Furthermore, Mr Debreczeni's remark, which I accept he made to Mr McKenzie that he was sorry he was found out before he had effected the sale does him little credit. However, I cannot find from all the circumstances that there was a representation by silence not to take advantage of the situation of any comment that Mr or Mrs Gonsalves may have made, or not to take advantage of information gleaned which may have led Mr Debreczeni to hurry up about exchanging contracts. The case is really rather similar to the gazumping case dealt with by the Full Federal Court where there is moral approbium, but no breach of the section.

Accordingly, I do not find any breach of the [Fair Trading
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/).
In all the circumstances, the question of Mrs Debreczeni's position does not arise.
The result of the case is that there must be a verdict for the defendants.

However, in case the matter should go further, I should note that I was very troubled as to what I would have done had I found for the plaintiffs about a remedy.

The plaintiffs were more or less insistent that the only remedy in which they were interested was an order that the property be held on constructive trust for them, they offering to pay all the necessary expenses that were incurred by the defendants in purchasing the property.

The principal argument for a constructive trust is that this is the only way in which any equity can be satisfied. There is no sense in ordering an account of profits because the material before me suggests that there were no profits, the land was bought for about the top of the range and there is no evidence as to the market since then. In New Zealand there has been a tendency to award exemplary damages in this sort of case; see eg Aquaculture Corp versus New
Zealand Green Mussel Co Ltd [[1990] 3 NZLR 299], but this proposition has been justifiably doubted in Australia; see eg Yamabuta versus Tay (No 1) [(1995) 16 WAR 254], 261, and indeed, appears to be treated with reservations even in New Zealand; see X versus AG [[1997] 2 NZLR 623], 633.
However, as the latter case shows, the proper order may well be an award of damages not subject to any common law restriction.

I do not consider this to be an appropriate case for granting the remedy of constructive trust. Apart from any other consideration, this really would put the plaintiffs in a far better position than had they lost the land to a disinterested third party. There was no indication that the knowledge Mr
Debreczeni had did any more than allow him to pitch his bid at the right figure and to make him exchange contracts quickly. The evidence does not allow me to find that the information alerted Mr Debreczeni to the fact that the land was for sale. Indeed, I accept that he knew the land was for sale as early as May 1997, and even if he did not satisfy me of that fact, he certainly saw the signboard at the time when he was in Hector Street showing the other lot to the plaintiffs. Again, there is no suggestion that the property was bought at any undervalue or that any information derived from the
Gonsalves went any further than to show Mr Debreczeni the lower limit of where he should pitch his bid.

I note that Mr Gray relies on certain dicta in Saltman Engineering Company
Ltd versus Campbell Engineering Company Ltd [(1948) 65 RPC 203] at 215 and for the proposition that the court may give restitution in specie as a remedy for breach of confidence. I am not at all sure that one can translate these dicta into the present scenario. Even if it were to be done, I would not consider this to be a proper case to give that remedy.

Accordingly, had the plaintiffs succeeded on the equitable count, I would have made an award of damages. I am not at all sure how much because I did not get to that stage in my reasoning. So far as the [Fair Trading
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/) claim is concerned, I do not consider that it would have been appropriate, even if there was power (which I doubt) to make an order for constructive trust of the property concerned. Again I would have awarded damages.

The only other matter is the question of costs. My feeling is that although the plaintiffs have failed, the case was brought about by the conduct of Mr
Debreczeni. Furthermore, the plaintiffs have succeeded on the questions of fact most seriously in contention, but have failed because the law does not give protection in the situation revealed in this case. My present view is that this is one of the cases in which each party should bear his or her own costs. I am open to persuasion to a different point of view.

As the matter of costs was not argued, I will merely say this. I will dismiss the proceedings without costs and order the exhibits to be returned as of 18
December 1998. That order is not to be taken out before 14 December 1998 and if before that date any one of counsel or solicitors applies to my Associate to have the matter listed for hearing on the question of costs, then I will further postpone the taking out of the order until that matter is determined.
 * * * 
