

Oz-Us Film Productions Pty Limited versus Heath and ors [2001] NSWSC 298 (20
April 2001) 
Last Updated: 2 May 2001 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT 
CITATION: OZ-US Film Productions Pty Limited versus Heath & ors <case> 
CURRENT JURISDICTION: 
FILE NUMBER(S): 3922/97 
HEARING DATE{S): 13 December 2000, 29 January, 14-15 February 2001, written submissions to 18 April 2001 
JUDGMENT DATE: 20/04/2001 
PARTIES: 
OZ-US Film Productions Pty Limited (in liquidation) (ACN 003 191 679) 
Simon Heath (First Defendant) 
Hanline Pty Limited (Second Defendant) 
Mace Neufeld (Third Defendant) 
Mace Neufeld Productions Inc (Fourth Defendant) 
Sanwa Australia Limited (ACN 000 809 549) (Fifth Defendant) 
JUDGMENT OF: Master McLaughlin 
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: Not Applicable 
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): Not Applicable 
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: Not Applicable 
COUNSEL: 
P. Brereton SC, R. Brender (Plaintiff) 
I. Wales SC, M. Ashhurst (Third and Fourth Defendants) (applicants) 
SOLICITORS: 
Lakos & Company Solicitors (Plaintiff) 
Noyce Lawyers (Third and Fourth Defendants) 
CATCHWORDS: 
Practice 
Service out of jurisdiction 
Whether service is authorised by the Rules of Court 
Whether applicants are properly joined as defendants 
Whether proceedings constitute an abuse of process 
Proceedings instituted whilst Plaintiff was deregistered 
Reinstatement of Plaintiff 
Order for reinstatement cannot be challenged in present application 
Whether proceedings are bound to fail 
Proof of foreign law 
Law of California 
Statutes of limitation 
Whether substantive or procedural 
Application by Court of forum of procedural law of California 
Whether Court is an inappropriate forum for trial of proceedings 
Whether Court in the exercise of its discretion should decline jurisdiction.

ACTS CITED: 
DECISION: 
See paragraph 117.

JUDGMENT: 
SUPREME COURT OF 
NEW SOUTH WALES 
EQUITY DIVISION 
MASTER McLAUGHLIN 
Friday, 20 April 2001 /97 OZ-US FILM PRODUCTIONS PTY LIMITED -V- SIMON HEATH and ORS 
JUDGMENT MASTER: There is presently before the Court an application by the Third
Defendant and the Fourth Defendant, being respectively Mace Neufeld and Mace
Neufeld Productions Inc, made by further amended notice of motion filed on 19
October 2000.
 By that further amended notice of motion those Defendants (to whom I will, for the purposes of this judgment, and the present application, generally refer to as "the applicant Defendants") seek, pursuant to Part 10 rule
A(2)(b) of the Supreme Court Rules, substantively an order that the statement of claim be set aside, and, in the alternative, an order that service thereof upon the applicant Defendants be set aside (together with consequential relief).
 The Defendants by that further amended notice of motion also seek, in the alternative to the foregoing relief, an order that the proceedings be permanently stayed on the basis that the Supreme Court of New South Wales is not the proper forum to entertain the proceedings, and a declaration that the
Court is an inappropriate forum for the trial of the proceedings.
 It will, at the outset, be appreciated that, in consequence of the combined effect of the provisions of Part 10 rule 6A and Part 11 rule 8(c), the making of the present application by the applicant Defendants does not constitute a voluntary submission by them to the jurisdiction of the Court.
 The substantive proceedings were instituted by statement of claim filed by the Plaintiff, OZ-US Film Productions Pty Limited, on 9 September 1997. That pleading named four Defendants, being Simon Heath as First Defendant, Hanline
Pty Limited as Second Defendant, and the present applicants as the Third and
Fourth Defendants respectively.
 The Plaintiff is a New South Wales Corporation. The First Defendant is an
Australian citizen; he was a promoter and former director of the Plaintiff and a director of the Second Defendant. The Second Defendant is a New South Wales corporation; it was, at relevant times, the corporate alter ego of the First
Defendant. The Third Defendant acted as agent for the Plaintiff in its dealings with various third parties. The Fourth Defendant is the corporate alter ego of the Third Defendant.
 Subsequently, on 26 April 2000 an amended statement of claim was filed (pursuant to leave in that regard granted by Justice Windeyer on 26 April ). That pleading named a further Defendant, being Sanwa Australia Limited, as Fifth Defendant. That Defendant is a New South Wales corporation.
 At the commencement of the hearing of the present application it was noted that Senior Counsel for the applicant Defendants stated that the Third
Defendant was properly served with the statement of claim and that that
Defendant did not dispute service upon him. Further, that the Third Defendant was also given, on behalf of the Fourth Defendant, a copy of the statement of claim for that company, and that no point was taken by the applicant
Defendants concerning service upon the Fourth Defendant.
 It was also noted that Senior Counsel for the Plaintiff then stated that, in the light of the foregoing statement made on behalf of the applicant
Defendants, the Plaintiff did not assert service of the statement of claim on any date earlier than 5 January 1999.
 By its amended statement of claim the Plaintiff claims that the First and
Second Defendants - with the knowing assistance of the Third, Fourth and Fifth
Defendants - took for themselves the benefit of a corporate opportunity of negotiating a multiple picture agreement (being an agreement for the production in Australia and distribution of major motion pictures) with a
United States film corporation, such as MGM or Orion, and a credit facility to finance it with the Fifth Defendant ("the Opportunity") - which opportunity they were bound (according to well established equitable principle) to exploit, if at all, for the benefit of the Plaintiff, of which the First
Defendant had been a promoter and director, and the Third Defendant an agent, when the Plaintiff first began to pursue the Opportunity. That the Fifth
Defendant later repudiated the agreement which it reached with the other
Defendants, who then sued the Fifth Defendant in the State of California in the United States of America and recovered a very substantial settlement ("the
Californian Settlement") - of several million dollars - against the Fifth
Defendant. The Plaintiff contends that the benefit of the Californian
Settlement is held for it upon constructive trust.
 The Third and Fourth Defendants (the present applicant Defendants) are said to be liable (1) as principals, because, having been the Plaintiff's agent for the purpose of pursuing the Opportunity, in breach of their fiduciary obligations they then acted for the First and Second Defendants and/or themselves in pursuing the same Opportunity; (2) as accessories, under either or both limbs of the principle enunciated by the Court of Appeal in Chancery in Barnes versus Addy [(1874) 9 Ch. App. 244] (per
Lord Selborne LC at 251f, with whom James and Mellish L.JJ agreed), on account of (a) their receipt of the proceeds of breaches of fiduciary duty, namely their shares of the Californian Settlement, knowing that such were the product of a breach of fiduciary duty by the First Defendant and/or the Second
Defendant; and/or (b) their assistance of the First and Second Defendant's pursuit of the Opportunity, knowing such to be in breach of fiduciary duty.
 It will be appreciated that the essential circumstance in which the present application is brought and which gives rise to the attraction of the provisions of Part 10 rule 6A of the Supreme Court Rules is that each of the applicant Defendants is a person on whom the originating process was served outside Australia, such service having been effected upon the Third Defendant in California in the United States of America, and (as I understand it, consequent upon the statement by Senior Counsel for the applicant Defendants at the commencement of the hearing, to which I have already made reference) being deemed to have been effected upon the Fourth Defendant also in
California in the United States of America).
 The Supreme Court Rules recognise that in certain circumstances a Defendant in the situation of the present applicant Defendants is entitled, without submitting to the jurisdiction of the Court, to make application that the proceedings against that Defendant be dismissed. Provision for such application is made by Part 10 of the Supreme Court Rules. Rule 6A thereof provides, 
The Court may make an order of a kind referred to in Part 11 rule 8 (which relates to setting aside etc originating process) on application by a person on whom an originating process is served outside Australia.

Without limiting subrule (1), the Court may make an order under this rule on the ground - that the service of the originating process is not authorised by these rules; or that this Court is an inappropriate forum for the trial of the proceedings.
 I have had the benefit of receiving written outlines of submissions from
Counsel for the respective parties to the present application. Those written outlines will be retained in the Court file.
 In regard to the written outlines of submissions, it is appropriate here to record that at the conclusion of the hearing on 15 February 2001 directions were made that the applicant Defendants lodge written submissions on or before
Friday, 23 February 2001, the Plaintiff lodge written submissions on or before
Friday, 2 March 2001, and that the applicant Defendants lodge any written submissions in response thereto on or before Friday, 9 March 2001. The written submissions of the applicant Defendants were lodged on 7 March 2001 (some twelve days after the date directed), the written submissions of the Plaintiff were lodged on 22 March 2001 (fourteen days after the written submissions of the applicant Defendants, rather than seven days thereafter), and the written submissions of the applicant Defendants in response thereto were lodged on 18
April 2001 (twenty-seven days after the written submissions of the Plaintiff, rather than seven days thereafter).
 It is the basic to their present application that the applicant Defendants contend that service upon them of the originating process was not authorised by the Supreme Court Rules.
 Part 10 of the Supreme Court Rules makes provision for service outside of
New South Wales, rule 1A thereof making provision for service outside
Australia. Subrule (1) of rule 1A provides that, subject to rule 2 and rule
A, originating process may be served outside Australia in the cases which are then set forth in that subrule.
 Although such a conclusion may not be essential for the purposes of deciding the present application (but it is certainly of relevance thereto), nevertheless I am in agreement with the submission of the Plaintiff that in cases to which it applies Part 10 rule 1A has the effect of conferring extra- territorial jurisdiction upon the Court; that is to say, whilst that rule expressly merely authorises service ex juris in the cases to which it applies, nonetheless, implicitly - because jurisdiction in personam is co- extensive with service of the process of the Court - it confers jurisdiction in those cases in which it authorises service. In Coppin versus Tobler Bros
Canberra Marine Centre Pty Limited [[1980] 1 NSWLR 183] Allen M (as he then was) concerning the effect of Part 10 rule 1 (subsequently replaced by Part 10, rule 1A) said, at 186, 
Part 10 rule 1 does not provide that, where service is effected outside the
State pursuant to the provisions of that rule, the Court shall be seised with jurisdiction. Nonetheless, where service is so effected, the jurisdiction of the Court is attracted. This follows, not from the language of Part 10, but from the very foundation of the jurisdiction of the Court in an action in personam. It suffices to refer to the following passage in Dicey &
Morris, The Conflict of Laws 9 ed., at pp 158, 159: "...service of the writ, or something equivalent thereto, is essential as the foundation of the court's jurisdiction. When a writ cannot legally be served upon a defendant, the court can exercise no jurisdiction over him. In an action in personam the converse of this statement holds good, and whenever a defendant can be legally served with a writ, then the court, on service being effected, has jurisdiction to entertain an action against him. Hence, in an action in personam, the rules as to the legal service of a writ define the limits of the court's jurisdiction." The foregoing conclusion of Allen M is totally consistent with the historical outline of the concept of jurisdiction over a defendant being exercised by a court which is expounded by the High Court of Australia in the joint judgment of Dixon CJ and Williams and Webb JJ in Laurie versus Carroll <case>; [(1958) 98 CLR 310] at 322-323.
 Whether the relief be sought in personam against the conscience of a defendant in a Court of Equity, or whether the rule of the Common Law non potest quis sine brevi agere be invoked, the foregoing principle (in the classic phrase of Dicey, that "in an action in personam, the rules as to the legal service of a writ define the limits of the court's jurisdiction") has been recognised by Courts of the highest authority (including a specific adoption by the High Court of Australia in Laurie, at 323-324, of the foregoing passage from Dicey, The Conflict of Laws (6 ed. (1949), p 172).
 It was not in dispute that in the instant case the Plaintiff had, as the ground for its asserted entitlement to serve the applicant Defendants outside
Australia, invoked the provisions of paragraph (i) of the foregoing subrule.
That paragraph refers to the case, where the proceedings are properly brought against a person served or to be served in the State and the person to be served outside the State is properly joined as a party to the proceedings.
 The applicant Defendants submit that, in consequence of the following matters, service upon them is not authorised by the Rules.

The requirements of Part 10 rule 1A(1)(i) have not been complied with by the Plaintiff, in that, so it is submitted on behalf of the applicant
Defendants, the proceedings against the Second Defendant and against the Fifth
Defendant have not been properly brought.

The applicant Defendants are not properly joined as parties to the proceedings, because: 
The proceedings against the applicant Defendants constitute an abuse of process; 
The proceedings against the applicant Defendants are bound to fail.
 It will be appreciated that, quite apart from their constituting grounds upon which, in accordance with their submissions, the applicant Defendants have not been properly joined as Defendants to the proceedings, the second of the foregoing grounds (abuse of process and certainty of failure) also, so it is submitted, constitute independent grounds upon which the Court should decline jurisdiction in the proceedings against the applicant Defendants (even if those Defendants be treated as having been otherwise properly joined), and upon which, in consequence, the proceedings against the applicant Defendants should, in any event, be dismissed.
 As I understand it, the applicant Defendants no longer seek to rely upon the argument which may be compendiously described as the argument grounded upon the principle of "most convenient forum" or "forum non conveniens" as a ground in support of their submission that they were not properly joined (although such an argument in support of that submission was foreshadowed by
Senior Counsel for the applicant Defendants in his opening address). Such an argument, however, is still (as I understand it) relied upon by the applicant
Defendants in support of the alternative relief sought in paragraphs 2 and 3 in the further amended notice of motion (that the proceedings be permanently stayed on the basis that the Court is not the proper forum to entertain the proceedings; and a declaration that the Court is an inappropriate forum for the trial of the proceedings).
 The Plaintiff asserts that the requirements of paragraph (i) of the foregoing subrule have been fulfilled by reason of the joinder of the Second and Fifth Defendants, it being asserted on behalf of the Plaintiff that each of those Defendants is a person against whom the proceedings "are properly brought", and that each of those Defendants is a person "served or to be served in the State". (It should be noted that the Plaintiff does not assert that the First Defendant falls within the foregoing category, since he was not served within New South Wales.) The Second Defendant was deregistered on 24 April 1996. That Defendant was reinstated on 24 September 1998, upon the application of the Plaintiff (in proceedings 2804 of 1988, in which the present Plaintiff was the Defendant).
In support of that application for reinstatement the Plaintiff relied upon an affidavit of Barbara Elisjones dated 17 August 1998, in which the deponent stated, in paragraph 3, "the Plaintiff wishes that the Second Defendant be reinstated for the purposes of this litigation".
 Since its reinstatement the Second Defendant has not entered an appearance.
Neither, according to the applicant Defendants, has the Plaintiff filed an affidavit of service upon the Second Defendant or sought any judgment against it. According to the submission of the applicant Defendants, there is no evidence that the Second Defendant has any assets or that its joinder was for any purpose other than enabling a claim to be made against the applicant
Defendants.
 It is submitted on behalf of the applicant Defendants that the requirement contained in paragraph (i) of Part 10 rule 1A(1) that "the proceedings are properly brought" against a person in the situation of the Second Defendant is not satisfied if it appears that the proceedings have been commenced merely for the purpose of facilitating or enabling proceedings against a foreign
Defendant. In this regard the applicant Defendants rely upon the decision of the English Court of Appeal (constituted by Lindley and Kay L.JJ) in Witted v
Galbraith [[1893] 1 QB 577]; the decision of the English Court of Appeal (constituted by Pollock MR and Warrington and Sargent L.JJ) in Rosler v
Hilbery [[1925] 1 Ch. 250]; and the decision of the House of Lords (constituted by
Lord Porter, Lord Simonds, Lord du Parcq, Lord Normand and Lord MacDermott) in
Tyne Improvement Commissioners versus Armement Anversois S/A (The Brabo) [[1949]
A.C. 326.] The effect of paragraph (i) of rule 1A(1) is to authorise service on, and in consequence to confer jurisdiction over, the person to be served outside the State ("the Foreign Defendant"), where proceedings are regularly brought against a person served or to be served in the State ("the Local Defendant") and the Foreign Defendant is, under the rules relating to joinder, properly joined as a Defendant. It will be seen that paragraph (i) contains two requirements: firstly, that the proceedings be properly brought against the
Local Defendant; and, secondly, that the Foreign Defendant is properly joined as a party.
 As to the first of the requirements of paragraph (i), proceedings are properly brought against the Local Defendant so long as the claim against the
Local Defendant is genuine and not doomed to failure. A claim is "genuine" in the relevant sense if brought with the intention that it be prosecuted to finality in order to effect an object within the scope of the remedy claimed, regardless of the circumstance that the Defendant might be completely unable to satisfy any ultimate judgment. (See Williams versus Spautz <case>; [(1992) 174 CLR 509] (especially per Mason CJ, Dawson, Toohey and McHugh JJ at f); but see, also, Dowling versus Colonial Mutual Life Assurance Society
Limited <case>; [(1915) 20 CLR 509] at 521 per Isaacs J.) The three authorities (Witted, Rosler and Tyne Improvement
Commissioners) relied upon by the applicant Defendants do not in absolute terms support the proposition for which they are cited, that the proceedings against the Local Defendant are not properly brought if commenced solely for the purpose of facilitating or enabling an application against the Foreign
Defendant, if that submission is taken to mean that the proceedings against the Local Defendant would not otherwise have been commenced. Those three authorities relied upon by the applicant Defendants do, however, support the proposition that proceedings against a Foreign Defendant cannot be supported by a claim against a Local Defendant which is not a genuine claim or which is doomed to failure.
 The assertion by the applicant Defendants that the Second Defendant is not going to be actively involved in the litigation - even if such assertion can be established as a fact - does not appear to me to be determinative of the question of whether the proceedings are properly brought against that
Defendant. I am in agreement with the response by the Plaintiff in this regard that there is nothing in the Supreme Court Rules or in the relevant judicial authorities which requires that the Local Defendant be "worth powder and shot" or otherwise be of substance. The relevant rule is concerned with the viability of the cause of action against the Local Defendant, not with the capacity of the Local Defendant to satisfy any judgment against it.
 The cases relied upon by the applicant Defendants make is clear, however, that the requirement that the proceedings be properly brought against the
Local Defendant is fulfilled so long as the claim against that Defendant is genuine and not doomed to failure.
 As I have already observed, none of the decided authorities relied upon by the applicant Defendants in this regard, supports the proposition that the requirement that the proceedings be properly brought against the Local
Defendant is not satisfied in circumstances where those proceedings have been commenced for the purpose of facilitating or enabling the joinder of the
Foreign Defendant, unless it also be established that the claim against the
Local Defendant is not genuine or is doomed to failure.
 The Plaintiff submits that there is plainly a cause of action against the
Second Defendant, and relies in this regard upon the following matters. It was to the Second Defendant that the First Defendant diverted the relevant corporate Opportunity from the Plaintiff, and the appropriate inference is that the Second Defendant was incorporated for that very purpose (the
Plaintiffs refer to the proximity of the date of incorporation of the Second
Defendant, 16 March 1988, and the date of the agreement between the Second
Defendant and the Fifth Defendant, 26 April 1988); it was the Second Defendant (in place of the Plaintiff) that contracted with the Fifth Defendant for the credit facility; the Second Defendant was a party to the Californian proceedings in which, as one of the successful plaintiffs it was entitled to its share of the settlement moneys. The evidence relied upon by the Plaintiff in respect to the present application supports the allegations in the amended statement of claim made by the Plaintiff against the Second Defendant.
 The applicant Defendants point to the circumstance that the Second
Defendant has not entered an appearance. That fact would seem, if anything, to support a conclusion that the claim of the Plaintiff against the Second
Defendant will succeed, rather than a conclusion that the claim of the
Plaintiff against that Defendant is bound to fail. But whether or not the
Second Defendant chooses to appear or to defend the proceedings is not determinative of whether the proceedings are properly brought against the
Second Defendant, and, indeed, does not illuminate that issue.
 The applicant Defendants submit that no affidavit in respect to service upon the Second Defendant has been filed by the Plaintiff and that the
Plaintiff has not sought judgment against that Defendant. However, that submission overlooks not only the affidavit of John Wooldridge sworn 26
October 1998 in respect to service by that deponent on the Second Defendant on September 1998, but also the notice of motion filed by the Plaintiff on 4
May 2000 which seeks, in paragraph 3 thereof, an order that, pursuant to Part rule 3, judgment be given against, inter alia, the Second Defendant for $US5 million and interest. That notice of motion has been stood over, pending the disposition of the present application by the applicant Defendants.
 The applicant Defendants suggest that the Second Defendant has been joined only to enable a claim against the applicant Defendants to be made, in the sense that there is no other purpose in suing the Second Defendant.
 The Plaintiff offers two answers to that suggestion. The first is that the suggestion is wrong in fact, because there is a sound forensic reason and need for joining the Second Defendant as well as for joining the First Defendant and the applicant Defendants. That is, that all four of those Defendants were entitled to a share of the Californian Settlement, the proceeds of which the
Plaintiff in the present proceedings seeks to recover. If the Plaintiff succeeds against the Second Defendant, that Defendant (or, ultimately, its liquidator) may have remedies against its directors or against third parties which would enable it to satisfy, in whole or in part, its liability to the
Plaintiff. In circumstances where other Defendants are overseas and practical difficulties in enforcement may be expected, it is important, so it is submitted by the Plaintiff, that all potential courses for recovery be pursued.
 The second answer offered by the Plaintiff is that, even if it be the case that the Second Defendant has been joined only in order to enable a claim against the applicant Defendants to be made, that fact is irrelevant in law, so long as the claim against the Second Defendant is genuine and not doomed to failure, because all that is required by paragraph (i) is that the proceedings be properly brought against the Second Defendant. It is submitted that if there is a viable cause of action and an intention to prosecute it for a purpose within the scope of the remedy claimed, then the proceedings are properly brought.
 In this regard it should be observed that Barbara Elisjones a director of the Plaintiff, was cross-examined during the hearing of the present application. It was not suggested to her in cross-examination that the
Plaintiff did not intend to prosecute to finality its claim against the Second
Defendant.
 The Plaintiff responds as follows to the suggestion that because the Second
Defendant "is not going to be actively involved", the basis for joining the applicant Defendants disappears. Often when proceedings are commenced, submits the Plaintiff, it may not be known what attitude the Defendants or any of them will take. Jurisdiction in this sense is determined at the time of service, not at the time of trial. Jurisdiction is asserted by service of the Court's process. The circumstance that after service the Local Defendant does not actively defend the proceedings cannot impact upon whether service upon the
Foreign Defendant was authorised at the time of service and thus whether the
Court has jurisdiction over the Foreign Defendant.
 The applicant Defendants submit that in respect to the Fifth Defendant the
Plaintiff has failed to show that the claim is genuine and not doomed to failure, and therefore properly brought. In this regard the applicant
Defendants point to the fact that the claim against the Fifth Defendant is pleaded in paragraphs 69-77 of the amended statement of claim, where it is grounded upon fiduciary duties said to be owed by the Fifth Defendant to the
Plaintiff.
 The applicant Defendants submit that in the instant case the relevant paragraphs of the amended statement of claim do not disclose a valid cause of action against the Fifth Defendant, and, further, that the evidence does not suggest that a valid claim could, indeed, be pleaded against the Fifth
Defendant.
 In respect to the assertion of the existence of a cause of action in the
Plaintiff against the Fifth Defendant the applicant Defendants rely upon the nature of a fiduciary relationship, and the fact that the critical feature of these relationships is that the fiduciary undertakes or agrees to act for or on behalf of or in the interests of another person in the exercise of a power or discretion which will affect the interests of that other person in a legal or practical sense (see Hospital Products Limited versus United States Surgical
Corporation <case>; [(1985) 156 CLR 41] at 96-97 per Mason J (as he then was)).
 The applicant Defendants also rely upon the statement in Meagher, Gummow and Lehane, Equity Doctrines and Remedies, 3 ed., 130 that "the distinguishing characteristic of a fiduciary relationship is that its essence, or purpose, is to serve exclusively the interests of a person or group of persons"; or, to put it negatively, that it is a relationship in which the parties are not free to pursue their separate interests.
 The applicant Defendants point to the clear distinction drawn in Hospital
Products (at 67-75 per Gibbs CJ, at 118 per Wilson J and at 137-143 per
Dawson J) between a fiduciary relationship and the association between companies and entities for a common purpose or for the participation in a venture for their common good. (See also, P.D. Finn, "The Fiduciary Principle" in T.G. Youdan (ed.).) Equity, Fiduciaries and Trusts (1989), 31f.) The applicant Defendants point to the response under cross-examination by
Miss Elisjones that the relationship of the Fifth Defendant to the Plaintiff was only that of a proposed financier.
 The applicant Defendants respond to the alternative basis for the claim against the Fifth Defendant, being that it "assisted [the First Defendant] in a dishonest and fraudulent design" and/or induced a breach of a fiduciary duty. The applicant Defendants in this regard proceed in their submissions upon the assumption that the Plaintiff is claiming that the Fifth Defendant participated with knowledge in the alleged breach of the First Defendant's fiduciary duty, within the meaning of that principle as enunciated in Barnes v Addy (at 251-252).
 The applicant Defendants observe that there are no particulars furnished in the amended statement of claim of this alleged participation in the fraud of another, of a nature to satisfy the requirement of Part 16 rule 2 of the
Supreme Court Rules ("A party pleading shall give particulars of any fraud, misrepresentation, breach of trust, wilful default or undue influence on which he relies"), which requires a fraudulent breach of trust to be clearly particularised (see Banque Commerciale SA (in liquidation) versus Akhil Holdings
Limited [(1990) 169 CLR 279.)] Further, the applicant Defendants point to the absence of any particulars as to the alleged knowledge of the Fifth Defendant, except that that knowledge is said to be "actual". The applicant Defendants submit that the surrounding circumstances from which this "knowledge" is said to arise have not been pleaded, and that, as the decision of the High Court of Australia in Counsel
Development Pty Limited versus DPC Estates Pty Limited <case>; [(1975) 132 CLR 373] at 398 demonstrates, mere knowledge by an employee of the actions of a party which are held to be a breach of fiduciary duty is not "actual knowledge" of the breach of fiduciary duty unless the third party also knew of the existence of the fiduciary duty that was being breached.
 However, it should be recognised that there is no need to particularise an allegation of actual knowledge, Part 16 rule 3 (especially subrule (2) thereof) making express provision in this regard.
 The foregoing submission of the applicant Defendants appears also to overlook paragraphs 73 and 75 of the amended statement of claim, which have the effect of expressly pleading that the Fifth Defendant knew of the fiduciary duty which was being breached, as well as of the actions of the
First Defendant in breach of that duty.
 It is submitted on behalf of the applicant Defendants that the relief sought against the Fifth Defendant demonstrates the artificiality of the claim brought against that Defendant. The relief sought is that the Fifth Defendant pay "the settlement moneys", or an equivalent amount, to the Plaintiff. That is to say (according to the submission of the applicant Defendants) that the
Plaintiff is claiming that the Fifth Defendant, having already paid these moneys to the other Defendants, is somehow liable to pay this amount for a second time, but now to pay it to the Plaintiff. The applicant Defendants submit that such relief clearly is neither an amount representing the
Plaintiff's damages nor an amount representing the Fifth Defendant's profits.
Further, that the Plaintiff also claims that the Fifth Defendant is somehow liable to it for the fees it received, although the Plaintiff has not pleaded that any fees were in fact received.
 The applicant Defendants rely upon the advice given by former Counsel for the Plaintiff that the Plaintiff had no sustainable claim against the Fifth
Defendant. In this regard, the applicant Defendants point to the fact that it was not until after the filing of their present application that the claim against the Fifth Defendant was made, some four years after the proceedings were commenced. The Plaintiff, in response, supports the existence of a reasonable cause of action against the Fifth Defendant by relying upon an advice from its present Counsel (Exhibit E).
 The applicant Defendants submit that Exhibit E does not explain why the claim against the Fifth Defendant was commenced so late, and also construe that advice as being equivocal in its terms ("there are grounds warranting an application to join Sanwa"), that advice not stating expressly that any such claim against Sanwa has any prospects of success.
 I find it somewhat curious that in the present application it is the applicant Defendants which are asserting that there exists no reasonable cause of action in the Plaintiff against the Fifth Defendant. The Fifth Defendant itself has not ever made such an assertion. It has entered an appearance.
There has been no attempt on the part of the Fifth Defendant to strike out or to have dismissed the claim against it. Any deficiencies in the pleading against the Fifth Defendant, as set forth in the amended statement of claim (for example, in respect to particulars of fraud), are matters which should be raised by the Fifth Defendant, and it has not yet seen fit to do so.
 As to the complaints of the applicant Defendants concerning the nature of the relief sought by the Plaintiff against the Fifth Defendant, it should be recognised that prayers for relief do not technically constitute part of a pleading. Thus any perceived defects in those prayers for relief cannot be determinative of whether the pleading is liable to be struck out, or whether it discloses a cause of action. In all cases a Court of Equity will mould the form of its relief to the nature of the entitlement which has been established before it.
 But, in any event, the relief sought against the Fifth Defendant is, consistent with the principle in Barnes versus Addy, the amount of the profit received by the other four Defendants, the liability of the Fifth Defendant in respect to that profit being a liability as an accessory jointly with the liability in respect thereto of the other four Defendants, who actually received the profit. The profit consisted of the Californian Settlement moneys. It should be recognised that the claim of the Plaintiff is not for damages or for profits made by the Fifth Defendant, but is for profits made by the first four Defendants, for which profits the Fifth Defendant is liable as an accessory under the principle in Barnes versus Addy.
 Neither do I consider that the reliance by either party upon what was contained in an advice by previous Counsel for the Plaintiff or is contained in an advice by present Counsel for the Plaintiff is determinative of the existence of a cause of action in the Plaintiff against the Fifth Defendant.
On 26 April 2000 Justice Windeyer made an order, pursuant to Part 8 rule 8 of the Supreme Court Rules, for the joinder of Sanwa Australia Limited as Fifth
Defendant to the proceedings. Unless and until, upon application by a party having the standing to do so, the amended statement of claim against that
Defendant is struck out or the proceedings against that Defendant are dismissed, it seems to me that the Court should, at least prima facie, proceed upon the basis that that Defendant has been properly joined and that the
Plaintiff has a cause of action against that Defendant.
 Further, I am of the view that it is for the present applicant Defendants to establish that there is no cause of action disclosed against either the
Second Defendant or the Fifth Defendant; that is, that it is for the applicant
Defendants to establish that the claims of the Plaintiff against those
Defendants are hopeless or are doomed to failure. It is not for the Plaintiff to establish that it must necessarily succeed in its claims against those
Defendants; it is for the applicant Defendants to establish that the Plaintiff will not succeed against either the Second Defendant or the Fifth Defendant (see General Steel Industries Inc versus Commissioner for Railways <case>; [(1964) 112 CLR 125] at 128-130 per Barwick CJ; see, also, Tyne Improvement
Commissioners, at 341 per Lord Porter, at 358-360 per Lord MacDermott.) In this regard, it will be appreciated that, for the purposes of the present application, it must be assumed that the Plaintiff at a final hearing will be able to establish the factual matters asserted in the amended statement of claim.
 The present application is not an appropriate vehicle by which to determine whether or not the Plaintiff will ultimately succeed against the Fifth
Defendant. It is not necessary for me to express any concluded views concerning the precise nature of the relationship between the Plaintiff and the Fifth Defendant, and the assertion on the part of the Plaintiff that the conduct of the Fifth Defendant constituted a breach of fiduciary duty owed by that Defendant to the Plaintiff arising out of their relationship in the pursuit of the Opportunity, or the assertion that the Fifth Defendant was liable as an accessory under the second limb of the principle in Barnes v
Addy for giving knowing assistance to the breaches by the other Defendants of their fiduciary obligations to the Plaintiff.
 It is sufficient for me merely to say that the claims of the Plaintiff against the Fifth Defendant are certainly arguable, and are not in my view necessarily doomed to failure.
 The applicant Defendants submit that, even if the Plaintiff be successful in establishing fulfilment of the requirements of the first limb of paragraph of Rule 1A(1) ("where the proceedings are properly brought against a person served or to be served in the State"), nevertheless, in any event, the
Plaintiff cannot establish fulfilment of the requirement of the second limb of that paragraph ("the person to be served outside the State is properly joined as a party to the proceedings"). In this latter regard the applicant
Defendants submit that they are not properly joined as parties to the proceedings. Firstly, they submit that the proceedings constitute an abuse of process. Secondly, that the proceedings against the applicant Defendants are bound to fail.
 It should at the outset be recognised that the present is plainly a case in respect of which the provisions of Part 8 rule 2 of the Supreme Court Rules have application, to authorise the joinder of each Defendant in the one proceedings. The applicant Defendants do not submit otherwise.
 I shall now proceed first to consider the submissions relating to abuse of process.
 It has already been observed that the proceedings were instituted by statement of claim filed by the Plaintiff on 9 September 1997. At that time the Plaintiff was deregistered and had purportedly been dissolved under section 474(1) of the Corporations Law.
 In proceedings 2804 of 1988 Dahozo Pty Limited versus OZ-US Film Productions
Pty Limited application was made on behalf of the present Plaintiff for its reinstatement. That application came before Bryson J on two occasions.
Firstly, on 3 September 1997, in respect of which His Honour gave reasons dated 4 September 1997; and on 5 September 1997, in respect of which His
Honour gave reasons dated 12 September 1997. On the first occasion His Honour declined to make the orders sought by the applicants in those proceedings. On the second occasion His Honour stood the application over to 13 October 1997.
Subsequently the application came on for hearing before Hodgson CJ in Eq., who on 15 December 1997 made orders for the reinstatement of the present
Plaintiff.
 It will be appreciated that if the Plaintiff had, in fact, been validly dissolved, the institution of the present proceedings some three months before the reinstatement of the Plaintiff was, until that reinstatement, irregular.
However, upon the making of the order for reinstatement, which was made by
Hodgson CJ in Eq. on 15 December 1997 pursuant to section 574(3) of the
Corporations Law, the effect of that order was (by virtue of subsection (4) of the foregoing section) that the company is deemed to have continued in existence as if its registration had not been cancelled.
 Accordingly, the Plaintiff, having been reinstated, must since 15 December be deemed to have continued in existence throughout the entire time during which it was deregistered, including the time when the present proceedings were instituted. Thus the order of 15 December 1997 has the effect of retrospectively validating any proceedings or activity initiated or performed by the Plaintiff between dissolution and reinstatement. (See
Silverstone Holdings Pty Limited versus American Home Assurance Company [(1997) WAR 516).] In particular, and in the circumstances of the instant case (where, as here, a company is deregistered whilst being a party to court proceedings, but achieves re-registration before it is removed from those proceedings), the proceedings continue unaffected, even if they were temporarily irregular during the period while the company was deregistered (see Jekos Holdings Pty Limited versus Australian Horticultural Finance Pty
Limited [(1994) 121 FLR 362]; Lidio
Excellence Pty Limited versus Cincotta [(1998) 28 ACSR 389).] As I understand it, the complaint of the applicant Defendants upon which they ground their submission that the joinder of them constitutes an abuse of process is, not the fact that at the time of the filing of the statement of claim the Plaintiff was deregistered - the applicant Defendants concede the foregoing effect of subsection (4) of section 574 of the Corporations Law - but the fact that, so it is submitted on behalf of the applicant Defendants,
Hodgson CJ in Eq. was somehow misled at the time when he made the order of 15
December 1997.
 If that be the complaint of the applicant Defendants, that the order of 15
December 1997 was made in circumstances where the Court was deliberately misled by or in respect to the present Plaintiff, then it must be obvious that the present application is not an appropriate procedure for the challenging of the order of 15 December 1997. That order has force and effect as an order of the Court until it is set aside or varied (either upon appeal or in accordance with the provisions of Part 40 rule 9 of the Supreme Court Rules). It is not for me in the course of the present application to determine whether or not the order made by the Chief Judge in Equity on 15 December 1997 was made in circumstances where His Honour was misled and where, if His Honour had been apprised of what are referred to by the applicant Defendants as the true facts (for example, relating to the present proceedings having been instituted, rather that merely proposed to be instituted), His Honour would not have made the order.
 In any event, it has been submitted on behalf of the Plaintiff that there is no evidence before the Court that His Honour was misled, actively or deliberately or materially or at all, during the reinstatement proceedings.
The Plaintiff further submits that there is no basis for assuming that the result of the reinstatement proceedings would have differed in the slightest had His Honour known that the present proceedings had already been instituted.
 So long as the order of 15 December 1997 remains in force, I do not consider it appropriate for me to treat the making of that order as in any way a ground upon which I could conclude that the present proceedings, or the institution of the present proceedings before the reinstatement of the
Plaintiff, constitute an abuse of the process of the Court.
 In the light of the conclusion which I have just expressed, it is not necessary for me to proceed to a detailed consideration of the submission on behalf of the Plaintiff that the purported dissolution of the Plaintiff pursuant to subsection (1) of section 574 was irregular and unauthorised. I record however that that submission was grounded upon the fact that, whilst the Australian Securities Commission (as that entity was then named) ("ASC") purported to act pursuant to section 572(3) of the Corporations Law, it was not entitled to do so, since the Plaintiff was never "being wound up", but was at the time merely in provisional liquidation. The statutory precondition of the purported exercise of the power of the ASC to deregister was absent.
Although I express no concluded view in this regard, the foregoing submission appears to me certainly to be arguable. If that be so, then, of course, the order for reinstatement made on 15 December 1997 was unnecessary, and the invocation of the deeming provision contained in subsection (4) of section 574 of the Corporations Law need never be or have been called into operation.
 The other ground upon which the applicant Defendants submit that they have not been properly joined as parties to the proceedings is that the proceedings against the applicant Defendants are bound to fail.
 The submission of the applicant Defendants in this regard is that the
Plaintiff founds its case against those Defendants on a breach of fiduciary duty. The applicant Defendants submit that although the relationship of principal and agent is ordinarily one which arises from a contract, fiduciary obligations arise out of status or relationship, rather than out of any contract.
 It is the submission on behalf of the applicant Defendants that the proper law of any contract of agency that might exist between the Plaintiff and the applicant Defendants was the law of California. Further, that in any event, the Plaintiff has not pleaded any contract at all or has not pleaded that the proper law of the contract was the law of New South Wales - merely that the
Third Defendant was the "duly authorised agent" of the Plaintiff.
 As I understand it, the submission of the applicant Defendants in this regard is that if the cause of action against those Defendants is a cause of action in contract, the proper law of that contract is that of California; if, however, the cause of action is grounded upon the equitable principles of fiduciary duty asserted to repose in the applicant Defendants for the benefit of the Plaintiff, then the Court is being required to exercise its powers in personam against the applicant Defendants.
 In this latter regard the applicant Defendants rely upon the passage from the judgment of McLelland J (as he then was) in US Surgical Corporation v
Hospital Products International Pty Limited [[1982] 2 NSWLR 766] at 796.
The applicant Defendants submit that it would be inconsistent with the exercise by the Court of a jurisdiction in personam where the persons against whom that jurisdiction is being invoked are not resident within New
South Wales, but, in the case of the Third Defendant, is and has been resident in California in the United States of America, and, in the case of the Fourth
Defendant, is a company incorporated in California.
 The applicant Defendants say that this is particularly so when there is no doubt that the law of California recognises and vindicates fiduciary obligations, and, further, when the Plaintiff's right to sue in respect of those obligations is statute barred by the law of the place where the relevant conduct occurred, being California.
 At the outset of the hearing of the present application an attempt appeared to be being made on behalf of the applicant Defendants to have the Court in some way assume judicial notice of the law of California.
 Presumably in consequence of comments made by me (that the basal principle underlying the administration of justice is that the law being applied is assumed to be secreted in the bosom of the judge, whilst foreign law (in the instant case, the law of California) is a matter of fact, which must be proved by expert evidence), there was subsequently tendered by the applicant
Defendants evidence concerning the law of California. That evidence consisted of a report dated 25 January 2001 from Robert Tunick Talbot-Stern (Exhibit 5).
Mr Talbot-Stern was cross-examined during the hearing of the application.
 Mr Talbot-Stern has been qualified to practice law in the United States of
America since 1967, having been admitted to practice in the States of
Connecticut, New York and Michigan and in Washington D.C., and before various
Federal District Courts, the Federal Circuit Court of Appeal and the United
States Supreme Court. His legal practice has included many matters under
California law. Although he has not been admitted as a practitioner by the
State of California he has been admitted to practice in that State pro hac vice for specific cases (for example, when he was an official prosecutor for the United States Department of Justice). His involvement with California Law has been both as litigation Counsel admitted pro hac vice before State or
Federal Courts in California and in rendering advice on California law (which he has been entitled to do).
 The effect of Mr Talbot-Stern's report is that the causes of action pleaded against the Third and Fourth Defendants would, if brought against those
Defendants in the State of California, fall within the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure of the State of California ("the Code") (the relevant provisions whereof were admitted into evidence as Exhibit 1), and in particular sections 335-349.4. That a cause of action against the applicant
Defendants in contract would come within section 337 of the Code, whilst a cause of action against those Defendants grounded on breach of fiduciary duty would come within the general provision of section 343 of the Code (applicable to an action for relief not otherwise covered in a preceding section), since the Code contains no specific provision for a limitation period in respect to breach of a fiduciary duty. Each of sections 343 and 337 requires that the action be brought within four years of the date at which the cause of action arises.
 Mr Talbot-Stern was cross-examined concerning the professional requirements for admission as a legal practitioner in the State of California (where he had not sought to be admitted as a practitioner, except in the specific instances to which reference has already been made). He was also cross-examined concerning what was described as the "doctrine of equitable tolling". He said that tolling means a situation where a limitation period is not running, either because it has not started to run or because it has started to run and has stopped - that is, tolling means the non-running of the statute of limitations.
 Mr Talbot-Stern agreed that the State Courts in California apply the doctrine of tolling, at least in some circumstances. He agreed that it was at least arguable that in California equitable tolling would apply and that the statute of limitations would not run during the period whilst the Plaintiff was deregistered. Although he gave evidence of most statutes of limitation in the United States being deemed procedural rather than substantive, he said that the limitation to be applied in California would be the law of the place of substantive law, but agreed that that was what he described as an arguable conclusion, and said that he could not state definitively his opinion on the foregoing matters.
 In a dispute between a principal and agent Mr Talbot-Stern said that the
Courts of California would decide first what was the proper law of the agency, and that an important consideration in that regard would be the place where the agency was created. He said that it was arguable in the circumstances of the instant case that the proper law of the agency was New South Wales.
 In respect to a cause of action for breach of fiduciary duty in relation to a claim for profits Mr Talbot-Stern said that the cause of action did not arise until the profits were made. He also said that the question of whether or not the limitation period under the California statute began to run against the Plaintiff in the circumstances of the instant case would depend upon when the Plaintiff became aware of the existence of its cause of action.
 The final conclusion expressed by Mr Talbot-Stern on the question of equitable tolling was that, on balance, a California Court would not allow the deregistration of a company in Australia to cause a tolling of the limitation statute.
 In response to the foregoing submissions on the part of the applicant
Defendants, that the proceedings against them are bound to fail, the Plaintiff relies upon the following matters.
 It is submitted on behalf of the Plaintiff that it is strongly arguable that the applicable substantive law is that of New South Wales, not of
California. Further, that even if the applicable substantive law is that of
California, the limitation law of the forum (that is, New South Wales) nevertheless remains applicable; and that, even if the limitation law of
California were applicable, it would not bar the proceedings.
 For the applicant Defendants to succeed upon their submission that the proceedings against them are hopeless, they must establish, firstly, that the substantive law applicable to the liability of the applicant Defendants to the
Plaintiff is the law of the State of California. Then, to establish that the
Supreme Court of New South Wales would apply the law of California not only in respect to matters which have been traditionally regarded as substantive, but also in respect to limitation provisions. Further, that under the law of
California the claim of the Plaintiff against the applicant Defendants would be statute barred.
 The Plaintiff responds by submitting, firstly, that as a matter of choice, the law of New South Wales and not that of California governs the potential liability of the applicant Defendants to the Plaintiff. Further, that even if the law of California is applied, this Court applies that foreign law only to substantive matters, and not to procedural matters, which (so it is submitted on behalf of the Plaintiff) include limitation provisions, those being governed by the lex fori.
 Further, that even if the Court were to apply the limitation provisions of
California, the evidence does not support (at least to the standard required upon this kind of argument) the conclusion that the Plaintiff's claim would be statute barred in California.
 The Plaintiff submits that the law applicable to the potential liability of the applicant Defendants to the Plaintiff as a matter of substance is that of
New South Wales and not that of California. Firstly, because questions relating to the constitution of corporations are decided according to the law of the place where the corporation is incorporated (see Banco de Bilbao v
Sancha [(1938) 2 KB 176] at 194-195; Re Anglo Austrian Bank [(1920) 1 Ch. 69]; Karl Zeiss
Stiftiung versus Rayner & Keeler Limited (No. 2) [[1967] 1 AC 853).] Further, because the relationship between the Plaintiff and the applicants was one of agency, the inquiry, therefore, is as to the proper law of the contract of agency (see US Surgical Corporation versus Hospital Products
International [[1983] 2 NSWLR 157] at -192). The proper law of such a contract is usually determined by the location of the principal (see Dicey and Morris, The Conflict of Laws (12 ed.), Vol 2, p 1453, and authorities there cited); other relevant considerations involve the place where the contract of agency was made (Dicey and Morris, op cit, 1453). Ultimately, the search is for that "system of law...with which the transaction has the closest and most real connection" (P.E. Nygh, Conflict of Laws in Australia (4 ed.), p 227; as to the application of the foregoing principle, see Re United Railways of the Havana and Regla Warehouses Limited [[1960] Ch. 52] at 91 per Jenkins
LJ).
 In this regard the Plaintiff relies upon the letter of authority constituting the agency between the Plaintiff and the applicant Defendants (or at least the Third Defendant) dated 2 January 1987 (Exhibit A). The Plaintiff also relies upon the following matters as supporting the submission that it is the law of New South Wales with which the agency asserted to exist between the
Plaintiff and the applicant Defendants has the closest connection.
 * The parties are overwhelmingly Australian nationals or Australian corporations. * The contract was made in New South Wales, where the relevant resolution by the directors of the Plaintiff was adopted (accepting the offer of the Third Defendant to act as agent for the Plaintiff) and the relevant instrument of authority was executed. * The Plaintiff - the principal - is incorporated in New South Wales. * The main transaction involved a venture to be undertaken primarily in Australia, and the primary place for performance was Australia. * Various of the agreements and draft agreements prepared in respect of the venture selected New South Wales law as the governing law of the contract, and provided for the Courts of New South Wales to have (non-exclusive) jurisdiction (see, for example, Exhibit BEJ2).  It is submitted on behalf of the Plaintiff that, alternatively, even if the relationship between the Plaintiff and the applicant Defendants is otherwise governed by foreign law (that is, in the circumstances of the instant case, by the law of California), there is a considerable body of judicial authority that a local Court of Equity would apply equitable principles administered by itself to found relief against a defendant subject to its jurisdiction. This situation is not limited to a case where the
Defendant resides within the jurisdiction (see US Surgical Corporation v
Hospital Products International Pty Limited at 796, where McLelland CJ in Eq stated that residence was a sufficient basis, not that it was a necessary basis).
 It is in my view arguable that the true position is no more than that, once a defendant is amenable to the in personam jurisdiction of the Court, that Defendant is subject to the equitable principles of the lex fori. That conclusion is supported by, for example, the express provision of the Supreme
Court Rules, where Part 10 rule 1A(1) allows service outside Australia in the case where the subject matter of the proceedings is a contract and the contract -
 is made in the State; it not being necessary, in those circumstances, that the Defendant be at any time either physically resident within New South Wales or otherwise have any connection with New South Wales.
 It should be noted, however, that the Plaintiff does not contend that the provisions of Part 10 rule 1A(1)(a) ("where the proceedings are founded on a cause of action arising in the State") authorises service on or confers jurisdiction over the applicant Defendants in the instant case.
 In regard to this question of identifying the system of law with which the transaction has the closet and most real connection, it is relevant to note that Lord Cottenham LC in Ex Parte Pollard; Re Courtney [(1840) 4 Deac ] at [40-41; Mont & Ch 239] at 251; [[1835-1842] All ER Rep 415] at said, ...the courts of this country, in the exercise of their jurisdiction over contracts made here, or in administering equities between parties residing here, act upon their own rules, and are not influenced by any consideration of what the effect of such contracts might be in the country where the lands are situate, or of the manner in which the courts of such countries might deal with such equities.
 If the cause of action asserted by the Plaintiff against the applicant
Defendants be seen as arising out of principles of Equity, rather than from the contract of agency, the Courts of New South Wales will apply those equitable principles in personam to all who come within the jurisdiction of the Court, be they geographically located within the State of New South Wales or not.
 Even if the substantive law governing the liability of the applicant
Defendants is that of California, it is clear that this Court will apply the law of the forum to questions of limitation (Pedersen versus Young <case>; [(1964) 110 CLR 162]; McKain versus R.W. Miller & Co.(SA) Pty Limited <case>; [(1991) 174 CLR 1).] Further, the evidence of Mr Talbot-Stern suggests that it is arguable whether, even by the law of California, the limitation provisions be regarded as substantive or as procedural; and that it is certainly arguable that in California they be treated as procedural. Unless there is some express enactment which has the effect of constituting such provisions as substantive law, then, as Menzies J observed in Pedersen versus Young, at 166, 
It is a well-established principle that statutes of limitation, except where title is affected, are rules of procedure only and form part of the lex fori. The reason why such statutes are so regarded is that they relate to the remedy and not the right. Since 21 Jac.I c.16 the usual form of a statute of limitation has been to provide that an action shall not be brought except within the time stated after the cause of action arose. A statute in this form, notwithstanding any generality of expression, must of necessity be construed as applying to the commencement of actions in courts subject to the power of the legislature enacting it and to no other courts.
 In the same case Windeyer J, at 170, said, 
For the purposes of private international law, limitation provisions are, generally speaking, treated as procedural and are governed by the lex fori.
That means the law of the country to which the court belongs, for it is only that country that can give the law to its court, can make it the lex fori.
 In McKain versus R.W. Miller & Co.(SA) Pty Limited Brennan, Dawson,
Toohey and McHugh JJ in a joint judgment recognised, at 41, that, 
For the purposes of applying conflict of law rules, English Courts have long adopted the distinction that a true statute of limitation, which does no more than cut off resort to the courts for enforcement of a claim, is a procedural law, while a statute which extinguishes a civil liability and destroys a cause of action is a substantive law.
 Their Honours (at 41) recognised that the same distinction had been made "in the United States sometimes for purposes uniquely arising under the United
States [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/)", and cited various decisions of the United States Supreme Court.
 I am not satisfied that the applicant Defendants have established (in accordance with the principle outlined by Barwick CJ in General Steel Inc.) firstly, that the law of California would treat the relevant limitation provision of the California Code as being a substantive law rather than a procedural law; or, further, that the law of California would reject a tolling of the relevant limitation period during the period whilst the Plaintiff was de-registered.
 It follows, therefore, that I am not satisfied that, on account of the application of California law to the cause of action asserted by the Plaintiff against the applicant Defendants, the Plaintiff's claim against those
Defendants is doomed to failure in consequence of being statute barred.
 In this regard I am in agreement with the submission of the Plaintiff that the decision of the High Court of Australia in John Pfeiffer Pty Limited v
Rogerson <case>; [(2000) 74 ALJR 1109] does not have any application to the question concerning the application of the law of the forum to limitation statutes. That decision applied only in respect to the question of a choice of law between States and
Territories of Australia, as distinct from a choice of law between a State and an overseas jurisdiction, the choice of law within the federal system of
Australia being governed by special constitutional provisions (such as [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s118.html) of the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) (full faith and credit)), which have no application where the choice is between a State and a foreign country. The High Court expressly recognised this distinction when it said, at [2], 
Before turning to the facts which give rise to this application, it is important to note that the issue arises in a federal context, and not in an international context. We put issues that might arise in an international context entirely to one side.
 It follows, therefore, that the applicant Defendants have not established that the claim against them is doomed to failure.
 The attraction of the jurisdiction of the Court (by the invocation by the
Plaintiff of the provisions of [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/index.html#p10) of the Rules) is relevant to the reliance placed by the applicant Defendants upon the decision of Sheppard J in Angus & Coote Pty Limited versus Qantas
Airways Limited [(1979) 2 NSWLR 398] (in particular, at 402, in support of their submission that, in any event, the
Court should decline jurisdiction in the present proceedings, upon the ground that the Court is not the proper forum). (See, also, the passage from The
Hagen [1908] P189 at 201 per Farwell LJ.) In regard to this question of the proper, or appropriate, forum, I have already (in considering the submission of the applicant Defendants that the proceedings against them are bound to fail) made observations and expressed conclusions which, in general, accept the submissions of the Plaintiff in preference to those of the applicant Defendants. Consistently with those observations and conclusions, I am not persuaded that the applicant Defendants have established that this Court is not the appropriate forum, or that, in the exercise of any discretion which may repose in it in this regard, the Court should decline to accept jurisdiction in the proceedings.
 The foregoing observations and conclusions concerning the appropriateness of the Supreme Court of New South Wales as the forum for the present proceedings, in respect to whether or not the Court in its discretion should decline to exercise its jurisdiction against the applicant Defendants, in regard to the question whether those Defendants have been properly joined, and thus whether the statement of claim, or the service thereof upon the applicant
Defendants, should be set aside are equally applicable to the alternative relief sought by the applicant Defendants in paragraphs 2 and 3 in the further amended notice of motion.
 It follows, therefore, that the application of the applicant Defendants should be dismissed.
 I make the following orders: . I order that the further amended notice of motion filed by the Third and
Fourth Defendants on 19 October 2000 be dismissed.
 . I order that the Third and Fourth Defendants pay the costs of the
Plaintiff of the aforesaid notice of motion.
 . The exhibits may be returned.
 
LAST UPDATED: 24/04/2001 * * * 
