

Harkness and Anor versus Partnership Pacific Ltd [1997] NSWSC 32 (14 February )

HARKNESS & ANOR versus PARTNERSHIP PACIFIC LIMITED /93 ED 50218/91 FEBRUARY 1997 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
PRIESTLEY JA, CLARKE JA, ABADEE AJA 
CATCHWORDS:COMPANIES - winding up - preferential payment to creditor - good faith - onus of proof - ordinary course of business - relevance of creditor's knowledge or suspicion of debtor's insolvency - ss 122(2)(a) and 4(c) [Bankruptcy Act 1966](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/) (Cth) 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED:RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED:ALLOWED 
Spedley Securities Limited (Spedley) was ordered to be wound up on 25 May
Prior to being wound up, but at a time when it was unable to pay its debts as they became due from its own money, Spedley paid $5 million to the respondent, Partnership Pacific Limited (PPL). The liquidator of Spedley sought to recover the payment as a preference within the meaning of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/s122.html) of the [Bankruptcy Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/) (Cth). PPL claimed the protection of [s (2)(a).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/s122.html)
At the hearing before McLelland CJ in Eq, it was accepted that the payment had the effect of giving PPL a preference, priority or advantage over other creditors and that PPL was a payee for valuable consideration. His Honour found that PPL was also a payee in good faith and in the ordinary course of business and ordered that the proceedings be dismissed with costs. The appellants appealed on the basis that his Honour erred in making both these findings.

Held: 
Good faith [(s (2)(a))](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/s122.html) 
If the trial judge, in reaching a conclusion based, wholly or partly, on the demeanour of witnesses, accepts the evidence of the directing minds of the corporation that they neither believed nor suspected that the payment was such as to give the creditor a preference, it is only in exceptional circumstances that an appellate court can interfere. There is no reason here to interfere with his Honour's finding that PPL had established that it was a payee in good faith.

Deemed lack of good faith [(s (4)(c))](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/s122.html) 
There is no requirement that a payee seeking to prove that it acted in good faith must negative the circumstances referred to in [s (4)(c).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/s122.html)
The section is not concerned with the onus of proof.

The circumstances revealed by the evidence were not sufficient to lead to the inference contained within [s (4)(c).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/s122.html)
Whilst the media reports and surrounding circumstances would have put a reasonable person in the position of PPL on notice that Spedley was associated with Rothwells, they would not have conveyed the fact or suggestion that
Spedley was insolvent.

Ordinary course of business [(s (2)(a))](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/s122.html) 
Although the factors relied on by the appellants showed that the circumstances of the recall of the loan might have been unusual for Treasury loans made by PPL, they could not be said to be outside the ordinary course of business.

Nothing in the authorities supports the proposition that the creditor's belief or suspicion as to the debtor's insolvency should be taken into account on the question of ordinary course of business. Although in some cases the same evidence may be relevant to both issues, in applying [s (2)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/s122.html), "good faith" (which already deals with the creditor's state of mind) and "ordinary course of business" are separate tests which should not be confused.
 
Robertson versus Grigg <case>; <case>; <case>; <case>; <case>; <case>; [(1966) 115 CLR 266] 
Spedley Securities Ltd (in Liq) versus Tennyson Holdings Ltd [(1992) 26 NSWLR ]

Spedley Securities Ltd (In Liq) versus Western United Ltd (In Liq) [(1992) 27
NSWLR 111] 
AOTC T/A Telecom versus Russell Kumar & Sons [(1993) 11 ACLC 281] 
Taylor versus ANZ Banking Group Ltd [(1988) 13 ACLR ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/journals/AUConstrLawNlr/1990/34.html "View
Case" ) 
Orders 
Appeal dismissed with costs.
 
JUDGMENT 
PRIESTLEY JA: I will ask Clarke JA to deliver his reasons first.

CLARKE JA: Spedley Securities Limited (Spedley) was ordered to be wound up on 25 May 1989 pursuant to an application filed on 11 April 1989. Prior to being wound up it paid $5 million to Partnership Pacific Limited (PPL) on 30 December 1988. It has been determined for the purpose of these and other proceedings that from 8 November 1988 onward Spedley was unable to pay its debts as they became due from its own money within the meaning of [s 122(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/s122.html) of the [Bankruptcy Act 1966](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/) (Cth). In these circumstances, the liquidator of Spedley sought to recover the sum of $5 million as a preference upon the grounds that it was void against him by virtue of the combined operation of <case> of the Companies Code and [s 122](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/s122.html) of the [Bankruptcy Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/). 
The proceedings were heard by McLelland CJ in Eq and at the hearing it was accepted that the payment in question had the effect of giving PPL a preference, priority or advantage over other creditors within the meaning of [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/s122.html), and that PPL was a payee for valuable consideration within the meaning of [s (2)(a).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/s122.html)
The matters in issue were whether PPL was a payee in good faith and in the ordinary course of business. His Honour answered those questions in PPL's favour and ordered that the proceedings be dismissed with costs. Spedley and its liquidator (the appellants) have appealed, raising 20 separate grounds of appeal. It will be convenient to group those grounds but before doing so it is necessary to refer to the facts.

PPL was, at all material times, a wholly owned subsidiary of Westpac Banking
Corporation and it carried on business as a financier. Its principal lending section, known as the Asset Based Finance Division, provided long-term finance to corporate customers with formal documentation and appropriate security. The
Treasury Department was responsible for managing PPL's liquidity, ensuring that funds were available to meet the requirements of the Asset Based Finance
Division, and investing funds surplus to immediate requirements by lending them on a short term basis, with little formality and often unsecured, to customers of high financial standing, thereby providing for their short term needs.

A third division, the Credit Department, approved lending proposals submitted by the Asset Based Finance Division and approved customers to which the
Treasury Department was authorised to make loans. It also approved credit limits for such customers and the security (if any) required from them in order to ensure that Treasury Department loans were at low risk. The limits were approved for specific periods of no longer than one year and were the subject of formal review by the Credit Department at or near the expiration of those periods. Informal reviews of Treasury Department borrowers and credit limits were carried out within the Credit Department at approximately monthly intervals with a view to monitoring the continuing suitability for Treasury
Department lending of particular customers as well as their respective credit limits.

Treasury dealers negotiated loans by the Treasury Department with customers within the credit limits for the time being approved by the Credit Department.
The maximum term for which a treasury dealer was authorised to negotiate a loan without specific approval from the Credit Department was 180 days. A treasury dealer who negotiated a loan would record the details on a "Money
Market Loan Input Detail Form". Information from these forms was processed into PPL's computer system which then generated a loan confirmation letter which was sent to the customer.

The Credit Department approved Spedley as a Treasury Department borrower in
June 1987 to a limit of $5 million upon the basis of security in the form of five letters of credit from Midland International Australia Limited (Midland), a subsidiary of Midland Bank PLC of the United Kingdom, each for $1 million plus 104 days interest thereon. On 19 June 1987 the Treasury Department advanced $5 million to Spedley repayable on 4 August 1987. That advance was subsequently rolled over on a number of occasions for varying periods until 2
December 1988. The Midland letters of credit initially had a maturity date of December 1987 and an expiry date of 16 December 1987. These dates were first extended to 2 June 1988 and 9 June 1988 respectively, and then to 2 January and 9 January 1989. There were corresponding extensions of the PPL facility in favour of Spedley (that is, Spedley's status as an approved
Treasury Department borrower within the limits and subject to the security outlined above), with the final extension of the facility, apparently in June , being negotiated to 9 January 1989. However, on 16 November 1988 the expiry date was altered from 9 January to 2 January 1989.

On 27 October 1988 and in the weeks following there was extensive press publicity concerning the financial difficulties of Rothwells Limited which included reference to the association between that company and Spedley. On 7 November 1988, and in later publications, there was particular reference to an amount of $15 million paid by the State Energy
Commission of Western Australia which, although intended for a company known as Western Collieries Limited, which was associated with Rothwells, was said to have been deposited with Spedley in questionable circumstances.

Shortly before the end of November 1988, in the course of an informal review of Treasury credit limits and approvals, Mr Broekhuyse, who was the Manager , proposed to Mr Carr, the Head of Credit, that Spedley's status as an approved Treasury Department borrower be cancelled. It was decided to terminate Spedley's credit limit and to require repayment of the outstanding advance when it fell due on 2 December 1988. Mr C J Wood, who worked in the
Treasury Department, was instructed to convey this decision to Spedley which he did by telephone on 29 November 1988. He informed an officer of Spedley that there would be no further roll-over and the principal was to be repaid on the due date.

What followed was the subject of the following unchallenged finding in his
Honour's judgment (at p 4-5): "During that or a subsequent conversation, Mr McLaughlin of Spedley asked Mr
Wood to whom Spedley might `appeal the decision', and was given the names of
Mr Broekhuyse and Mr Carr. During the period 30 November to 1 December 1988 there was telephonic communication between Mr Knowles of Spedley and Mr
Broekhuyse during the course of which Mr Knowles criticised PPL's decision to cancel Spedley's credit limit, and sought its reversal. The result of this was that on 1 December 1988 Mr Broekhuyse (probably after consultation with Mr
Carr) decided that Spedley's credit approval would not be immediately cancelled but should be extended to 2 January 1989 (the maturity date of the
Midland letters of credit), to permit Spedley to roll-over the current advance for another month on the basis that it was to be repaid at the end of that period. The advance was thereafter rolled over to 2 January 1989 although at some stage during the processing of this extension, it was realised that 2
January 1989 was a public holiday and the date for repayment was fixed at 30
December 1988 (the last business day before 2 January 1989). The advance was in fact repaid by Spedley to PPL on 30 December 1988, that being the payment the subject of challenge in these proceedings." 
His Honour expressed the view that it was unlikely that either Mr Carr or Mr
Wood had any belief or suspicion concerning Spedley which was not communicated to Mr Broekhuyse and that the critical question was therefore as to the state of mind of Mr Broekhuyse. His Honour examined the issue carefully and concluded that he accepted Mr Broekhuyse's evidence to the effect that at no time prior to the repayment of the advance on 30 December 1988 did he believe or suspect that Spedley was insolvent. His Honour considered the question posed by [s (4)(c)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/s122.html) and said that he was not prepared to draw an inference from the circumstances that Mr Broekhuyse knew or had reason to suspect that Spedley was insolvent.
Accordingly, he accepted that PPL had established it was a payee in good faith.

On the issue of "the ordinary course of business", his Honour found that the payment was one of a debt due, made on the due date by the usual and ordinary means by which payments of that kind were made and without unusual incident.
In those circumstances, and in the light of the fact that PPL had no relevant belief or suspicion of Spedley's insolvency, his Honour found that PPL had discharged its onus on that issue also.

The matters on appeal can be grouped into several main areas, namely, whether
PPL was a payee in good faith, or could be deemed not to be a payee in good faith, and whether PPL was a payee in the ordinary course of business. The appellants also submitted that his Honour erred in making certain factual findings, failing to make certain findings, and in failing to draw appropriate inferences from the evidence.

The relevant statutory provisions are [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/s122.html) of the [Bankruptcy
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/) and <case> of the Companies Code. Section 122 (relevantly paraphrased for present purposes) provides that a payment, made by a person who is unable to pay their debts as they become due from their own money, in favour of a creditor, having the effect of giving that creditor a preference, priority or advantage over other creditors, is void as against the trustee in bankruptcy if the payment is made within 6 months before the presentation of a petition by virtue of which the debtor becomes a bankrupt. The relevant sub-sections are as follows: "s 122 ....

Nothing in this section affects: the rights of a purchaser, payee or encumbrancer in good faith and for valuable consideration and in the ordinary course of business; ....

The burden of proving the matters referred to in sub-s (2) lies upon the person claiming to have the benefit of that sub-section.

For the purposes of this section: ....
 a creditor shall be deemed not to be a purchaser, payee or encumbrancer in good faith if the conveyance, transfer, charge, payment or obligation was executed, made or incurred under such circumstances as to lead to the inference that the creditor knew or had reason to suspect: that the debtor was unable to pay his debts as they became due from his own money; and that the effect of the conveyance transfer charge, payment or obligation would be to give him a preference priority or advantage over other creditors." 
Section 451 of the Companies Code provides that a payment made by a debtor company which, if it had been made or incurred by a natural person, would in the event of him or her becoming a bankrupt be void as against the trustee in bankruptcy, is, in the event of the company being wound up, void as against the liquidator. The section then goes to on specify the dates in the course of the winding-up of a company which correspond with the dates specified in [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/s122.html) of the [Bankruptcy
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/).

Good faith - [s 122(2)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/s122.html) 
The appellants have appealed on the basis that his Honour erred in finding that PPL had discharged its onus of proving that it was a payee in good faith.
They do not appear to take issue with the test applied by his Honour, but rather cavil with the application of that test to the facts of the case. In making this submission, the appellants have challenged certain factual findings, and have asserted that his Honour failed to draw proper inferences from the evidence.

The test for determining whether a creditor is a payee in good faith is stated by Barwick CJ in Queensland Bacon Pty Limited versus Rees <case>; [(1966) 115 CLR 266.] In considering the corresponding section in the Bankruptcy
Act 1924, his Honour said: "The existence of knowledge or suspicion of insolvency negatives good faith: and the knowledge of circumstances from which ordinary men of business would conclude that the debtor is unable to meet his liabilities is knowledge of insolvency.." (at 287) 
In Re Weiss; Ex parte White versus John Vicars & Co Ltd [[1970] ALR ], Gibbs
J expressly followed the approach of Barwick CJ when he stated, "If the respondent knew or suspected that the bankrupt was insolvent it would not have acted in good faith" (at 664). Similarly, in Re Chisum Services Pty Ltd [(1982) 7 ACLR 641], Wootten J (at 648) adopted Barwick CJ's formulation in accepting the creditor's denial of "actual knowledge or suspicion of insolvency or the gaining of a preference", adding the comment that "good faith is a subjective condition, requiring that the payee act with propriety and honesty" (Butcher versus Stead [(1875) LR 7 HL 839], at 849; and Re Linney (H) & Co Ltd [(1925) NZLR 907], at 917).

In the present case, McLelland CJ applied the principles relating to the operation of <case> as stated by him in Spedley Securities Ltd (In Liq) v
Western United Ltd (In Liq) [(1992) 27 NSWLR 111.] In
Western United, his Honour was of the opinion that a creditor was a payee in good faith if at the time of the payment he neither believed nor suspected that the payment was such as to give him a preference over other creditors of an insolvent debtor (at 118). In the case of an organisational payee such as a corporation, the persons whose states of mind are relevant to the question of good faith for the purposes of <case>(a) are those officers, employees or agents of the organisation who were concerned in an executive capacity in the transaction leading to the receipt of the monies (at 118-9).

McLelland CJ in Eq found that the central actor for relevant purposes was Mr
Broekhuyse, a witness whom his Honour found to be honest although with a somewhat impaired recollection of the detail of events. He accepted Mr
Broekhuyse's evidence that there were two matters operating in his mind when he cancelled Spedley's Treasury Department credit limit. The first was that the Spedley facility had been fully drawn for an extended period, such period being inconsistent with PPL's policy that Treasury Department borrowings were intended to be a fluctuating facility for the short term needs of customers.
The second matter was that because of the adverse media publicity which
Spedley was receiving in association with Rothwells, Mr Broekhuyse believed
Spedley to be a "credit risk", that is, as his Honour found, "a company whose credit-worthiness was not sufficiently high to justify its remaining among the customers of high financial standing appropriate for Treasury Department borrowings".

His Honour accepted Mr Broekhuyse's evidence to the effect that at no time prior to the repayment of the advance on 30 December 1988 did he believe or suspect that Spedley was insolvent. The appellants criticised his Honour's approach to proven facts in reaching this conclusion. First, it was submitted that his Honour failed adequately to consider, or to accord due weight to, the fact that PPL's decision to recall the loan was accompanied by a decision to terminate Spedley's facility with PPL. Secondly, they contended that the factual finding that there was nothing significant in the alteration on 16
November 1988 of the expiry date of the Spedley facility was wrong, as was the finding that the discussion between Mr Broekhuyse and Mr Carr leading to the cancellation of the facility took place in the course of a regular review of credit limits. Further, they submitted that his Honour erred in the way he dealt with the memo recording the reasons for the cancellation, that is, in accepting that it was probably destroyed in early December. Finally, the appellants contended that his Honour erred in his interpretation of what Mr
Broekhuyse meant by his statement that Spedley was a "credit risk".

The test whether a creditor was a payee in good faith focuses on the actual state of mind of the payee and is essentially a fact-finding exercise. In the case of a corporate payee, this fact-finding exercise depends on the evidence as to the beliefs of the "directing minds", that is, those officers who were concerned in an executive capacity in the transaction. If the trial judge, in reaching a conclusion based, wholly or partly, on the demeanour of the witnesses, accepts the evidence of the directing minds that they neither believed nor suspected that the payment was such as to give the creditor a preference over other creditors, it is only in exceptional circumstances that an appellate court can interfere. In my opinion, there is nothing to suggest that his Honour palpably misused or failed to use his advantage as a trial judge in making these factual findings and reaching his final conclusion on this aspect of the case. His Honour having found, on the basis of the evidence before him and on an assessment of the witnesses, that PPL had established that it was a payee in good faith within the meaning of <case>(a), I see no reason to interfere.

I have separated from the consideration of these factual challenges the alleged failure of his Honour to draw appropriate inferences from the absence of certain evidence, as this was said to constitute an error of law. At the trial, the appellants drew attention to the fact that the decision to cancel
Spedley's credit limit, as well as the reasons for that decision, would have been recorded in a PPL internal memorandum but that PPL had not produced the document on the grounds that it had been lost or destroyed. His Honour found that it was likely the document was destroyed in early December 1988 as a result of the decision to permit the further roll-over and did not draw any adverse inference from its absence. The appellants argued on appeal that his
Honour erred in failing to draw an inference from the failure by PPL to produce any such document(s) or otherwise calling secondary evidence of the contents of those documents. The inferences which it was submitted should have been drawn were inferences adverse to PPL's allegation that it was a payee in good faith and in the ordinary course of business.

The appellants sought to rely on the principle in Allen versus Tobias <case>; [(1958) 98 CLR 367], at 375, that: "If anyone by a deliberate act destroys a document which, according to what its contents may have been, would have told strongly either for him or against him, the strongest possible presumption arises that if it had been produced it would have told against him; and even if the document is destroyed by his own act, but under circumstances in which the intention to destroy evidence may fairly be considered rebutted, still he has to suffer. He is in the position that he is without the corroboration which might have been expected in his case." 
In the present case, the trial judge made a positive finding as to the circumstances under which the document was destroyed, namely, that it was likely the document was destroyed as a result of the decision to permit the further roll-over. In my opinion, the express refusal of his Honour to draw any adverse inference from the absence of the document equates to a finding that there existed "circumstances in which the intention to destroy evidence may fairly be considered rebutted". The only consequence therefore is that PPL is without the corroboration that the document could have brought to the issue of the reason for the cancellation of Spedley's credit limit.

I would also reject the submission that his Honour erred in failing to draw an adverse inference from the absence of any secondary evidence as to the contents of the memo recording the reasons for the cancellation of the limit.
The reasoning in Allen versus Tobias focuses on the destruction of a relevant document, and the case has nothing to say about a failure to lead secondary evidence of the contents of that document. It may be that in certain circumstances an adverse inference may be drawn by a trier of fact from the absence of secondary evidence, but I am not persuaded that the present case is one in which that result should follow.

I would therefore reject the argument that PPL failed to discharge its onus of proving that it was a payee in good faith within the meaning of <case>(a).

Deemed lack of good faith - <case>(c) 
Sub-section 122(4)(c) provides that a creditor shall be deemed not to be a payee in good faith if the payment was made under such circumstances as to lead to the inference that the creditor knew, or had reason to suspect, that the debtor was insolvent and that the effect of the payment would be to give him a preference, priority or advantage over other creditors. His Honour was of the opinion that neither the matters set out in the appellants' detailed written submissions, nor the circumstances revealed by the evidence generally, lead to the inference contained within <case>(c). The appellants have challenged his Honour's conclusion on the basis that he erred in his approach to which party bears the onus of proof under <case>(c), in applying the requisite objective test, and in holding that the conditions specified in the sub-section were not satisfied.

First, the appellants argued that his Honour incorrectly held that the onus of proof under <case>(c) fell upon the appellants, and ought to have held that the burden of establishing that the conditions in <case>(c) have not been satisfied falls upon the party who claims to be a payee in good faith. In this respect, McLelland CJ once again applied the principles he articulated in
Western United. In that case, his Honour rejected the plaintiff's argument that the burden of proving good faith which lies on the payee by virtue of s (3) includes the burden of proving the absence of circumstances of the kind outlined in <case>(c). He referred to the conflicting cases and concluded that the weight of, and more convincing, authority was in favour of the position that "the party which seeks to invoke the operative provisions of the sub-section bears the burden of showing that the stipulated conditions of its operation are satisfied" (at 117-8).

In reaching this conclusion, McLelland CJ preferred the reasoning of Barwick
CJ in Queensland Bacon Pty Limited versus Rees <case>; [(1966) 115 CLR 266], to that of Barwick CJ to the contrary effect in Rees versus Bank of New South Wales <case>; [(1964) 111 CLR 210], at 217-8. In Queensland Bacon, in discussing ss 95(2)(b), and (4) of the Bankruptcy Act 1924 (these sections corresponding respectively to ss 122(2)(a), (3) and (4)(c) of the 1966 Act), his Honour said (at 287-8); "In my respectful opinion, his Honour was in error in reading <case> as casting such an onus upon the creditor. No doubt <case> casts upon the creditor who has received a preference the onus of bringing himself within one of the paragraphs of <case>. The existence of knowledge or suspicion of insolvency negatives good faith: and the knowledge of circumstances from which ordinary men of business would conclude that the debtor is unable to meet his liabilities is knowledge of insolvency: Bank of Australasia versus Hall <case>; [(1907) 4 CLR 1514]; National Bank of Australasia versus Morris [[1892] AC ];
Tomkins versus Saffery [(1877) 3 App Cas 213.] The proof of the circumstances under which the payment was made would seem to be an insurmountable step in an attempt to prove that the creditor in receiving it was acting in good faith within the meaning of <case>. But, though <case> relates to good faith, it does not extend the onus cast by sub-s (3) so to require the creditor to negative the existence of circumstances from which the described inference could be drawn by the court.

It was pointed out in S Richards & Co Ltd versus Lloyd <case>; [(1933) 49 CLR 49], at 60, that <case> is in terms a prohibition, addressed to the court, denying the possibility of a finding of good faith if its conditions are satisfied. "It says nothing about onus" (at 60, 61). The condition it raises is that the court is positively satisfied that the circumstances of the payment justify the inference by it that the creditor knew or had reason to suspect the insolvency and the preference. To treat this as imposing onus on the creditor to negative the existence of any such circumstances is, in my respectful opinion, to misread the sub-section.

If the court, otherwise satisfied of good faith, has no material or insufficient material from which it can draw the inference mentioned in s (4), the creditor's exculpation under <case>, if otherwise made out, will be complete; or if, in such circumstances, the court is in doubt as to whether or not the inference should be drawn, the preference should not be avoided." 
Whilst it is true that in the earlier case of Rees versus Bank of New South
Wales, Barwick CJ expressed a contrary view as to who bears the onus, in that case his Honour was of the opinion that the availability of the inference in s (4) was inevitable and consequently did not give any real consideration to the question of onus. It was not until the Queensland Bacon case several years later that his Honour undertook a detailed analysis of the question. It is not surprising, therefore, that in Western United McLelland J found the latter authority to be more persuasive. I agree. In my opinion, there is no requirement that a payee seeking to prove that it acted in good faith must negative the circumstances referred to in <case>(c). The fact that <case> expressly refers, and only refers, to the matters to be proved in <case> provides further support for this conclusion.

However, the conclusion that there lies upon the liquidator or trustee an onus to prove the matters outlined in <case>(c) does not automatically follow. In
Richards versus Lloyd (supra), Rich and Dixon JJ were of the opinion that the section is in terms a prohibition, addressed to the court, denying the possibility of a finding of good faith if its conditions are satisfied; "It says nothing about onus" (at 60-1). In Queensland Bacon, Barwick CJ said "The condition it raises is that the court is positively satisfied that the circumstances of the payment justify the inference by it that the creditor knew or had reason to suspect the insolvency and the preference" (at 287). In
Western United, although McLelland J said that the party which seeks to invoke the operative provisions of the sub-section bears the burden of showing that the stipulated conditions of its operation are satisfied, he qualified this statement by saying that the section operates only if the court finds that circumstances exist such as to lead to the inferences there described and by the suggestion that in order to rely on <case>(c), a trustee or liquidator would not be required to present a substantive case (at 118).

As McLelland J noted in Western United (at 117) the weight of authority is in favour of the proposition that <case>(c) casts no onus upon the creditor.
Of the cases in support of this proposition, some contain an express and unequivocal statement that the onus of proving the matters specified in the sub-section lies upon the trustee or liquidator (Re KDS Construction Services
Pty Ltd [(1986) 4 ACLC 250], at 254; Re Cooke; Ex parte Official Trustee in
Bankruptcy versus Miller Bros Melbourne Tankworks Pty Ltd [(1985) 4 FCR ], at 411; and Taylor versus ANZ Banking Group Ltd [(1988) 13 ACLR ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/journals/AUConstrLawNlr/1990/34.html "View
Case" ), at 782). However, the majority of cases merely adopt the statements from Richards versus Lloyd and Queensland Bacon, to the effect that the sub- section simply precludes the court from finding good faith if it is positively satisfied that the circumstances justify the inference (Re Weiss [[1970] ALR ], at ; Re Chisum Services Pty Ltd [(1982) 7 ACLR 641], at 648-9;
Re Castellucci; Ex parte Pipkin <case>; [(1983) 68 FLR 162], at 167; Re Lambert Homes Pty Ltd (In Liq) [(1984) 71 FLR ], at 388; and Re Southern Cross Commodities Pty Ltd (in Liq) [(1983) 80 FLR ], at 439).

In my opinion, <case>(c) is not concerned with the onus of proof. A creditor who seeks to bring itself within <case>(a) bears the onus of establishing that it was, for instance, a payee in good faith and for valuable consideration in the ordinary course of business (s 122(3)). Once evidence is led on that issue a question will arise whether, in the light of the totality of the evidence, the inference of which <case>(c) speaks should be drawn.
There are two stages to this inquiry. The first is to determine what evidence should be accepted - this is also a necessary inquiry in considering the s (2)(a) issue. The second is to decide whether, in the light of that evidence the inference should be drawn that the creditor knew or had reason to suspect that the debtor was unable to pays its debts as they fell due from its own money and that the effect of the payment would be to give it a preference.
If the court does draw the inference the stated consequences flow.

The second aspect of the appellants' challenge to his Honour's decision on deemed good faith concerns whether he incorrectly applied an objective test.
In reaching his conclusion as to whether <case>(c) was satisfied, his Honour said (at p 6) "I would not be prepared to draw an inference from Mr
Broekhuyse's (or Mr Carr's) exposure to the press publicity that he knew or had reason to suspect that Spedley was insolvent", and to similar effect (at p 7), "Neither the matters there set out nor the circumstances revealed by the evidence generally lead in my view to the inference that as at 30 December PPL knew or had reason to suspect that Spedley was unable to pay its debts.." (my emphasis). The appellants relied on these statements in support of the submission that in applying <case>(c), his Honour addressed the effect of the circumstances on PPL's state of mind rather than their objective effect upon the mind of a "reasonable person in the position of" PPL (see
Queensland Bacon, per Kitto J at 303).

Although McLelland CJ's conclusions are couched in terms which might suggest that he considered the effect of the circumstances upon PPL's state of mind rather than that of a reasonable person, it must be remembered that his Honour stated at the outset of the judgment that he adopted the principles relating to the operation of <case> as expressed in Western United. His Honour there applied the law as stated by Latham CJ in Downs Distributing Co Pty Ltd v
Associated Blue Star Stores Pty Ltd (in Liq) <case>; [(1948) 76 CLR 463], at 475-6, that; "...a transaction falls within sub-s (4), so that a creditor is excluded from the category of a creditor dealing in good faith under sub-s (2)(b) [of <case> of the 1924 Act], if, whatever the creditor may think or believe with respect to the circumstances of a transaction, those circumstances are such as to lead to an inference by the court that there was reason to suspect according to the standards of an ordinary reasonable man that the debtor was unable to pay his debts as they became due, and that the effect of the transaction would be to give the creditor a preference over other creditors" (at 118).

These statements of principle, expressly applied by McLelland CJ, accord with the approach contended for by the appellants. Having referred himself to the correct test, in my opinion it is simply improbable that his Honour would then have made the error of law suggested by the appellants. To my mind, in expressing his conclusions in terms of Mr Broekhuyse's and PPL's state of mind, all his Honour did was to substitute, for ease of expression, the reference to "PPL" for the word "creditor" when reciting the relevant words of s 122(4)(c). I would therefore reject this ground of appeal.

The final ground of appeal relating to deemed good faith was that his Honour erred in not finding that PPL had failed to discharge the onus which fell upon it pursuant to <case>(c). Strictly speaking, this question does not arise by reason of my earlier conclusion that <case>(c) does not impose a burden of proof upon the creditor. However, the submission is in effect directed to the question whether the evidence of the objective circumstances should lead this court to draw the inference that there was reason to suspect that Spedley was insolvent and that the effect of the repayment would be to give PPL a preference. On this issue, the appellants simply submitted that the press reports were such that "when taken with all the other material available to it by 30 December", it would have been impossible for PPL to avoid coming to the necessary conclusions or suspicions in relation to Spedley's insolvency and the effect of the repayment.

McLelland CJ was of the opinion that the matters set out in the evidence were not sufficient to lead to the requisite inference. I see no reason to reach a contrary conclusion. In my opinion, whilst the media reports and surrounding circumstances would have put a reasonable person in the position of PPL on notice that Spedley was associated with Rothwells (which was insolvent), they would not have conveyed the fact or suggestion that Spedley was insolvent. I would therefore reject the appellants' submission that PPL should be deemed not to be a payee in good faith.

Ordinary course of business - <case>(a) 
As regards this aspect of <case>(a), his Honour found that the repayment was of a debt due, made on the due date by the usual and ordinary means by which payments of that kind were made and without unusual incident, and concluded: "It was no doubt unusual for a Treasury Department borrower whose limit had been cancelled to `appeal' to the Credit Department against that cancellation, and for such a cancellation to be reversed or postponed so as to permit a further roll-over of an existing advance. But it does not follow in my opinion, once a belief or suspicion by PPL of Spedley's insolvency is negated, that the repayment at the end of the further roll-over period should properly be characterised as having been made otherwise than in the ordinary course of business. The circumstance that PPL had decided that it was not going to give any further approval to Spedley as a Treasury Department borrower does not in my view alter the position. Once the roll-over had been made on 2 December , the repayment at the end of the roll-over period occurred as part of the ordinary and undistinguished flow of business." 
The appellants' challenge to his Honour's conclusion that PPL was a payee in the ordinary course of business is essentially concerned with the question of what matters a court is entitled to take into account in determining whether a payment was made in the ordinary course of business. The appellants have submitted that a court can, and should, take into account the circumstances in which the payment was made, the method by which it was made, the reason for which it was made, and the state of knowledge of the parties which prompted its being made. It is possible to separate into two distinct but related questions the issues which arise for consideration on this aspect of the appeal. The first issue concerns the meaning of the phrase "ordinary course of business" and the extent to which a court may consider the business of the debtor and creditor in determining whether the payment was made in the ordinary course. The second issue involves a consideration of whether the creditor's state of mind as regards the debtor's actual or possible insolvency is relevant to the ordinary course of business inquiry.

Turning now to the first of these issues. The High Court has repeatedly emphasised that in applying <case>(a) (and its earlier equivalent) the question a court must ask is not whether the payment was made in the ordinary course of any particular trade or business, but rather whether the payment was made in the course of business generally. In Robertson versus Grigg <case>; [(1932) 47 CLR 257], at 267, Gavan Duffy CJ and Starke J said that the test "is not whether the act is usual or common in the business of the debtor or of the creditor, but whether it is a `fair transaction, and what a man might do without having any bankruptcy in view'." Evatt J simply said that "..(t)he `ordinary course of business' is not, I think, to be related to any special business carried on by either debtor or creditor but is concerned with the character of the impeached transaction itself" (at 273). In Richards versus Lloyd , at 64, he repeated what had been said in Robertson. In Burns v
McFarlane <case>; [(1940) 64 CLR 108], Rich, Dixon and McTiernan JJ referred to these cases and agreed that the expression "does not require an investigation of the course pursued in any particular trade or vocation and it does not refer to what is normal or usual in the business of the debtor or that of the creditor" (see also Starke J at 128).

Often quoted as the seminal statement on the meaning of "in the ordinary course of business" is the short judgment of Rich J in Downs Distributing.
After referring to the statement in Burns versus McFarlane (as quoted above), his
Honour (at 476-7) said of the phrase: "The provision does not require that the transaction shall be in the ordinary course of any particular trade, vocation or business. It speaks of the ordinary course of business in general. But it does suppose that according to the ordinary and common flow of transactions in affairs of business there is a course, an ordinary course. It means that the transaction must fall into place as part of the undistinguished common flow of business done, that it should form part of the ordinary course of business as carried on, calling for no remark and arising out of no special or particular situation." (my emphasis) 
To similar effect was the observation by Dixon CJ in Taylor versus White <case>; [(1963-64) 110 CLR 129], at 136, that: "I do not doubt that `in the ordinary course of business' refers to `business' as a general conception and is not restricted to the conduct of any particular business such as the business carried on in a shop or merchant's office or the like, but is referring to the transaction of business as a known and recognised activity pursued by anybody engaged in an attempt to win or earn or `make' money or a living in a systematic or regular way.... The time-honoured phrase `in the ordinary course of business' is meant to refer to transactions regularly taking place in a sustained course of activity or some usual process naturally passing without examination." (my emphasis) 
The test applied by McLelland J in Western United (at 116) and Harkness v
Potts [(1993) 11 ACLC 501], at 505, and in the present case, was based on the formulations by Rich J in Downs Distributing and Dixon CJ in Taylor v
White as outlined and italicised above.

Although the High Court has continually emphasised that the section is concerned with the ordinary course of business generally and not the ordinary course of the business of the parties, it does not mean that the normal procedures and practices of the parties' businesses and the trade in which they operate, as well as the dealings between them, are irrelevant. Evidence of such matters is necessary so that the court may consider the payment in question in its factual context.

However, it does mean that the particular procedures followed in the parties' businesses will not determine whether what occurred was in the ordinary course of business. That issue falls to be determined by whether or not the transaction by which the payment was effected arose out of a special or particular situation calling for remark or comment. A payment will fit that description when, for example, the method and timing of the payment, or the motivations which prompted its being made, indicate that it did not take place as part of ordinary business dealings.

Where, for instance, the debtor makes the impugned payment because of its unsure financial position and in order to protect the creditor (as in Taylor v White) it is difficult to conceive of the payment as one made in the ordinary course of business. Indeed, in my opinion, the statement by Gavan
Duffy CJ and Starke J in Robertson, "what a man might do without having any bankruptcy in view" focuses attention on the debtor's knowledge and motive in a way which indicates the complementary nature of the concepts of "good faith" and "in the ordinary course of business". In the context that the section is concerned with an insolvent person, it seems to me that both inquiries are essentially concerned with the reasons which led the debtor to pay (was it in the ordinary course of business?) and the creditor to accept (was it in good faith?) the payment.

In the present case, the appellants submitted that in reaching the conclusion that the repayment of the advance on 30 December occurred as part of the ordinary and undistinguished flow of business, his Honour failed to take into account several matters. These included the fact that it was unusual for a
Treasury Department borrower whose limit had been cancelled to "appeal" to the
Credit Department, and that it was unusual for Mr Broekhuyse, an officer of the Credit Department, to be involved in the renegotiation and monitoring of the loan when it was rolled-over for the additional period of 28 days.
Further, the appellants said that when the roll-over was ultimately agreed to on 1 December, it was of a non-standard character in that the loan was extended on the basis that it would be repaid at the end of the month "come what may".

In my opinion these factors do no more then demonstrate that PPL had decided to recall a loan. Whether there was a general practice as to the manner in which loans by Treasury were recalled is questionable but is, in any event, irrelevant. Once the finding of good faith had been made, there was nothing about the particular recall in this case which raises any relevant question.
Although the appeal may be unusual for Treasury loans made by PPL, it could not be said to be outside the ordinary course of business, nor, in my opinion, could the other matters which are relied on.

The second aspect of the challenge to McLelland CJ's finding that PPL was a payee in the ordinary course of business involves a consideration of the extent to which the creditor's knowledge or suspicion of the debtor's insolvency is relevant to the inquiry. The essence of the argument is that the motivation of the creditor in demanding and/or receiving the payment might in some circumstances take a transaction outside the ordinary course of business.
Specifically, the appellants submitted that his Honour erred in not considering whether or not PPL had an apprehension or fear that Spedley might be insolvent and instead taking the view that the only relevant state of mind on the part of PPL was a belief or suspicion of actual insolvency. The submission is based on the statement by his Honour that, "it does not follow in my opinion, once a belief or suspicion by PPL of Spedley's insolvency is negated, that the repayment at the end of the further roll-over period should properly be characterised as having been made otherwise than in the ordinary course of business". (my emphasis) 
Reading this sentence in the context of the judgment as a whole, it is not entirely clear to me that his Honour did in fact draw the distinction and restrict his consideration of the issue in the manner suggested by the appellants. However, it is not strictly necessary for me to decide this question because, for reasons which will become clear, I do not think the creditor's belief or suspicion as regards the debtor's possible or actual insolvency is a matter relevant to the question whether a payment was made in the ordinary course of business. Rather than finding in the authorities support for the appellant's proposition that the state of mind of the payee is a matter properly considered as part of the test for determining the issue of ordinary course of business, I am of the opinion that they show that in applying <case>(a), "good faith" (which already deals with the creditor's state of mind) and "ordinary course of business" are separate issues which should not be confused. Indeed an acceptance of the appellant's submission would lead to the consequence that the deeming of good faith in <case>(c) would be superfluous.

Even if there be some doubt about the correctness of this conclusion, I do not think there is any value in drawing the distinction suggested by the appellants. At the heart of the appellant's submission is the argument that there is a practical difference between a belief or suspicion on the part of the creditor that the debtor is actually insolvent, and a fear or apprehension that the debtor might be insolvent. At least for the purposes of examining the creditor's motivation for entering the transaction which effected the payment,
I am of the opinion that it is semantic to assert that there is any difference. Once this is accepted, it is quite unnecessary to consider such matters as part of the test for "ordinary course of business", as they are already encompassed by the test for "good faith".

Turning then to the authorities. As earlier discussed, a creditor is a payee in good faith within the meaning of <case>(a) if at the time of the payment it neither believed nor suspected that the payment was such as to give it a preference over other creditors of an insolvent debtor: see Western United, per McLelland J at 118. Put alternatively, the existence of knowledge or suspicion of insolvency negatives good faith: Queensland Bacon, per Barwick
CJ at 287; and Re Weiss, per Gibbs J at 664. It is a subjective inquiry directed at the creditor's state of mind. In contrast, the inquiry whether the creditor was also a payee in the ordinary course of business involves a consideration of the circumstances of the transaction by which the payment was made. As Rich J said in Downs Distributing; "It is an additional requirement and is cumulative upon good faith and valuable consideration. It is, therefore, not so much a question of fairness and absence of symptoms of bankruptcy as of the everyday usual or normal character of the transaction." (at 476-7) 
In contrast, the appellants submitted that there is an overlap between the question of "good faith" and the question of "in the ordinary course of business". They referred to the judgment of Gavan Duffy CJ and Starke J in
Robertson versus Grigg, where their Honours said that in deciding if a transaction is in the ordinary course of business, one must consider whether it is "a fair transaction, and what a man might do without having any bankruptcy in view" (at 267) and concluded that the transaction there in question "was fair and reasonable, and such as any man might engage in without adverting even to the possibility of bankruptcy" (at 268).

The Court was also referred to Downs Distributing, where Williams J said: "..the expression refers to a transaction into which it would be usual for a creditor and a debtor to enter as a matter of business in the circumstances of the particular case uninfluenced by any belief on the part of the creditor that the debtor might be insolvent." (at 479-80), and to Spedley Securities Limited (In Liquidation) versus Tennyson Holdings
Limited [(1992) 26 NSWLR 344], where
Samuels JA said: (at 348): "...once good faith is established by the beneficiary of the payment said to constitute a preference, and there is no basis for the conclusion that the payee knew or had reason to suspect that the payer was, or might be, insolvent, it should not be a matter of difficulty to establish that a variation of deposits such as that carried out in the present case was done in the ordinary course of business." 
In my opinion, the authorities relied on by the appellants do not, on closer examination, provide the support contended for the proposition that the state of mind of the creditor, as opposed to the debtor, is a matter relevant to the question of ordinary course of business. Whilst I acknowledge that the statements by Gavan Duffy CJ and Starke J in Robertson versus Grigg would, taken on their own, tend to suggest the contrary, they must be understood in the context of the facts of the case.

The debtor in Robertson versus Grigg had tendered for road-making contracts with the Main Roads Board. He entered into an agreement with the respondent under which sums were advanced to the debtor in order to finance the contracts. The debtor agreed to pay interest and to make repayments out of the progress payments paid by the Main Roads Board. The debtor later ordered the Board to make any payment of monies due to him directly to the respondent. The High
Court found that the arrangements constituted equitable assignments of a chose in action and that the orders and payments effected thereunder were not affected, for various reasons, by <case> of the Bankruptcy Act. Gavan Duffy
CJ, Starke and Evatt JJ found that, in any event, <case>(b) was satisfied. As it was accepted that the respondent was a purchaser in good faith and for valuable consideration, the only issue was whether he was also a purchaser in the ordinary course of business. Their Honours found in the respondent's favour.

The case is one of the earliest High Court authorities on the meaning of the phrase "in the ordinary course of business", and as such Gavan Duffy CJ and
Starke J turned to old English authorities for assistance (at 267). These cases dealt with the English (and earlier Australian) legislation under which the issue whether the payment was in the ordinary course of business was relevant to the question whether the debtor had given a fraudulent preference.
This inquiry focused on the actions of the debtor and it was in this context that the courts had used the phrase "what a man might do without having any bankruptcy in view". In Robertson versus Grigg itself, there was no challenge to the finding of good faith, and in no part of their judgment do Gavan Duffy CJ and Starke J expressly direct themselves to consider whether the respondent entered the transaction because he had bankruptcy in view.

The observation by Williams J in Downs Distributing (at 480) appears to provide support for the appellant's submission. It may be, however, that where his Honour said that a transaction is in the ordinary course of business if it were usual for a creditor and a debtor to enter it as a matter of business "uninfluenced by any belief on the part of the creditor that the debtor is insolvent" (at 479), he was not directing his attention to the resulting overlap between the concepts. On the other hand, I would readily agree that a transaction which did not meet the test posed by his Honour would not fall within the ordinary course of business. The point is that if the creditor had been influenced by a belief that the debtor was insolvent, it would fail to establish good faith. In Downs Distributing the factual finding of an absence of good faith removed the need for the court to analyse in depth the meaning of the alternate phrase.

That this is so is clear from the facts and nature of the case there before the court. Downs Distributing concerned the settlement of a debt between traders by a transaction involving the re-delivery of goods of a value slightly in excess of the amount due, subject to an arrangement that the debtor could "repurchase" the goods for cash as and when it ordered them. The evidence indicated that the creditor entered into the transaction because he was anxious about the debtor's position and was afraid that his company might not be paid for the goods. The High Court was unanimous that the trial judge correctly held that the inferences in <case> (deemed lack of good faith) were available and that the arrangements did not constitute a transaction in the ordinary course of business. However, it was no part of the case that the court was required to consider the relevance of the creditor's motivation to the question of ordinary course of business. Even the remarks of Williams J, when read with the whole paragraph in which the excerpt relied on by the appellant appears, indicate that his Honour considered that the creditor intended to obtain a preference by the transaction and that it was essentially this which caused him to fail. This seems to me to account for the slight blurring (or overlapping of) the ideas of "good faith" and "ordinary course of business" which appears in his Honour's discussion.

Some support for the appellants' proposition is also to be found in Spedley
Securities Limited (In Liquidation) versus Tennyson Holdings Limited (supra), one of the numerous cases arising from Spedley's liquidation. The facts in
Tennyson were that two companies invested money with Spedley on 24-hour call. Within six months of Spedley's insolvency, the monies were recalled and the deposits repaid. One of the companies' directors gave evidence that the monies were recalled after he read a newspaper article about the financial difficulties of Rothwells and Spedley's association with that company. The director denied that he had any reason to suspect that Spedley was other than solvent, but agreed that the article raised in his mind an "uncertainty". The trial judge accepted his evidence and concluded that, there being no ground for inferring that the director suspected or had any reason to suspect the insolvency of Spedley, the payments were made in good faith. It is not entirely clear whether a challenge to this finding was maintained on appeal, as the judgments of Samuels JA and Mahoney JA differ as to whether the liquidator conceded the point.

Samuels JA (with whom Meagher JA agreed) concerned himself only with the question whether the payment was made in the ordinary course of business. His
Honour noted that there were a great variety of reasons why a company manager might withdraw monies placed on short-term call, many of which concern the ultimate safety of the money. However, these were pre-occupations that would ordinarily inform anybody with the responsibility for investing funds. His
Honour held that in the absence of any evidence that the director suspected
Spedley was insolvent or even under any financial pressure, there was no reason to describe the withdrawal as otherwise than in the ordinary course of business. In making this statement and concluding with the remarks (at 348) earlier quoted, I do not think his Honour intended to convey the proposition that a belief or suspicion on the part of the creditor as to the debtor's insolvency is a matter relevant to the issue of "ordinary course of business".
In my opinion, the correct interpretation is that once it was accepted that the creditor acted in good faith (both subjectively and by avoiding the inference in <case>(c)), there was nothing else about this transaction which took it outside the ordinary course of business.

Mahoney JA considered both whether the payee was deemed not to be in good faith by reason of <case>(c), and whether the payment was in the ordinary course of business. In dealing with the issue of good faith, his Honour said that a person lending money on a short-term basis would have in mind at all times matters relevant to the investment and concluded that the fact that these matters were considered by the director in making his decision to withdraw the funds from Spedley was not enough to warrant the inference that the creditor had a doubt or suspicion as to the solvency of the borrower. On the issue of "ordinary course of business", his Honour was of the opinion that it was relevant to consider: what were the business and the ordinary course of the business of the parties concerned, and whether what was done was a "fair transaction, and what a man might do without having any bankruptcy in view" (at 350). Like Samuels JA, he concluded that it would be in the ordinary course, and was in fact prudent, for a person engaged in the lending of short- term monies to have regard to credit reports, comments in journals and the like, in deciding where to place their funds on a short-term basis.

In my opinion, at its highest Tennyson stands for the proposition that the fact that the payee, in entering into the transaction which effected the payment, was influenced by matters which altered its preference for the debtor as a borrower, is not enough to take the transaction outside the ordinary course of business. This is a far cry from proffering a general principle that a creditor's belief or suspicion as to the debtor's insolvency is a matter always relevant to the question of ordinary course of business.

Perhaps stronger support for the principle relied on by the appellants is to be found in the first instance Victorian decisions of Taylor versus ANZ Banking
Group Ltd [(1988) 13 ACLR ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/journals/AUConstrLawNlr/1990/34.html "View
Case" ), and AOTC T/A Telecom versus Russell Kumar & Sons [(1993) 11 ACLC .] 
In AOTC, receiver managers appointed to the debtor company by a chargee disposed of some of the company's assets. This enabled them to make two payments settling an outstanding account with Telecom - the payments being made under threat that the telephone service would be disconnected. The trial judge found that at the time of the payments Telecom was aware of the company's insolvency. O'Bryan J, who heard the matter on appeal from a magistrate, dealt first with the question whether the transaction was in the ordinary course of business. His Honour said that the transaction itself was normal enough, being a business debt due and payable for services provided, but concluded that the fact that the creditor was aware of the insolvency took the payment outside the ordinary course of business - it had not acted "in accordance with the standards of honesty and fairness ordinarily accepted by the business community" (at 284). He then briefly considered the issue of good faith, saying; "The concept of `good faith' substantially overlaps the concept of `in the ordinary course of business'. If payments are received otherwise than in accordance with the standards of honesty and fairness ordinarily accepted by the business community they will not be received in good faith as a general rule" (at 284).

With all due respect to his Honour, while the result was clearly correct it is my respectful opinion that the matters his Honour dealt with under the rubric of "ordinary course of business" were better dealt with in relation to "good faith".

In Taylor versus ANZ, at a time when the debtor company was insolvent, but some months prior to it being placed in voluntary liquidation, the business of the company was sold. At the direction of the company's directors, the settlement monies were received by ANZ, the company's bank, and applied to extinguish the overdraft and loan accounts owing by the company to ANZ and the loan accounts owing by the company to its directors. McGarvie J found that although the evidence did not establish that at the time of making the payments the directors or the bank manager knew the company was insolvent, it did establish that they feared it might be insolvent. In his Honour's view, it was this fear which led the company to make, and the bank to insist on the making of, the payments. The payments were made in a "special or particular situation" and not in the ordinary course of business and were therefore void as against the liquidator.

McGarvie J said that although there was nothing inherent in the transaction, or the form it took, which would preclude the payment from being treated as part of the ordinary course of business, he was of the opinion that (at -8): "....the authorities also establish that a transaction, which in nature and form complies with ordinary business practice, is nevertheless not in the ordinary course of business if the reason for its being effected is a reason other than an ordinary business reason. One example of a transaction which, on that basis, is not in the ordinary course of business, is one which is effected because of the existence or apprehension of insolvency of the debtor." 
While I would agree with his Honour's statement of principle and the example, the latter, to the extent it encompasses the belief of both parties, involves the overlapping I have discussed.

In Taylor versus White (upon which McGarvie J relied), a husband and wife were the only directors and shareholders of a company, although the wife had no involvement in the running of the business. Mrs Taylor, acting as the attorney under power of her mother, lent a sum of money to the company which undertook to pay interest and repay the principal within six months of written demand.
Such a demand was made and, at a time when he knew the company was insolvent,
Mr Taylor made a series of repayments of the money lent and interest owing.
The first two sums were paid at the request of Mrs Taylor, the last three without any such request. The payee (Mrs Taylor as the `agent' of her mother) was found to have received the payments in good faith, and the question became whether the payments were in the ordinary course of business.

The High Court held (Kitto J dissenting) that the payments were not made in the ordinary course of business. Dixon CJ decided the matter on the basis that the repayments were made in the course of a family and not a business transaction. Taylor J construed the phrase "in the ordinary course of business" in the light of the history of the law relating to fraudulent preferences, concluding that it is appropriate to take into account the debtor's intentions in making the payment in deciding the question of ordinary course of business. Both Menzies J and Windeyer J reached the same conclusion.
Menzies J applied the test laid down by Rich J in Downs Distributing, adding that, "because the section under consideration treats a payment `in good faith' as different from a payment `in the ordinary course of business' and so requires a construction of each phrase which leaves some room for the other, I have not found much help from decisions in cases where this distinction did not have to be observed" (at 160).

Nothing in these judgments supports the proposition that the creditor's belief or suspicion as to the debtor's insolvency should be taken into account on the question of ordinary course of business. If anything, I think they emphasise that although in some cases the same evidence may be relevant to both issues, there are two separate tests and where good faith is satisfied, the second inquiry is directed to the ordinariness of the transaction, a test which, in my opinion, will often involve a consideration of the debtor's knowledge, intention and motive.

Quite apart from the question of authority, to my mind there is no benefit in making the semantic distinction suggested by the appellant in assessing a creditor's motivation for entering into a transaction. As a matter of ordinary
English, a suspicion of actual insolvency conveys a knowledge or suspicion of possible insolvency. Conversely, if you suspect or believe that a debtor might be insolvent, then it follows that you also suspect, although perhaps not believe, that it is insolvent. As Kitto J explained in Queensland Bacon, "A suspicion that something exists is more than a mere idle wondering whether it exists or not; it is a positive feeling of actual apprehension or mistrust, amounting to `a slight opinion, but without sufficient evidence'."(at 303).

A fear that a company might be insolvent seems to me to be very little different from a suspicion that it is insolvent. Once the logic of this is accepted, there is simply no reason why a court should consider the creditor's state of mind, however categorised, as part of the test for "in the ordinary course of business". If there is no practical difference between believing someone might be insolvent and suspecting that they are insolvent, then the test for good faith already makes the relevant inquiry. I would therefore reject this ground of appeal.

Conclusion 
The result of the foregoing is that the appeal should be dismissed with costs.
 
PRIESTLEY JA: 
Introduction.

The circumstances of this appeal and the arguments advanced in its support are fully set out in the reasons of Clarke JA. I wish to deal only with two of these arguments which concern the interpretation and application of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/s122.html) of the [Bankruptcy Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/) (Cth) and raise the question of the relationship between the expressions "in good faith" and "in the ordinary course of business" in [s (2).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/s122.html)
I will discuss this question first and then state my opinion on the two arguments, the first involving what test of "ordinary course of business" has been established by authority (the meaning question), and the second asking whether, in applying that test, the subjective state of mind of the creditor is relevant (the subjective question).
 [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/s122.html) is applicable to the present case because <case> of the Companies Code, in force at the time of the relevant happenings in 1988, adopted bankruptcy law in cases of this kind. That has not been so since the coming into operation of
Part 5.7B of the Corporations Law on 23 June 1993. Since then company law has imposed its own regime, which deals with what are called "unfair preferences" in a way similar to but not identical with that of the [Bankruptcy
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/).
 [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/s122.html).

The relevant parts of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/s122.html) are as follows: "(1) A conveyance or transfer of property, a charge on property, or a payment made, or an obligation incurred, by a person who is unable to pay his debts as they become due from his own money (in this section referred to as 'the debtor'), in favour of a creditor, having the effect of giving that creditor a preference, priority or advantage over other creditors, being a conveyance, transfer, charge, payment or obligation executed, made or incurred: within 6 months before the presentation of a petition on which, or by virtue of the presentation of which, the debtor becomes a bankrupt; or on or after the day on which the petition on which, or by virtue of presentation of which, the debtor becomes a bankrupt is presented and before the day on which the debtor becomes a bankrupt; is void as against the trustee in the bankruptcy.
 ...
 
Nothing in this section affects: the rights of a purchaser, payee or encumbrancer in good faith and for valuable consideration and in the ordinary course of business; the rights of a person making title in good faith and for valuable consideration through or under a creditor of the debtor; or a conveyance, transfer, charge, payment or obligation of the debtor executed, made or incurred under or in pursuance of a maintenance agreement or maintenance order.
 
The burden of proving the matters referred to in subsection (2) lies upon the person claiming to have the benefit of that subsection.
 
For the purposes of this section: a conveyance, transfer, charge, payment or obligation shall be deemed to have been executed, made or incurred in favour of a creditor if it is executed, made or incurred in favour of a person in trust for that creditor; a payment of tax, or of any other amount payable to the Commonwealth, or to the Commissioner of Taxation, under of because of an Act of which the
Commissioner has the general administration, is taken to be made for valuable consideration and in the ordinary course of business; and a creditor shall be deemed not to be a purchaser, payee or encumbrancer in good faith if the conveyance, transfer, charge, payment or obligation was executed, made or incurred under such circumstances as to lead to the inference that the creditor knew, or had reason to suspect: that the debtor was unable to pay his debts as they became due from his own money; and that the effect of the conveyance, transfer, charge, payment or obligation would be to give him a preference, priority or advantage over other creditors." 
For present purposes the above subsections are in substantially the same form as <case> of the Bankruptcy Act 1924 (Cth).

Immediate background to <case> of the Bankruptcy Act (Cth) 1924.

The 1924 Act was the first Bankruptcy Act passed by the Commonwealth
Parliament. It did not come into operation until 1928. The draftsmen of the
Act were not happy with it. The reasons for this, which no doubt contributed to the delay in its coming into force, were explained by Sir Robert Garran, at relevant times the head of the Commonwealth Attorney General's Department and
Solicitor General, in his reminiscences, "Prosper the Commonwealth" (1958), where he said: "The Bankruptcy Act caused a good deal of trouble and was a long time in preparation. The different State bankruptcy and insolvency laws showed many variations, and, besides the straight-out bankruptcy and insolvency provisions, nearly every State had some special alternative scheme of its own - deeds of assignment, deeds of arrangement, and so forth. In some cases the variations in the different States were small, but each State was in love with its own special system. We strove hard against resistance to get some common denominator agreed on, but at last our orders came from the Olympians to humour the States; and eventually all these systems were included in the hope that sooner or later some of them would be pushed into the background and we should be able to get them off the record. However, I have enquired recently of [the] Inspector-General in Bankruptcy, and he tells me that so far these hopes have proved elusive. He still hopes that some day Parliament may find time to clean up the matter. Meanwhile, there is much unnecessary overlapping and complication."[1] 
The form of <case> represented a substantial adoption of the New South Wales approach to what had been known in England and the Australian colonies during the 19th century as "fraudulent preferences". The New South Wales approach, which dated from 1841, was to treat transactions with creditors by a debtor contemplating bankruptcy as preferential if they had the effect of preferring the creditors to the general body of unsecured creditors, whether the debtor had any intent to prefer those creditors, or not. The bankruptcy statutes of all the other Australian jurisdictions kept, until they were superseded by the
Commonwealth legislation, the idea, which originated in England in the 18th century and was still retained there, that for a transaction with a creditor by a debtor contemplating bankruptcy to be found void as a preference, the debtor's subsequent trustee in bankruptcy had to show that the debtor had intended to prefer the creditor by entering into the transaction.

The 1924 Commonwealth Act adopted the New South Wales approach, in <case>.
The first two of the three requirements of the protective subsection 2(b) of s had previously appeared in the same or similar form in English and
Australian jurisdiction statutes. As to the third, "and in the ordinary course of business", although a substantially similar formula had appeared in an English bankruptcy statute from 1745 until 1825, it had not, so far as I can discover, appeared in English or Australian any bankruptcy statute after .[2] 
The question whether the words "in the ordinary course of business" could sensibly be read as raising considerations independent of "good faith" was raised in a text published in the year in which the 1924 Act came into operation: "The Australian Bankruptcy Law & Practice" by McDonald Henry and Meek, (1928). Their comment reveals a little perplexity about the part to be played by the expression in the operation of the section: "It is submitted that the words, if they are to be given a meaning dissociated from the bona fides of the creditor (which under Subs (4) the latter must separately prove), they can only mean (1) in the ordinary course of the creditor's business, (2) in the ordinary course of dealing between the bankrupt and the creditor, or (3) in the ordinary course of similar transactions.
 
It seems obvious that it is in the ordinary course of a creditor's business for him to accept payment from his debtor whenever it suits the creditor; and therefore the mere fact that a payment is accepted either before or after the due date should not, apart from special circumstances, prevent the creditor from retaining the advantage of payment. But for a trader creditor to accept payment in kind instead of in money would probably be held not to be in the ordinary course of business.
 
The onus of proving a preference under Subs (1) is upon the trustee. The onus of establishing protection under Subs (2) and (4) is upon the creditor or the latter's transferee, as the case may be.
 
It appears that this subsection has been drafted from the interpretation by
Griffith CJ of the decision in Tomkins versus Saffery.
 
From the provisions of Subs (4) knowledge by the creditor that he was being preferred, or knowledge on his part, or reason to suspect, that his debtor was insolvent appear to be material rather to the question of bona fides than to the question whether the payment was 'in the ordinary course of business,' unless, as above suggested, the latter words are bound up with the question of the creditor's bona fides." (at 249) 
Two High Court cases in particular are helpful in understanding what lay behind the formulation of <case>. These were decided before the 1924 Act was drafted and settled the interpretation of the Queensland and New South Wales
Insolvency Acts in regard to preferences. (As already indicated, these statutes took somewhat different approaches to this subject.) The two most important of these cases are Stewart & Walker versus White,3 (1907) dealing with the Queensland Act, and Williams versus The Official Assignee of the
Estate of William Dunn,4 (1908) dealing with the New South Wales Act. To explain the significance of these decisions however it is necessary first to indicate some of the history which preceded them. This history, and the two cases, set the context for the use of "in the ordinary course of business" in its first appearance in an Australian bankruptcy statute.

The following section on the historical development has grown much longer than
I originally intended. Although I have found the long survey I have done very helpful in attempting to grasp what use those knowledgeable in this area of the law would have thought "ordinary course of business" meant during the period when the Bankruptcy Act 1924 was being drafted, much of it is relevant to the meaning question and the subjective question in only a very general way. It is possible to answer the meaning question simply by reference to a small number of High Court cases decided on the 1924 Act. The subjective question however is less satisfactorily answered simply by reference to those cases. I have summarised what in my opinion comes out of the historical survey under the subheading "Conclusions on 'ordinary course of business' as at " at pp 80-83. A reader wishing to come to the essential part of these reasons more quickly than I have done should go directly from here to that subheading.

The Historical Development.
The history begins with what is usually said to have been the first bankruptcy legislation in England, the 34 and 35 Hen 8 c. 4 (1542) entitled "An Act against such Persons as do make Bankrupt."5 The significance of this
Act is that it provided in <case> for the payment "to every one of the creditors" from the property of offending debtors of "a portion, rate and rate like, according to the quantity of their debts" and that in <case> it used some phrases of a kind which were to become familiar in later bankruptcy statutes. Section 4 provided in part that if offenders should "... intend to delay or defraud their Creditors deceitfully by covin or collusion, suffer ... any other person to recover ... debts ... without ... just cause and title so to do, proceeding bona fide, without fraud" then the debt could be recovered from that person.

Thus, in this first legislative attempt, two themes were introduced, which appeared in all the later legislation: rateable distribution of the debtor's property; the proceeds of some transactions which had diminished the debtor's property in favour of someone else would be protected against being drawn into the general estate for distribution among all unsecured creditors.

The machinery provided by the 1542 Act for collection and realisation of the debtor's property was not well defined, and the Act was apparently not successful.[6] Further legislation was passed in 1571.

The two statutes of 1571. The 1542 Act had not distinguished between trade and non trade debtors. The 1571 legislation did. Two Acts were passed. The first, the 13 Eliz c.5, dealt with every alienation of property, by any property owner, intended to defraud creditors. Such alienations were declared to be "clearly and utterly" void. This Act did not extend to any alienation upon good consideration and bona fide to a person not having notice of the intended fraud. Versions of this statute are still on foot; in New South
Wales, without reference to bankruptcy, in <case> of the Conveyancing Act. The operation of this statute was independent of the bankruptcy law. Earlier versions of it had been enacted in 1376 (50 E 3 c.6) and 1487 (3H 7 c.4). The idea was not new; in his treatise on The Law of Fraudulent and Voluntary
Conveyances, May showed how it corresponded with Roman civil law, and had been incorporated in the common law of Scotland and in Roman Dutch law.[7] The idea was, in 1691, extended by statute to fraudulent devises.[8] All these statutes made voidness depend on the intent of the debtor to defraud or delay creditors, and also contained protective provisions depending on good faith.

The other 1571 statute, which related only to trader-debtors, was the 13 Eliz c.7. It is generally recognised as having put the bankruptcy law into a shape which, in its outlines, it afterwards retained. This legislation, which was added to in 1604 and 1623,[9] provided that the Lord Chancellor, upon proof of one of the acts of bankruptcy by a trader listed in <case> should by commission under the Great Seal appoint commissioners to sell all the bankrupt's property for rateable division among his unsecured creditors. The Commission became known as a Commission of Bankrupt. Later the disposal of the bankrupt's property was by general assignees appointed by the Commissioners. For present purposes it is enough to note that these persons, in a general way, corresponded to the present day Trustee in Bankruptcy.[10] The main aim of this 1571 statute was still the division of the proceeds of the sale of the bankrupt's estate among unsecured creditors proportionately to the amounts owed.[11] The property the Commissioners or assignees were authorised to sell was that which the bankrupt possessed at the commencement of the bankruptcy.

The Relation. The 13 Eliz c.7 was so construed that the beginning of the bankruptcy was the first act of bankruptcy, no matter by how long it preceded the issue of the bankruptcy commission. Thus, under the 13 Eliz c.7, by a doctrine for a long time simply called that of Relation, there was an unlimited relation back period. Under this doctrine a trader was deprived from the moment of committing an act of bankruptcy, of all power of charging or disposing of his property to the prejudice of his creditors for whose benefit it was thereafter held. By relation from the time of the first act of bankruptcy any transfer of property was void.[12] This doctrine was said by
Eden, in 1826, "probably" to have "effected more injustice than any provision that ever obtained in our law".[13] 
Relaxation of Relation. Later in his text Eden noted that because the hardship of the doctrine was so great the legislature had from time to time relaxed its severity, and he listed the six Acts by which this had been done prior to the 6 Geo 4 c.16 (1825), the comprehensive bankruptcy statute which he himself had drafted, and which repealed all earlier statutes.[14] He also noted that by "the New Act, a still further relief has been afforded to persons dealing bona fide with the bankrupt".[15] Two presently relevant points appear from the listed relaxations.

One point is general; they all protected particular transactions from the relation (and thus voidness) doctrine, provided the party dealing with the bankrupt had had no notice, stated in some of the statutes as notice of an act of bankruptcy, in another as notice of bankruptcy or insolvency, and in another as notice of bankruptcy, insolvency, or stoppage of payment. Each of these ameliorating statutes showed legislative response to the ever present need to balance the rateable distribution objective with the fair retention situations.

The more particular point for present purposes comes from the 19 Geo 2 c.32.
Section 1 both contained a preamble clearly stating why it was felt further exceptions should be made to the relation doctrine and rateable division objective and also, in its operative part, introduced the expression "in the usual and ordinary course of trade and dealing" into bankruptcy legislation.
The relevant parts of the section were as follows: "Whereas many persons ... liable to the statutes concerning Bankrupts, frequently commit secret acts of bankruptcy unknown to their Creditors and other person, with whom in the course of trade, they have dealings and transactions; and after the committing thereof, continue to ... carry on their trade and dealings, by buying and selling of goods ..., drawing accepting and negotiating bills of exchange, and paying and receiving money on account thereof in the usual way of trade and in the same open and public manner as if they were solvent persons, and had not become Bankrupt: And whereas the permitting such secret acts of Bankruptcy to avoid and defeat payments, really and bona fide made ... where the persons receiving the same had not notice of, or were privy to such persons having committed any act of bankruptcy, will be a great discouragement to trade and commerce, and a prejudice to credit in general: Be it therefore enacted ... That from ... the th day of October 1745, no person who is or shall be really and bona fide a creditor of any Bankrupt, for or in respect of goods really and bona fide sold to such Bankrupt, or for or in respect of any bill or bills of exchange really and bona fide drawn, negotiated, or accepted by such Bankrupt, in the usual and ordinary course of trade and dealing, shall be liable to refund or repay to ... such Bankrupt's estate, any money which, before the suing forth of such commission, was really and bona fide and in the usual and ordinary course of trade and dealing , received by such person of any such
Bankrupt, before such time as the person receiving the same shall know, understand, or have noticed that he has become a Bankrupt, or that he is in insolvent circumstances." (My underlining.) 
This enactment explicitly shows the felt need, in certain circumstances, to qualify the rule of rateable division of the estate among unsecured creditors.
The bankruptcy law, introduced for the relief of traders against insolvent traders, some of whom, in the nature of things, would have attempted to save something from the wreckage of their trading activity by taking steps to have available for themselves after bankruptcy, property which should really be distributed among their unsecured creditors, and some of whom would not have taken any such steps, at first adopted, with only minor qualification, the method of making the whole of the bankrupt's estate at the time of the first act of bankruptcy available to the general body of creditors rateably. This was a logical approach, but if taken to its logical limit, then for the reasons mentioned in the preamble, it could, in particular cases, prove unsettling and disruptive to some of the body of traders for whose benefit the statutes were introduced.

The assumed basis of trading: some light from 19 G 2 c.32. In 1756, in
Cooper versus Chitty,[16] Lord Mansfield commented on "the usual and ordinary course of trade and dealing" in 19 G 2 c.32. The statute and the case concerned only post-bankruptcy events; at that date pre-bankruptcy events were not reachable under the bankruptcy statutes. The contest in the case was between the assignees of the bankrupt and the two Sheriffs of London as to goods of the bankrupt seized by the Sheriffs under a writ of execution after the grant of the bankruptcy commission. What Lord Mansfield said about 19 G2 c ,[17] although brief, throws some light on the meaning he attached to the protective words in <case> of that Act. He said: "Till the making of 19 G2 c 32, if the bankrupt had, bona fide, bought goods, or negotiated a bill of exchange; and thereupon, or otherwise, in the course of trade, paid money to a fair creditor, after he himself had committed a secret act of bankruptcy; such bona fide creditor was liable to refund the money to the assignees, after a commission and assignment; and the payment, though really and bona fide made to the creditor, was avoided and defeated by the secret act of bankruptcy.
 
This is remedied by that Act, in case no notice was had by the creditor, (prior to receiving the debt,) 'that his debtor was become a bankrupt, or was in insolvent circumstances'."18 
And then a little later: "Though the statutes concerning bankrupts rescind all contracts and executions not completed before the bankruptcy, and vest the property of the bankrupt in the assignees by relation, in order to an equal division of his estate among his creditors, yet they do not make men trespassers or criminal by relation, who have innocently received goods from him, or executed legal process, not knowing of an act of bankruptcy; that was not necessary and would have been unjust."19 
Section 1 of the 1745 Act, both in its preamble and enacting part, was speaking of transactions of sale of goods between traders dealing with one another on the ordinary unspoken basis that transactions between them would be fulfilled, and payment made when due; the ordinariness of the course of trade consisted in the fact that the transaction would be completed; that, by one means or another, the trader would be able to pay at the appropriate time was an assumption so basic to the trading that it need not be explicit. Lord
Mansfield, in his comments in Cooper versus Chitty, was stating, in somewhat different words, the ratio of <case> of the 1745 Act as being that when one trader dealt with another on this footing of the solvency required in the ordinary course of trade, and received payment on that footing, the creditor should be treated as a bona fide creditor, and exempted from the prima facie, basic rule that all the bankrupt's property should be gathered together for rateable division.

This view of the basis on which trading was ordinarily conducted also appears incidentally, it seems to me, in a 1758 opinion of Lord Mansfield in Worsley v Demattos,20 in which a deed was held to be void and an act of bankruptcy pursuant to the 1 Jac I c.15 <case> (see p 10 above). The trader who had conveyed property by the deed remained in possession of it. Lord Mansfield remarked: "By the express tenor of the deed, Slader was to have the absolute order and disposition as before. In fact he was permitted to continue in possession, and act as owner. They who dealt with him, trusted to his visible trade and stock.
They trusted to the bankrupt-law that he could neither have sold or mortgaged; and in case of a misfortune, that his effects must be equally distributed.
They were imposed upon by false appearances."21 
And later: "A trader is trusted upon his character, and visible commerce: that credit enables him to acquire wealth. If by secret liens, a few might swallow up all, it would greatly damp that credit.[22] 23 
Lord Mansfield was speaking, so far as creditors were concerned, of those whose debts were discharged in what was, objectively, in the ordinary course of trade, and in circumstances where there was no question in the creditor's mind, of the solvency of the debtor.

Subsequent cases on the 1745 Act seem to me to support this understanding, as well as giving specific instances of what was then thought to be and not to be in the usual and ordinary course of trade and dealing. I will not extract all the passages which support what I have called the assumed basis of trading and mention here only these further examples from the opinion of Chambre J in Cox v Morgan,24 in 1801. At one point he said: "... the intention is manifestly to protect only those who are deluded by specious appearances of solvency and credit;"25 
A little later, in supporting his dissenting view that the payment in question did not fall within the protection of the Act, he commented that after the bankrupt's first act of bankruptcy, which it had been held the creditor had no notice of, "... it is not in evidence that he ever appeared publicly and carried on his trade and dealing in the usual way of trade, and in the same open and public manner as if he were a solvent person, all which circumstances are by the preamble supposed to attach themselves to the situation of the bankrupt, whose payments were meant to be ratified by this Act;"26 
Cases on 19 G 2 c.32 - the usual and ordinary course of trade and dealing.
The reported cases come mainly from the latter part of the 18th and the early part of the 19th century. 19 G 2 c.32 was concerned only with payments after bankruptcy so the cases had nothing to do with fraudulent preferences. Two trends can be seen in the cases, one limiting, and the other expansive. The limiting one was that it became established that the statute extended only to the two cases of a bankrupt paying for goods and paying bills of exchange.
Payments in the usual and ordinary course of trade and dealing not falling within either of those two categories were not protected: Vernon versus Hall ;[27] Bradley versus Clark (1793).[28] Within those confines, the broadening trend was to give quite a wide meaning to the usual and ordinary course of trade and dealing. The two most informative cases are Holmes v
Wennington (1790)[29] and Cox versus Morgan (1801)[30].

Holmes was an action brought to recover money paid, after a secret act of bankruptcy, by a trader to a creditor who had had him arrested for the debt.
The debt arose in the course of trade. The payment was made a few days after and in consequence of the arrest and whilst the debtor was in confinement. At nisi prius Chief Baron Eyre of the Exchequer Court was of opinion the payment was protected by the statute. When the matter came before the Exchequer Court
Mr Wood, counsel for the plaintiff, had, what to present day eyes, might seem a strong argument: "Can it be said that a payment by a man under duress is a payment in the course of trade? ... Payment under duress of imprisonment, as suffering himself to be arrested, to have executions against him, etc. is not in the usual course of trade; it is an interruption at least of his trade, if not a total stoppage of it. Both duress of imprisonment and duress of goods show insolvency. ... Arrest or execution either in body or goods preceding payment shows insolvency to the party suing at least; and that the payment is not in the usual course of trade. Payment in the usual course of trade is when bills are duly paid and honoured without driving a party to arrest, on failure of payment."31 
All the Court were of opinion that the Chief Baron's ruling at the trial had been correct. Chief Baron Eyre himself delivered the principal opinion. He said: "I decided this at Nisi Prius with very great doubt - I thought that tying up the words 'in the usual course of trade and dealing' too closely would be very mischievous to the public; but I found a difficulty in drawing a line to satisfy my own mind; I thought a payment on arrest within it, and I did not then know of the case in the Common Pleas.[32] What a debt contracted in the usual course of trade and dealing is, is easy to be ascertained; but as to payment in the course of trade and dealing it is difficult to draw the line.
Mr Wood defines it to be a payment according to the terms of the contract: but it would be very mischievous to say that payments must be strictly according to the terms of the contract, or punctually made; for that would shake almost all the payments in the city. Suppose a merchant says, call next week, cash is low; and the creditor calls again and is paid, can any man doubt that it is a good payment? Suppose he calls two or three times? As to what is said, that an arrest shews insolvency, that is a circumstance in evidence from which a Jury may infer notice of it, but it is by no means decisive, and it must be something decisive to mark the line. If it be not evidence of insolvency, it is nothing but diligence to get his payment, and that ought not to defeat it.
The other part of the act is more definite and more capable of being carried into execution. ... I acquiesce in the determination of the Court of Common
Pleas, arrests are now very frequent, not on the ground of insolvency, but of quickening payments, which are within the statute."33 
The last sentence explains why Mr Wood's argument was not as strong then as it seems now. The power of the creditor to have a debtor arrested and imprisoned upon issue of a writ, now for a long time regarded as uncivilised and deserving of the abolition it received, has faded from memory; in 1790 it was a commonplace fact of everyday life. Further, it was recognised that solvent traders did not always pay their debts on the due date; some would delay to the extent that their creditors would commence legal proceedings, with the interlocutory consequences that followed; this was usual trade practice. It was when the creditor varied the terms of payment that, as we shall see, the usual course was departed from.

In Cox versus Morgan,34 (1801) in a case tried before Lord Eldon CJ,[35] the jury found for the assignees. Their verdict however was subject to the opinion of the court on a case stated by the judge. This included the facts that neither the creditor nor anyone concerned for him personally knew that the debtor had been in the Fleet, or had committed an act of bankruptcy, or was in insolvent circumstances. The debtor had been arrested at the suit of another creditor and had been in the Fleet from November 1798 to February 1799. This was the act of bankruptcy. In February 1799 the creditor had the debtor arrested by a sheriff's officer, upon which the debtor immediately paid the creditor.

On the hearing of the stated case the majority of the court took the view the payment was protected by the statute. The dissentient was Chambre J, some of whose remarks in this case I have already cited (see pp 17).

He stated the circumstances of the payment and continued: ""Was this a payment in the usual and ordinary course of trade and dealing?
Are sheriff's bailiffs the persons who transact the affairs of merchants and traders in the ordinary course of trade and dealing? If this will do where are we to stop? This is a case where a payment has been made under an arrest, but why stop there? Will not the argument go equally to protect payments after suing out execution?"36 
His conclusion was that "payments under all these circumstances" should not be considered "as made under appearances of perfect solvency on the part of the bankrupt, and in the ordinary course of trade".[37] 
The regularity of arrest for debt clearly played a part in the view of the other members of the court. Rooke J said: "Legal coercion is a course which the law allows, and surely if we attend to the literal construction of the statute, it is neither unusual nor extraordinary, nor out of the ordinary course of dealing for a creditor to be driven to arrest his debtor, or to use legal diligence in order to procure payment. The taking out legal process does not depend so much on the real credit of the debtor as on the patience or impatience of the creditor. If a creditor is obliged to call three or four times on a debtor before he can obtain payment, it may awaken suspicion. If a patient creditor does this and receives payment, he is protected. Shall we say that if a harsh creditor calls once, and then arrests and is paid, he shall refund? Shall we consider his severity as a proof of his debtor's bankruptcy or insolvency? The statute has given one positive criterion, viz knowledge of the bankruptcy or insolvency; and has also required that the transaction shall be in the ordinary course of trade and dealing; but as it has not defined what the ordinary course must be, the courts of law must, as cases arise, declare what is within the ordinary course and what is not."38 
Heath J thought Holmes versus Wennington and another case should be treated as binding the court to find the transaction protected, but he also said the statute of 19 G 2 had always been considered a remedial one and entitled to a liberal construction, and continued: "In order to give a validity to the payment of a bill of exchange, it must be drawn and the money received in the ordinary course of trade. In my apprehension this bill had both requisites. Of the consideration of the bill there is no question. The bill was due before it was paid, and it was not officiously paid by the bankrupt. The objection is, that the payment was made under the terror of an arrest. If the bill had been paid before it became due, or if the bankrupt had solicited the Defendant to receive the money, those circumstances would have vitiated the transaction, and would have brought the case within the statute. It is objected that the payment is under an arrest.
If this were to be the ground of the decision it would introduce great uncertainty."39 
The result was that a verdict was ordered to be entered for the defendant creditor.

In Harwood versus Lomas (1809)[40] a bankrupt's assignees were held entitled to recover back money paid by the bankrupt to the defendant after a secret act of bankruptcy committed before the date of the commission. The creditor had recovered the debt by judgment in an action on a promissory note. The promissory note had been given on an account stated for the balance of an account the debtor had with the creditor which was partly made up of money lent by the creditor to the debtor. The court said (per Lord Ellenborough CJ) that a promissory note given to pay an account of that kind "could not be said to have been given in the ordinary course of trade and dealing",[41] that is, that the promissory note was to pay for an amount which in part was not a trade debt of the kind covered by the statute.

In Tamplin versus Diggins (1809)[42] accommodation bills were paid by the debtor liable on them to the accommodator (creditor), after an act of bankruptcy but before the commission of bankrupt was sued out, and a month before the bills were due. The creditor in due course paid the holders of the bills. The bankrupt's assignees brought action against the creditor for money had and received, and obtained a verdict. Lord Ellenborough said: "As the bills were still running at the date of the commission, this money was not received by the defendants in the usual and ordinary course of trade and dealing. The payments protected are payments upon bills actually due."43 
To use the word of Heath J in Cox versus Morgan the bills were paid "officiously".

In Bayly versus Schofield (1813),[44] the payment had been by bill enclosed in a letter in which the debtor had explained his circumstances. The case shows how closely bound together knowledge of insolvent circumstances and being out of the ordinary course of trade could be. The creditor relied on 19 G 2 c.32.
Lord Ellenborough CJ asked "how does the case stand with respect to their knowledge of his being in insolvent circumstances?".[45] He answered his question as follows: "By insolvent circumstances is meant that a person is not in a condition to pay his debts in the ordinary course, as persons carrying on trade usually do.
Looking at the letter of the 11th of October which inclosed the bill, it emphatically shews him to have been in insolvent circumstances. It speaks of his being unable to muster a sufficient sum, and of his having been obliged to pay every one a little as it came to hand. Can that payment then be said to be in the ordinary course, when a man confesses he is obliged to pay by minute portions to each of his creditors? It is more like a distribution under a deed of composition, than a payment by a trader appearing openly at his counter. I should say that this was not the mode in which a solvent man proceeds."46 
Grose J said: "As to the money having been paid in the usual and ordinary course of trade,
I cannot say that money paid by driblets by a person who felt himself to be insolvent was such a payment."47 
Le Blanc J said much the same, although the main ground of his opinion was that the creditors must have known the debtor to be insolvent.

Bayley J, on the course of trade point said: "As to this being a payment in the ordinary course of trade, the object of the statute was to protect those persons only who received money under circumstances not calculated to raise suspicion;"48 
A feature of all the cases on 19 G 2 c.32 is that when the usual and ordinary course of trade and dealing was discussed, it was necessarily in the context of the question whether the way in which the creditor had been paid was in that usual course; attention was thus always directed to the terms on which the debtor would ordinarily discharge the debt, whether by explicit contract or the ordinary custom of the trade. In cases where the debt had been incurred in the ordinary way of trade, and this was so in the general run of cases, the question therefore usually was whether the manner of discharge of the debt differed from the way in which it would ordinarily have taken place, either by contract or in the usual course, in such a way as to suggest that the variation was due to problems of the debtor, which although not notice to the creditor of the debtor's being bankrupt, were only really explicable on the basis that the debtor might be insolvent. The question was always looked at with hindsight, because these cases only occurred when the debtor had in fact been bankrupt at the time of the discharge of the debt although that was not known to the creditor.

Another feature of the operation of the "ordinary course" requirement in 19
G 2 c.32 which followed from this was that no question of the debtor's subjective intent needed to be investigated as a separate issue. The debtor had already committed a secret act of bankruptcy, and the relation theory meant that the payment was made from property which he should have been holding for the benefit of all his creditors. If it appeared objectively that the payment was one not in the usual and ordinary course, then the assignees would recover the payment from the creditor. If the circumstances of the payment did objectively have the appearance of being in the ordinary course, the only other question to be investigated was whether the creditor knew, understood or had noticed either that there had been an act of bankruptcy by the debtor or that he was in insolvent circumstances. This meant making a decision about the state of mind of the creditor, but to repeat, that only became necessary if the payment appeared to be in the usual and ordinary course. If such an inquiry became necessary, then, incidentally to it, questions of what the creditor knew about the debtor's state of mind could become relevant. (Under <case>(a) this inquiry would come under the good faith heading.) 
Finally it appears the cases on the statute were not regarded as satisfactory in their own time. According to Christian in 1819 they then showed "a considerable degree of contradiction and confusion".[49] 
The origin of the fraudulent preference. It was during the period that the statute 19 G 2 c.32 was in force from 1745 to 1825, that what was seen by some as judicial activism, the doctrine of the fraudulent preference, appeared and became established. By 1758, when Lord Mansfield mentioned the argument in
Worsley versus Demattos that a pre-bankruptcy preferential payment to the creditor was valid, and indicated without deciding, his own view to the contrary,[50] the situation that had been reached was (1) that, subject to the qualifications on the relation doctrine that had been introduced to that time, all dealings by the bankrupt with his property after the first act of bankruptcy were void and, (2) that in regard to dealings before the first act of bankruptcy, a provision had been in place since the 1604 statute already mentioned[51] which provided that property conveyed before bankruptcy could be recovered by the assignees unless conveyed in consideration of marriage or for value. This provision was additional to and independent of 13 Eliz 1 c.5 (see p 9 above) which dealt with property owners generally, and had no explicit bankruptcy connection, but which could be relied on in bankruptcy proceedings.

In this situation it would seem that at that date all of the bankrupt's property from the date of the first act of bankruptcy would be available to the assignees, and also any property transferred in fraud of creditors before bankruptcy. However, none of the statutory provisions was thought to reach discharge of debts, otherwise than by deed, by a trader "about to break", and intending to prefer a particular creditor.

This left without remedy under the bankruptcy statutes the situation where a debtor on the eve of bankruptcy (that is, immediately before committing an act of bankruptcy) decided to discharge the debt of an unsecured creditor.
Although the transaction in itself would not be an act of bankruptcy,[52] it would clearly be to the disadvantage of the other unsecured creditors in the bankruptcy, and, to an extent, defeat the object of the bankruptcy legislation. The establishment of the fraudulent preference doctrine from 1768 onwards seems to have been a judicial response to what had come to be seen as an omission from the bankruptcy statutes. The situation had been referred to, and, as already mentioned, the later doctrine foreshadowed, in Worsley v
Demattos,53 a case decided on other grounds. In 1768 Lord Mansfield first based his own opinion in a case on what became the doctrine that a fraudulent preference before bankruptcy was void. This case was Alderson versus Temple[54].

The theory of the fraudulent preference. The facts of Alderson were that on the day before they committed an act of bankruptcy two men endorsed a promissory note to Temple to whom they were indebted to a large amount. The promissory note was endorsed and sent to Temple by the two men in contemplation of their insolvency and subsequent failure. There were a number of issues upon which the matter could have been decided in favour of the plaintiff, the assignee of the bankrupt's estate, but Lord Mansfield took the opportunity to deal with the case by asking whether the endorsement of the promissory note by the bankrupts had been fraudulent. The other members of the court did not decide the case on this footing. Lord Mansfield's approach was not the basis of the court's decision.

Lord Mansfield began the relevant part of his reasons by pointing to the incongruity of such payments not being available for the general body of creditors.
 "... it is certain that the Statutes of Bankruptcy leave a trader, to the moment of an act of bankruptcy committed, every power an owner can have over his estate. The statute says[55] 'Fraudulent conveyances shall be an act of bankruptcy'. Other acts that are fraudulent are not made acts of bankruptcy: but they are attended with the consequences of fraud, at law; which is, 'that fraud renders every act void'."[56] 
He then laid out the theoretical basis of the voidability of the fraudulent preference: "All acts to defraud creditors or the public laws of the land are void; and if the nature of the act be a conveyance or grant, 'tis not only void, but an act of bankruptcy. It has been determined 'that a conveyance by a trader, of all his effects for the payment of one or more bona fide creditors of the most meritorious kind, though his effects do not amount to half what is due, is void; because it is not an act in the ordinary course of business; it is not such an act as a man could do but it must be followed by an immediate act of bankruptcy, and it is defeating the equality that is introduced by the
Statutes of Bankruptcy, and the criminal (for the bankrupt is considered as a criminal) is taking upon himself to prefer whom he pleases'. But suppose he leaves out a considerable part of his effects: if it appears to be only colourable, that don't vary the case; it is fraudulent. Suppose a trader makes a conveyance of all his estate, for the payment of all his creditors except one (which was the case of Gayner cited in Dematto's case), it is void.
Suppose it was 'to pay all his creditors rateably:' if there were no assent of his creditors, or composition, it would be void: for, it would be rescinding the whole system of the bankrupt laws, and instead of applying to the Great
Seal, he would choose his own trustees. If this is a fraudulent act, it is void."57 
The course of business. Next, Lord Mansfield considered the question whether all preferences are void. In doing so he naturally enough, drew upon the "course of trade" notion introduced to the bankruptcy statutes by the 19 G 2 c.32. He said that whether a transaction would be void as a preference "... will depend upon the act. As, if a bankrupt, in course of payment pays a creditor; this is a fair advantage, in the course of trade: or, if a creditor threatens legal diligence, and there is no collusion; or begins to sue a debtor: and he makes an assignment of part of his goods; it is a fair transaction, and what a man might do without having any bankruptcy in view.
Suppose such a case as Small and Oudley: there it was for the advantage of the creditors, and no fraud to them; and if part of the transaction were set aside as fraudulent, the whole must. But it never entered into the mind of any
Judge, to say 'that a man, in contemplation of an act of bankruptcy, could sit down and dispose of all his effects to the use of different creditors:' for, that would be a fraud upon the acts of bankruptcy. But if done in a course of trade and not fraudulent, it may be supported."58 (my underlining) (In the underlined words, Lord Mansfield is making an important point I will be returning to later - that a payment objectively in the course of trade may still be fraudulent, that is, because of the debtor's intent.) 
Finally Lord Mansfield explained why he thought the particular case was not in the course of trade: "... there never was any dealing between the parties in sending indorsed notes. There was no application made by the defendant. And it was done with a view to positive iniquity: for, the bankrupts had received this note from
Bryer and Everard; for notes of the same value; and knowing that they should be come bankrupts the next day, to defeat Bryer and Everard of setting off their notes against it, indorse this note to another person. And there was no way of doing justice to Bryer and Everard, but supporting the claim now made by the assignees. So that there was express particular fraud, at the time the fact was done. Next, 'tis an act that is, most certainly, not complete, as between the parties. The argument of the case of Scott is very applicable to the present. For, there was a preference given to a bona fide creditor: but he knew nothing of it. Suppose, in the course of trade, a bill is sent to
Constantinople, and a bankruptcy happens in England before it arrives; yet it may be good. But here, it is done, because they were resolved to commit an act of bankruptcy."59 
When Lord Mansfield in these passages spoke of "fair advantage", "fair transaction" and "course of trade and not fraudulent" he was doing so, I think, in the sense I sought to indicate in commenting on Cooper versus Chitty above, as indicating that the creditor was dealing with the trader on the ordinary trade assumption, that transactions will be completed within trade requirements. The same view is apparent in following cases.

There was a difference in the use of the ordinary course of trade idea in cases on 19 G 2 c.32 and cases based on the fraudulent preference doctrine. In the former, for reasons earlier explained, the debtor's state of mind was not an issue; in the latter, it necessarily was, even in the case where looked at objectively the manner of payment of a debt appeared to be in the ordinary course.

Further cases mentioning course of trade. In Harman versus Fishar,60 (1774)
Lord Mansfield again spoke of the ordinary course of business. The case was not a preference case, because the debtor's effort to repay before the first act of bankruptcy was unsuccessful. In one part of his reasons, Lord Mansfield tersely summarised the situation: "But the present case affords no circumstances that can give rise to a question. A trader at five o'clock in the morning, just going to commit an act of bankruptcy, orders his servant to take certain bills to a creditor in discharge of a debt: pursuant to no contract: in performance of no obligation; in no course of dealing; without the privity of the creditor, or call on his part for the money, and without a possibility of the notes being delivered before an act of bankruptcy was committed. ... the act was not complete; and therefore the act of bankruptcy revoked it. ...
 
Lord Mansfield added, that if a preference were only consequential, the case might be different: as if a payment were made or an act done in pursuance of a prior agreement."61 
On the basis of the theory he had explained in Alderson, he must have meant by this, that a consequential preference was one which in fact preferred the creditor, but was not done by the debtor for the debtor's purpose of preferring the creditor, but because of the prior agreement.

Rust versus Cooper,62 (1777), is another case which casts light on the view taken at that time concerning "ordinary course of business". At a time when two traders were in difficulties but had not yet committed an act of bankruptcy, they borrowed [sterling]1,000 from Mr Cooper. Eight weeks later they committed an act of bankruptcy. A few days before the act of bankruptcy they sent a bill of parcels to Mr Cooper with an order to the man who had possession of the goods referred to in the bill to deliver the goods or any proceeds from any already sold to Mr Cooper. At a jury trial the jury found in favour of the assignees of the bankrupts and brought in a verdict for the value of the goods covered by the bill of parcels. The jury's verdict was subject to the opinion of the Court on the case, the question being whether the assignees were entitled to recover the value of the goods. Lord Mansfield said that although the transaction was a fraudulent one on the part of the debtor, because it had not been by deed it was not itself an act of bankruptcy.[63] He went on to consider whether the transaction was a mere fraudulent contrivance, with no other view but to defeat the consequences of inevitable bankruptcy. He then referred to the clear intention of the debtor to prefer Mr Cooper and went on to ask a series of questions evidently relevant to whether there had been any pressure upon the debtor or whether what he did was in the ordinary course of business. In this part of his reasons he said: "How does this case stand then? Was there any application on the part of the creditor? Was the money become due? Did the creditor demand payment? Did he threaten process if the bankrupt did not pay? not one of these circumstances appear. On the contrary, the whole was transacted behind the back of the creditor: and, without any previous communication, with any previous transaction or stipulation, a bill of parcels in made out, which bears date on the 22d of September, but was not delivered until the 24th. The next thing is, it purports to be a bill of sale of goods at particular prices. That is not true. No prices were agreed on: the defendant knew nothing of the matter. This bill of parcels is delivered to the defendant upon the 24th. With what view? it must be to apprize the defendant that he meant to secure him. Again, there is no receipt on the bond. It is impossible to consider this as a sale; it must be a security; a plank to save: the goods are to a much larger amount than the principal and interest due on the bond. There is nothing that carries the face of a sale upon it; no receipt, no transaction, no acknowledgment in discharge of the bond, no account. The whole is a secret clandestine contrivance, with no other view or intention than to give a preference, and to defeat the consequences of a certain bankruptcy, though it purports to be a bona fide sale.
 
Another excessively strong circumstance is, that the defendant never bought, or dealt in, this kind of goods; and moreover, they were, at the time, in the hands of the bankrupt's agent.
 
There is a fundamental distinction between an act like this, and one done in the common course of business. The statutes have relation back only to the act of bankruptcy. And I consider here, that there is no act of bankruptcy till the 26th. If, in a fair course of business, a man pays a creditor who comes to be paid, notwithstanding the debtor's knowledge of his own affairs, or his intention to break; yet, being a fair transaction in the course of business, the payment is good; for the preference is there got consequentially, not by design; it is not the object; but the preference is obtained, in consequence of the payment being made at that time.
 
Suppose a creditor presses his debtor for payment, and the debtor makes a mortgage of his goods, and delivers possession; that is, and, at any time, may be, a transaction in the common course of business, without the creditor's knowing there is any act of bankruptcy in contemplation; and therefore, good.
It is not to be affected by what passes in the mind of the bankrupt. (my underlining) But, in the present case, there is not a single thing but what is a step towards fraud, and a proof of an intended preference: and to support it, would be to overturn the whole system of the bankrupt laws. The present therefore, is a fraudulent sale upon all the other creditors, and all the laws concerning bankrupts.
 
The present determination will not affect the case of a fair mortgage of goods delivered, arising out of a transaction in the common course of business. It will only affect cases, where there is no object but that of defeating the bankrupt laws, and committing a fraud on all the other creditors."64 
Aston J said that there had been neither payment nor sale but a mere contrivance. He went on: "If the bankrupt had paid what was due ... in banknotes or money ... I think there might be an argument ... as to the fairness of the payment. But this was done without demand ... as to the fairness of the payment. But this was done without demand; not in a common course of dealing; and the bond [which the bankrupt had given to Temple at the time of the borrowing] was left in the hands of the creditor, without any receipt taken upon it. ... The present transaction is not in itself an act of bankruptcy; but not being a payment in the regular and common course of dealing and business, it is a fraudulent transaction, and therefore, void with respect to the other creditors."65 
The passage underlined above from Lord Mansfield's opinion has two important features. One is that it is a further demonstration of how far a creditor could go in enforcing his right to payment without being seen as going out of the ordinary course. Taking security (from a solvent debtor) improved the creditor's position, in contrast to giving further time without any compensating advantage. The other is that in the example given the debtor is making the mortgage and delivering possession of the goods because of the trade pressure, and not because it is his wish to do so. It is because the cause of the payment is assumed (in the example) or found (in a case) to be the trade pressure and not the debtor's will or desire, that what passes in his mind becomes immaterial. Lord Mansfield's own theory would require a different conclusion, if, notwithstanding the objective appearance of the payment (or transaction) as in the ordinary course of trade, the real cause of the payment was found to be the debtor's intention to prefer the creditor as against his other creditors.

Another case which throws some light on what was meant by "ordinary course of trade" was Cosser versus Gough,66 (1790). Here, a creditor called on a debtor three days before the debtor's bankruptcy, demanding payment, and was given a bill of exchange. Following the issuing of the commission the bankrupt's assignees demanded the bill from the creditor. In directing the jury Lord Kenyon said: "... if a bankrupt officiously made such payment to a creditor on the eve of his bankruptcy, that of itself would be evidence of fraud: it would not be a payment in the ordinary course of trade." (at 156; 1027) 
Lord Kenyon was using "officiously" here in the same way as Heath J in Cox v Morgan as meaning "before it would be ordinarily due". Cosser versus Gough also illustrates the point I made regarding the underlined words in Lord
Mansfield's opinion in Altderson. I will deal with it in the following section.

The mental element in the fraudulent preference. In Cosser versus Gough Lord
Kenyon also directed the jury that in considering whether the payment had been made in order to give an undue preference and in contemplation of bankruptcy it was not sufficient to show that the bankrupt must have known that insolvency was inevitable. The intention of both creditor and debtor must be considered.[67] This is consistent with my explanation above of Lord
Mansfield's statement in Rust versus Cooper that what passes in the mind of the bankrupt could not affect what appeared to be a fair transaction in the ordinary course of business. Given that Lord Mansfield's fraudulent preference doctrine was based on the fraudulent intent of the debtor, what Lord Kenyon said must follow. If a payment of a debt not yet due were made by a fully solvent debtor who had committed no act of bankruptcy then there would be no occasion on either side for any attention to be paid to it. Further, from the creditor's point of view, whatever the fact of insolvency might be, if there were no occasion for the creditor to think the debtor might be insolvent, then there would be nothing untoward in such a payment. Yet, in the situation where the debtor knew he was on the eve of bankruptcy and the intention of his then making the payment was in fact deliberately to favour that creditor by giving him an advantage over the other unsecured creditors in the bankruptcy shortly to begin, then, as a matter of fact, the conditions for the operation of the fraudulent preference doctrine would be present, although from the creditor's point of view (if acting on the assumption of the debtor's solvency and not having any relevant notice of insolvency) the payment by the debtor could only be an early payment in the ordinary course of trade. Debtors occasionally make such payments, if only to show their financial soundness or to encourage good relations.

The difficulty in theory caused by the fact that the same transaction could, in some cases, be both an intentional preference on the part of the debtor, and from the creditor's point of view a receipt in the fair course of trade, was solved, in a practical sense, by leaving to a tribunal of fact, usually a jury, the question whether the discharge of the debt was voluntary or not.
This is where causation would come in. If the situation was one where the debtor paid on the due date and also intended to prefer the creditor, and the creditor, without any idea the debtor might soon commit an act of bankruptcy, accepted payment in the usual way, the question for the jury would be: did the debtor make the payment because he wanted to prefer the creditor? or, because it was usual for him to do so as a matter of business or (what I think must be the same thing) because ordinary business practice required him to do so? 
On this basis, the fact that from the creditor's point of view the receipt was in the ordinary course would not be decisive; the case would turn on the assessment by the jury (or other tribunal of fact) of what was the psychologically "real" cause of the payment. This is the theoretical explanation of how a decision should have been arrived at; no doubt many fact finders silently took the simpler path of deciding according to their view of the "fairness" of the transaction.

It seems to me that the foregoing view of the matter must follow from the insistence at all times in the history of the fraudulent preference doctrine of the need for the discharge of the debt by the debtor to have been voluntary. In De Tastet versus Carroll (1815)[68] Lord Ellenborough told the jury "the rule was not meant to debar a creditor from using such means as were in his power for compelling satisfaction of his claim, but merely to exclude a voluntary and fraudulent preference." 
He went on: "The question for your consideration is, whether the transfer was voluntary, or made under the apprehension that a degree of force, civil or criminal, was about to be applied."[69] 
What was involved in the decision on the question whether a preference had been voluntary or not was quite fully discussed in the Court of Common Pleas in Cook versus Rogers[70] in 1831. A debtor had satisfied part of the purchase price of his business by a bill drawn by himself, accepted by his father and payable on 29 September 1829. Shortly before the due date the creditor pressed the debtor very hard for payment, which he obtained on the morning of 19
September. Later that day he committed an act of bankruptcy and subsequently a commission was granted against him. His assignees sought to recover the payment. In evidence at the trial the debtor said he had paid the money to secure his father and benefit the creditor; he had no recollection of any threat, and had there been one it would not have affected him; he had not contemplated bankruptcy in the morning, thinking then a composition with his creditors might be possible but later on that day he was advised to become bankrupt.

The trial judge was Tindal CJ. He directed the jury to consider, first, whether, at the time of the payment, the debtor had in contemplation the breaking up of his affairs by bankruptcy and, next, whether the payment was voluntary or in consequence of a threat from the defendant. Further, he directed them to consider what was passing in the bankrupt's mind at the time of the payment and the motives by which he was probably actuated. The jury found in favour of the assignees.

The creditor moved for a new trial on the ground that the jury had been misdirected. It was submitted that what passed in the mind of the bankrupt and the motives by which he was actuated were altogether immaterial. The earlier authorities were fully discussed, both in argument and in the reasons given by the court. Tindal CJ said: "This is not a case of simple preference, nor the equally simple case of a payment obtained by threats, without any sinister intention on the part of the debtor. It is a mixed case, in which the debtor had an object in favouring the particular creditor, but in which the creditor also, before he knew of such a disposition on the part of the debtor, had urged and importuned him for payment. I am not able to perceive any mode of ascertaining whether the payment and the delivery of the bill in this case were such as the law protects or such as the law avoids, but by putting it to the jury to say, whether the payment were made in contemplation of bankruptcy, and under fear of compulsion, or voluntarily. On those two points I left it to the jury, and they were at liberty to find whether the payment was made out of favour to the
Defendant, or under the influence of his threats. It has been argued by the counsel for the Defendant, that wherever threat or importunity is resorted to, there cannot be voluntary payment. But that proposition is too constrained, and it must be left to the jury to say, whether the threat had any operation or not."71 
Park J said: "The question is, Was it proper to leave to the jury the frame of mind and probable motive of the bankrupt in making the payment in question? That has always been done since the case of Harman versus Fisher"[72] 
Gaselee J dissented, being of the view that the verdict had been altogether against the weight of evidence. He complained that the cases on the subject were so conflicting that it seemed impossible to reconcile them.[73] 
Alderson J, apparently in response to Gaselee J's observations about inconsistency said there were always two questions in such cases, whether the payment had been made in contemplation of bankruptcy and whether it had been made voluntarily or not. He went on: "These are questions of fact which must be left to the jury upon the circumstances of each case, and this consideration will, I think, reconcile all the decisions. The apparent contradiction arises from treating observations, which have really been made with reference to the peculiar facts of the cause under discussion, as general principles of law and of universal application."[74] 
After going through some of the cases he then gave the following general explanation: "It seems to me, therefore, that the motives and intentions of the bankrupt may be material or immaterial, or, to speak accurately, may be more or less material according to his situation, to the nature of the threat, and the degree and period of urgency by the creditor.
 
In like manner we find, that in cases where the payment has been made before the debt was due, that circumstance has sometimes been relied on as an indication that the payment is voluntary, and at other times has been said to be immaterial; but neither in the one case nor in the other do these facts of themselves furnish any certain criteria; they are only ingredients in the whole question upon which the jury are to come to a determination. Threats on the part of the creditor are a strong circumstance to shew that the payment ensuing is not voluntary: but if, as here, the party be not placed in a better situation by yielding to the threats, or if he disclose such a reason for preference that the threats could obviously have produced no perceptible effect on his mind, those are circumstances which afford a strong inference the other way. It has been urged, indeed, that the motive of the bankrupt in this case was altogether immaterial, and if, as in Hartshorne versus Slodden, the payment had been clearly made in consequence of the threat, it might have been immaterial to examine whether the bankrupt were also actuated by any other motive; as, for instance, if the money had been paid in order to get rid of an actual and bona fide arrest; but when, as here, it is not clear what effect, if any, the threat of the creditor has produced, it was most material to ascertain what were the motives by which the bankrupt was actuated. Here the whole was left to the jury, and there were facts which might weigh on either side. Whether we should have come to the same conclusion as the jury is not the question now, but whether we can see our way clearly to the conclusion that the jury are wrong. As I am unable to do this, I think the verdict ought not to be disturbed, and the rule obtained on the part of the
Defendant must be."75 (my underlining) 
This explanation and in particular the parts I have underlined seem to me to support, if not state the explanation I put forward earlier in regard to causality as the means by which fact finding tribunals decided whether an apparently ordinary course transaction was nevertheless a fraudulent preference on the part of the debtor..

The rule that what was actually in the debtor's mind at the time of the transaction was material to the question whether the preference was voluntary or not was acted on consistently throughout the 19th century and held to be correct by the House of Lords in 1899, in Sharp versus Jackson.76 Four law lords heard the case and supported the rule. Two of them approved the opinions that had been given in the Court of Appeal. There, Lord Esher had said that whether there had been a fraudulent preference depended on the two questions whether there had been a preference and what was the state of mind of the person who made it. As to the latter he said: "It depends upon what was in his mind. ... The question is whether in fact he had the intention to prefer certain creditors. ... I think that one must find out what he really did intend."77 
It seems to me that when what was being advanced by a preferred creditor as the reason why the payment by the debtor had not been voluntary was that it had been made in the ordinary course of business, exactly the same considerations would apply. The question was did the debtor do what he did because he really intended to prefer the creditor or because he really was doing no more than what he would ordinarily do because of the requirements of the ordinary course of his business.

Critics and criticism of the fraudulent preference doctrine. The doctrine of the recovery of fraudulent preferences had grown up under the aegis of Lord
Mansfield to support that aim of the bankruptcy statutes which was directed to the rateable distribution amongst the bankrupt's unsecured creditors of the whole of his estate. At the same time, the means by which this object was to be supported required an investigation of the debtor's subjective intentions at the time the preference occurred; this meant that the doctrine could not operate when the debtor's fraudulent intention was not accepted by the tribunal of fact as having been the reason for the preferential payment. Yet, from the point of view of the general body of creditors, the important fact was the occurrence of the preference; the motivation of the debtor was irrelevant to the effect of the preference on the interests of the general body of creditors. So, as a doctrine in support of the objective of an equal distribution of what should be in the bankrupt's estate, it was not particularly effective and its operation was erratic.

On the other hand there was a considerable body of opinion that the doctrine should not have been accepted at all.

This opinion appeared from time to time in a series of cases in which the way in which the question of voluntariness was left to juries seems to have made it more and more common for juries to find that pressure negated the debtor's voluntariness with the result that the preferred creditor was allowed to keep the payment. Such results accorded with the views of those who were against the disruption in ordinary commercial dealings involved in traders who had received apparently regular payments for trading debts being required to return such payments to a bankrupt's assignees.[78] 
The attitudes of some of the judges appear clearly in some of these cases. In
Scudamore[79] the Attorney General (Scott)[80] was appearing for the assignees. In argument he mentioned that despite Lord Mansfield's views Lord
Thurlow had very often said that he could not conceive how the preference cases could be supported at all, though they had been law for thirty years.[81] In giving his decision Lord Chancellor Loughborough said: "I do not controvert the doctrine, which appears to have been disapproved by
Lord Thurlow, but it is a nice doctrine: and I do not feel any inclination to extend it."82 
In Crosby, Lord Ellenborough said: "Strictly, only the acts of a trader subsequent to his bankruptcy are void.
Precedent acts supposed to be in contemplation of bankruptcy have likewise been invalidated; but this is an excrescence on the bankrupt laws.[83] Cases upon the subject have gone far and far enough, and I am not disposed to give them any extension."84 
In Cook, Tindal CJ said: "I agree in one observation which has been made by the counsel for the
Defendant; that the whole doctrine of fraudulent preference has arisen rather by the contrivance of courts of law than on the language of the bankrupt acts ... Lord Eldon once stated in the House of Lords, that this was a bold doctrine when first started, and in some degree a fraud on the Act of
Parliament; because, if the Act were insufficient in that respect, recourse should have been had to the legislature; but that after a course of decisions for sixty years, it was too late to alter the rules. The doctrine, however, has at length crept into the statute law; for in the 6 G 4, c 16 <case>, we find certain bona fide payments protected, 'such payments not being a fraudulent preference'."85 
These objections primarily flowed from the fact that a fraudulent preference was not an act of bankruptcy and was something that took place before bankruptcy. If the fraudulent preference were to be made an act of bankruptcy, this basis of objection would disappear.

Policy difficulties in bankruptcy law. From what I have dealt with so far it is clear that from the first bankruptcy statute onwards there was a good deal of adjustment of the rights of different interests by amendment to the
Bankrupt Acts. So much so that in the first edition of the Encyclopaedia of the Laws of England, vol 1, 1897, Mr E. Manson, who contributed the title on bankruptcy, speaking of the English position at the end of the 19th century, noted that there had been "no less than thirty eight Bankruptcy Acts in the last 350 years" and a little later went on to say: "The Bankruptcy Acts, from the Statute of Henry VIII to the Acts of today, are, as all legislation must be, a series of experiments. They are a building up and a pulling down - readjustments to the changing conditions and sentiments of the community - more especially the commercial community."86 
Some of the conflicting interests which needed to be reconciled when steps were taken at the beginning of the 19th century to respond to complaints about the operation of the bankruptcy laws were well described by Sir Samuel Romilly when in 1806 he succeeded in having a bill passed to amend the bankrupt laws.
The Act was 46 G 3 c 135. The principal provision in this Act (s 1) was much along the lines of <case> of 19 G 2 c 32 abstracted above (at p 13) and made similar references to the "great inconveniences and injustice ... occasioned by reason of the fair and honest dealings ... of traders being defeated by secret acts of bankruptcy ..." but where the earlier provision was confined to the protection of payments in the defined circumstances, the Romilly provision protected "all contracts and other dealings and transactions by and with, any Bankrupt bona fide made or entered into more than two calendar months before the date of the [relevant] commission ... notwithstanding any prior act of bankruptcy ..." This provision made no reference to "the usual and ordinary course of trade and dealing", but made the protection conditional on the party dealing with the bankrupt having had no "notice of any prior act of bankruptcy ... or that he was insolvent, or had stopped payment". Such notice would have been strong evidence against "ordinary course of business" as it was then (in my opinion) understood because it would justify the inference that the creditor knew he was getting some of the debtor's property, in which all of the debtor's creditors were entitled to share, something inconsistent with what I have called the assumed basis of trading.

At the time of his introduction of the bill for this Act in the House of
Commons, Sir Samuel Romilly recorded the policy considerations he had taken into account when the bill was prepared: "In the House of Commons I this day moved for leave to bring in a Bill to amend the Bankrupt Laws. The object of it is merely to prevent the evils which arise from the honest transactions of bankrupts being set aside by secret prior acts of bankruptcy, and from commissions being overturned by secret acts of bankruptcy prior to the petitioning creditor's debt. There are three ways of remedying the evil: 1st, By making the party bankrupt only from the time of the commission being taken out; and not, as he now is, by relation back from the time of the first act of bankruptcy committed. The objection to this is, that it would open a great door to fraud, by giving validity to all transfers of the bankrupt's property at a time when it was known that his circumstances were desperate. 2d, By declaring that no commission shall be taken out founded upon any act of bankruptcy which has taken place more than a limited time (six or three months) before the commission is sealed. This is a remedy which
Mansfield, the present Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and Lord Eldon lately thought of applying; and Lord Eldon has declared that he would bring in a Bill for the purpose. But the objection to it is, I think, unanswerable: if the time limited is short, a great many very proper commissions will be prevented; if it is long, the evil will not be remedied, but a great many honest transactions with bankrupts will be set aside. 3d, The only other remedy that occurs to me is that which I have adopted, - to declare that all conveyances, payments, contracts, and dealings with bankrupts shall be valid, notwithstanding prior acts of bankruptcy, if the parties dealing with the bankrupts had not notice of such acts."87 
The comprehensive Bankruptcy Act of 1825. The Act 6 G 4 c 16 which Tindal CJ referred to in Cook, (see p 47) in apparently unenthusiastic terms, was a major piece of legislation. It repealed all previous enactments respecting bankrupts, consolidated all the substantive law of bankruptcy in the one statute and made many amendments. Eden, in his 1826 treatise[88] drew together all materials relevant to the bankruptcy law, by reference to the new Act. In the introduction he referred to the new statute as "having made most extensive changes in the system which had long been the subject of complaint".[89] He went on to describe the major changes, of which it is here relevant to mention only one, of which he said: "The Relation to the Act of Bankruptcy, a doctrine which has probably effected more injustice than any provision that ever obtained in our law, has been greatly curtailed in its extent and operation. All payments whatever, either by or to the bankrupt, without notice of an act of bankruptcy, are protected down to the date of the commission. Other transactions remain on the footing upon which they were placed by Sir S. Romilly's act; except that, upon the principle that there should be a period where purchases are not to be molested, and litigation should cease, it is provided that Purchases for valuable consideration, even with notice of an act of bankruptcy, shall not be impeached, unless a commission issue within twelve months after such an act of bankruptcy."90 
Eden's reference in the foregoing passage to all payments by the bankrupt without notice of an act of bankruptcy being protected to the date of the commission is somewhat elliptically expressed. The relevant provision is the s to which Tindal CJ referred in Cook. Eden noted[91] that <case> was the new version of the 19 G 2 c.32 <case>; it was as follows: "And it be further enacted, That all payments really and bona fide made, or which shall hereafter be made by any bankrupt, or by any person on his behalf, before the date and issuing of the commission against such bankrupt, to any creditor of such bankrupt (such payment not being a fraudulent preference of such creditor), shall be deemed valid, notwithstanding any prior act of bankruptcy by such bankrupt committed; and all payments really and bona fide made, or which shall hereafter be made to any bankrupt before the date and issuing of the commission against such bankrupt, shall be deemed valid, notwithstanding any prior act of bankruptcy by such bankrupt committed; and such creditor shall not be liable to refund the same to the assignees of such bankrupt, provided the person so dealing with the said bankrupt had not, at the time of such payment by or to such bankrupt, notice of any act of bankruptcy committed." 
Statutory recognition of fraudulent preference doctrine. It seems clear that
Tindal CJ was quite right in saying that the introduction in <case> of the 1825
Act of the bracketed words "such payment not being a fraudulent preference of such creditor" carried the case law, started by Lord Mansfield, into the statute. This case law, although criticised by some, had by this time become established in such a way that the reference to it in <case> amounted to legislative approval of the fraudulent preference doctrine. But Eden also considered that the Act he had drafted significantly changed the law concerning fraudulent preferences. Part of <case> of the new Act made it an act of bankruptcy for a trader "to make or cause to be made any fraudulent gift, delivery, or transfer of any of his goods or chattels," Eden noted that what had previously to the Act been treated as fraudulent preferences would henceforth be considered acts of bankruptcy.[92] He went on to say that the same doctrine as was applicable to fraudulent preference by deed, (which had been an act of bankruptcy since the 1 Jac I c.15. <case>) now attached also to all fraudulent preference.[93] When dealing a little later with the fraudulent preference which had now become an act of bankruptcy, he explained the situation in this way: "An assignment of part of a trader's effects to a particular creditor (unlike in this respect to an assignment of the whole), carries with it no intrinsic evidence of fraud; a trader must, in the course of his business, have the power to make over parts of his property, either for past debts or future advances. But when such an act is done in contemplation of bankruptcy, and consequently with the intent to give the grantee a preference over the other creditors, it is contrary to the spirit and policy of the bankrupt law, and is not only void, but, whether it be by deed (as formerly) or (as now) by gift, delivery or transfer of goods and chattels, is an act of bankruptcy."94 (my underlining) 
The "usual and ordinary course of trade and dealing" dropped from the 1825
Act. Eden went on to go through the fraudulent preference cases to that time, the more significant of which I have already referred to. In doing so he mentioned how it had repeatedly been held that to make void a delivery of goods, etc to a creditor the transaction must not only have been in contemplation of bankruptcy but have been voluntary.[95] In dealing with the cases on what transactions would be treated as voluntary, he gave no explicit attention to the part played by "the ordinary course of business" beyond the very incidental reference in the underlined words in the last quoted passage.
This would appear to indicate that the concept could be regarded as one of the evidentiary matters to be looked at in deciding the question of voluntariness or pressure, but with no greater legal significance than that. This view is supported by the fact that the <case> replacement in the 1825 Act of <case> of the G.2 c.32 did not reproduce from its predecessor the expression "in the usual and ordinary course of trade and dealing" or any equivalent. Instead, it protected payments received by creditors in such course before any knowledge of the debtor's having become a bankrupt or being in insolvent circumstances by the bracketed words "such payment not being a fraudulent preference of such creditor". This took into account the developments in the law, particularly fostered by Lord Mansfield, in the period between 1745 and
It was evidently considered that the work previously done by the expression "in the usual and ordinary course of trade and dealing", and the protection of transactions in such course, would be done and effected if the transaction was bona fide on the debtor's part and without notice by the creditor of any act of bankruptcy by the debtor.

The position established in England by the 1825 Act continued, with some modifications not now relevant, and with the difficulties inherent in it (because of the need to show the debtor's subjective intent) which I mentioned earlier, until 1869. It was then altered in a way, which, until 1986,[96] still substantially retained the same subjective requirement.

The ordinary course of trade in the Cape of Good Hope. In 1829 an Insolvency
Statute was passed in the Cape of Good Hope.[97] Section 84 adopted the
English approach to fraudulent preferences, with some modifications. Section had the sidenote "Transactions in the ordinary course of trade". Its text, which seems to me to reflect, without the need for further explanation by me, the views proposed at pp 17, 26, 36 and 43 above, among others, was as follows: "And be it enacted, that every alienation, transfer, cession, delivery, mortgage or pledge as aforesaid and every payment made by any insolvent to any creditor in the usual and ordinary course of trade or business, shall, prima facie, be held and taken to have been made or given bona fide, and without an intention to give such creditor any preference, although such insolvent may, at the time, contemplate the sequestration of his estate as insolvent, and in every such case it shall be necessary for the trustee, or trustees seeking to set the same aside, to show the existence of some collusive arrangement, mutual understanding, or common consent, between the insolvent and the creditor, the one to give and the other to get a preference over the other creditors of the insolvent, under colour of a transaction in the usual and ordinary course of trade or business."98 
New South Wales: 1841. In 1841 the New South Wales legislature enacted an insolvency statute (5 Vic No 17) which applied both to insolvent traders and non traders. The general tenor of this Act was weighted heavily in favour of the rateable distribution among all unsecured creditors, and against the retention, by persons who had dealt with the insolvent, of property or money received at any time after the insolvent was actually insolvent: sections effecting this were ss 6, 7, 8, 10 and 12. Insolvency in fact was the starting point of these provisions, not the commission of an act of bankruptcy as in
England. Although the two might sometimes coincide, a person could reach a state of actual insolvency before committing any act of bankruptcy.

For present purposes the important feature of this 1841 Act was that it did away with the debtor's subjective intent to prefer as a necessary ingredient of a fraudulent preference. Section 8 provided that any alienation or transfer of any property "made by any person being insolvent or in contemplation of surrendering his estate as insolvent or knowing that legal proceedings for obtaining an order for the sequestration of his estate as insolvent have been commenced or within sixty days preceding the making of any order for sequestration of his estate as insolvent and having the effect of preferring any then existing creditor to another shall be and are hereby declared to be absolutely void." 
Section 12 dealt with payments "made to any creditor by any person not compelled by legal process to make the same and knowing himself to be insolvent or in contemplation of surrendering his estate as insolvent or knowing that legal proceedings for obtaining an order of sequestration for his estate as insolvent have been commenced or that any such order has been made shall be and are hereby declared to be fraudulent... " 
Section 12 continued with a somewhat obscurely couched protective provision which subsequently received a restrictive interpretation which appears to have made it of little use. The relationship between ss 8 and 12 and their successors also later caused some difficulties in the New South Wales case law which it is not useful now to consider.[99] The lasting effects of these sections were (1) the removal by <case> of any question of intent from the question of preference, thus starting what came to be called the de facto law of preference and (2) the declaring by <case> of payments to be fraudulent (and thus on the Lord Mansfield approach void) by reference to criteria, which although they still involved the state of knowledge of the debtor, did not require any inquiry into the debtor's intent to give an advantage to one creditor over another.

The rigour of these provisions in favour of the rateable distribution approach appears to have been a response to economic conditions in New South Wales at the time.[100] 
Sir Samuel Griffith later observed that the effect of the 1841 legislation was that "all payments made by and transactions with the bankrupt, which were in themselves acts of bankruptcy and available for that purpose, were absolutely void, and a person who claimed under them had no protection whatever."101 
He added that, in some cases, the situation produced was "barbarous".[102] 
Whether his description of the effect of the Act in these respects was correct without qualification, does not now matter. In general terms that had been the perceived effect of the legislation.

The judges in New South Wales certainly had no doubt of the meaning of <case> of the 1841 statute. In Perry versus Simpson,103 (1857), Dickinson J in giving the court's opinion on a question whether a security should be set aside, and speaking of <case>, said its words "are not similar to those in the English Acts about fraudulent preference, or even equivalent to them. They do not contemplate the animus of the transferor, but the effect of the transfer, and as the mortgage gave the defendants a higher security for their debt than was conferred on any other of [the transferors] private creditors, even if they were his only creditors, the mortgage had the effect of preferring the defendants' to all his other private creditors."104 
Although <case> of the New South Wales Act of 1841 had introduced the concept of what came to be known as the de facto preference, the idea did not (until the Commonwealth Bankruptcy Act) gain followers elsewhere.[105] The Privy
Council, in 1861, in Harris versus Bank of Australasia[106] read the New South
Wales Act as if even the de facto preference must also be a fraudulent one, but the New South Wales judges adhered to their view of their Act.[107] This meant that until 1861, as the 1841 Act originally stood, there was little or no protection for de facto preferences. By sections 1 and 2 of Act No 8 of protection was given so long as the recipient creditor did not know at the time of receipt that the debtor was insolvent, contemplated insolvency, was the subject of bankruptcy proceedings or that the payment was a voluntary preference. Sir Samuel Griffith later commented: "Thus honest transactions were protected."108 
Nunes versus Carter. Because some remarks in it may have later influenced the
High Court in Robertson versus Grigg,[109] I here mention the decision in 1866 in the Privy Council of Nunes versus Carter.[110] The case came from Jamaica whose insolvency statute made any transfer of property by a debtor in contemplation of insolvency to a creditor within six months before a declaration of insolvency fraudulent and void. The argument in the Privy
Council that for the transaction to be void proof of intent to prefer was necessary, failed. The Privy Council said that the words of the statute clearly excluded the need for any preferential intention. In explaining this, they gave a brief description of a fraudulent preference: "It arises where the Debtor, in contemplation of bankruptcy - that is, knowing his circumstances to be such as that bankruptcy must be, or will be, the probable result, though it may not be the inevitable result - does, ex mero motu, make a payment of money, or a delivery of property to a Creditor, not in the ordinary course of business, and without any pressure or demand on the part of the Creditor."111 
There was no need for the Privy Council to examine in any detail, for their purposes in the case, the scope or meaning of ordinary course of business, and
I do not think their mention of it is of any great significance. It does illustrate, however, that pressure and ordinary course of business were not incompatible. Indeed, in my view, they were not incompatible, the latter was a species of the former.

England 1869: Queensland 1874. In 1869 a new Bankruptcy Act came into force in England. In <case> there was for the first time, a statutory definition of a fraudulent preference, which still required proof of the debtor's intention.
Protection was given to payees in good faith and for valuable consideration.

Queensland passed an Insolvency Act in 1874. The Bill was drafted and seen through the parliament by Mr Samuel Walker Griffith when a member of the Lower
House.[112] In regard to fraudulent preference, the English <case> was taken as the model for Queensland's <case>, but with a significant addition. Section , relevantly, was as follows: "Every ... payment made ... by any debtor unable to pay his debts as they become due from his own moneys in favour of any creditor ... with a view of giving such creditor a preference over the other creditors shall if a petition ... be presented against such debtor within six months after the date of ...
paying ... the same and adjudication of insolvency be made on such petition be deemed fraudulent and void as against the trustee ... but this section shall not affect the rights of a ... payee ... in good faith and for a valuable consideration ... Provided that pressure by a creditor shall not be sufficient to exempt any transaction from the operation of this section." 
The Queensland addition to the English <case> was the proviso concerning "pressure". Queensland thus preserved, in part, the need for there to be intention on the part of the debtor to make the preferential payment but removed part of a principal hurdle from the path of a bankrupt's trustee when seeking to prove that the bankrupt's payment had been voluntary.

It so happened that when this provision came to be considered by the High
Court thirty-three years later in Stewart & Walker versus White,113 it was Chief Justice Sir Samuel Griffith who wrote the leading opinion in the case.

Stewart & Walker versus White. In view of the fact that some expressions from his opinion appear in very similar form in <case> of the 1924 Bankruptcy Act, it seems important to try and see as exactly as possible what he meant by them.
The passages in his reasons which are for present purposes the critical ones are very compactly expressed, and need to be approached in light of the facts and reported argument in the case.

The facts were that a debtor, under severe pressure from a trade creditor to pay 606 then due, gave the creditor fifteen post dated cheques to a total value of 661 which fell due and were paid at various times within two months after they were given, and which the creditor knew were probably preferring them over other creditors. Counsel for the appellant creditor submitted that the cheques were payments made in the ordinary way of business and that the debtor had also told the creditor that his other debts were fully secured.

At first instance, Northmore CJ, following a decision of the Full Court of the
Supreme Court of Queensland on <case>, Russell Wilkins & Sons Ltd v
Outridge Printing Co,114 had read the section as if the words "or by reason of pressure" followed the words "with a view of giving such creditor a preference over the other creditors", and had held there was a preference because there had been pressure. The appellants contended (1) this involved a wrong interpretation of the section, and (2) there had been no evidence that the debtor had made any payment "with a view of giving" a preference.

Griffith CJ was of opinion the appeal should be dismissed because although he agreed with the appellant's contention (1), he did not agree with his contention (2).

In explaining why he thought the challenged construction of <case> was wrong, he briefly sketched how the section came to include its final proviso. He mentioned that before the English Act of 1869 the rule as to fraudulent preference was not contained in statute; the two elements of the earlier law were found in the cases; for these two elements the 1869 Act substituted definite rules. Instead of the first question asked by the cases, whether the act was done in contemplation of bankruptcy, the statute now asked whether a debtor was able to pay his debts as they became due out of his own moneys and whether bankruptcy occurred within the prescribed period; instead of the second question required by the cases, was the transaction voluntary, the Act asked whether it was made "with a view of giving" the creditors a preference over the other creditors.[115] He pointed out that under the English <case> it had been held that the old rules as to pressure remained unaltered so that it was still necessary to consider whether the debtor had done the act voluntarily. He then proceeded to explain the construction of the Act he had drafted. In an effort to make as clear as possible what I think the Chief
Justice meant, I will intersperse the relevant passage with my own commentary.

Griffith CJ: "I pause to remark that the section contains two phrases open to different constructions. The words 'with a view of giving' may mean 'in order to effect the result of giving,' or they may mean 'actuated a desire to give.'
In one sense the words refer to an intention, in the other to a motive." 
Comment: It becomes clear as the passage proceeds that the sense in which he uses "intention" here is that of conscious intention to do something with knowledge of what the result will be, but without wanting to bring about that result, and that "motive" refers to an intention to do something having a result which the doer wants to bring about. The distinction provides another way of saying what I earlier described by use of the concept of causality: in the situation where there was objectively a preference and the debtor (as must have been the fact in nearly all the cases) knew that the transaction was likely to prefer the creditor, the question whether the transaction was a fraudulent preference or not depended on whether the debtor's will caused the preference or whether the debtor went through the transaction for some other cause, such as pressure or that species of pressure constituted by the requirements of ordinary business. In the former case, in Griffith CJ's terms, the debtor was motivated by the wish to prefer, in the latter, although the cause of the debtor's going through with the transaction was not the wish to prefer, he intended the preference in the sense of intentionally doing the act which he knew would be a preference.

Griffith CJ: "The word 'prefer' also is capable of meaning either that one creditor is in fact put in a better position than others, or that the debtor likes one creditor better than another, and therefore desires to give him an advantage. In sec 92 it is obviously used in the first sense, although in argument, and, I fear, in some of the cases, the latter sense has inadvertently crept in. This aspect, however, of the question really belongs to the word 'view,' and not to the word 'preference.' 
I think that in many of the decided cases the word 'view' has been used in both senses in the same judgment, and hence some confusion has arisen. The difference between the motive which induces an act and the end intended to be attained by the act is recognized by the statute law of Queensland, (see
Criminal Code, sec 23), and is very material in construing sec 107 of the
Insolvency Act.
 
The existence of pressure was material, not for the purpose of determining the result intended to be effected, but for determining the motive for effecting that result, ie, for determining whether the act was voluntary or not. 
When, therefore, it was declared by the Queensland Act that pressure should not be sufficient to exempt a transaction, the element of motive was in effect excluded from the new provisions. An act must either be voluntary or not voluntary, and if that fact is no longer material the word 'view' can no longer refer to it." 
Comment: That is, in the terms I have been using, pressure would only be material for deciding whether the will to prefer caused (or as Griffith CJ would say, motivated) the transaction to go ahead. Since "with a view to giving" was only concerned with intention to do the act which would cause the result, irrespective of whether the doer wanted the result, then whether or not the doer wanted the result, the motivation, in Griffith CJ's sense, became irrelevant. (I am fortified in my use of the causation idea by the fact that in <case> of the Queensland Criminal Code, also drafted by Sir Samuel, the language of causality is used in the same way as I have been using it here.)[116] Putting it another way, the pressure went only to voluntariness, motivation, the intention to bring about (because it involved) a desired result: so, if pressure were not sufficient to take a transaction out of the section, neither were voluntariness, motivation or intention to cause; all that was left was doing something knowing but not wanting what the result would be. Griffith CJ goes on to make this doubly clear.

Griffith CJ: "It follows, I think that the words 'with a view of giving' in the Queensland section must be read as equivalent to 'with an intention to give.' In this regard I accept the reasoning of the learned Judges of the
Supreme Court of New Zealand in the case of Official Assignee of Kinross v
Robjohns 8 NZLR, 224." 
Comment: The New Zealand equivalent of <case> used the words, in respect of a transaction done "with a view of giving a preference" ... "whether the act be voluntary or under pressure from a creditor". In Kinross, Richmond J said it was familiar "that a man may do an act intentionally but at the same time unwillingly" and that "with a view of giving" imported a debtor who "intends, whether willingly or unwillingly to give an undue advantage to the preferred creditor over other creditors".[117] 
Griffith CJ: "I think that when a debtor, knowing that he cannot pay all his creditors in full, deliberately pays one of them, he intends the necessary consequences of his action, i.e., he intends to give him a preference. And I think that under such circumstances he makes the payment with a view of giving the creditor a preference within the meaning of sec 107. Under the Statute, however, the intention of the debtor to prefer the creditor is not decisive as it was under the old law. If the payment is made in good faith the creditor is protected. But, if the payment is made out of the ordinary course of business, and under such circumstances as to show that the creditor knew or had reason to suspect that the effect of it would be to pay him in full and leave other creditors unpaid, it is not made in good faith: Tomkins versus Saffery, 3 App Cas "
 
Comment: It appears that the ordinary course of business was in the Chief
Justice's train of thought because it had been one of the arguments used in
Kinross, which he approved of, and because Tomkins had been cited in argument.[118] 
To this point Griffith CJ has explained how, subject to the good faith and valuable consideration proviso, a payment will be within the fraudulent and void part of the section notwithstanding that the debtor was not motivated to prefer the creditor; all that was needed was that the payment be preferential in fact and that the debtor knew at the time of the payment that he could not pay all his creditors in full; almost but not quite a de facto preference of the New South Wales kind. Now, having explained that the challenged payments had been made "with a view of giving" the creditor a preference within the opening words of <case> and thus having come to the view that they were void as against the trustee unless the payee had the rights of a payee in good faith and for valuable consideration, he goes on in the sentence commencing "Under the Statute, however," to consider whether the payee had such rights. Thus the sentence "Under the Statute" etc is referring to the fact that when voluntary preferences were governed by case law, once it was shown that it was the intention (in the sense of motive) of the debtor to prefer the creditor, that was the end of the matter, the payment was a fraudulent preference. Now, he is saying, as the passage proceeds, there is the defence of good faith (he was assuming valuable consideration was present).

In considering good faith, he takes Tomkins versus Saffery to have shown that good faith was negatived if a payment were made out of the ordinary course of business and under such circumstances as to show the creditor knew or had reason to suspect the effect would be preferential. This would appear to be at least partly an answer to the reported submission of the creditor[119] that the cheques were payments of a recognised trade debt, in the ordinary way of business, received honestly by the creditor who was told by the debtor and believed that the debtor's only creditors were well secured by his assets, although it later turned out that there had been at that time other larger creditors whose existence the debtor concealed from the preferred creditor.

So, in the last sentence quoted Griffith CJ is saying that these submissions would fail if, as Tomkins versus Saffery indicated, the facts were as stated in that sentence.

Tomkins versus Saffery was decided in the House of Lords in 1877. Griffith CJ appears to have been referring to a passage in the opinion of Lord Blackburn, who was the only judge who mentioned "ordinary course of business". The passage was: "Now I think you must say that it is not with a view to give an undue preference, if a man makes a payment to a creditor in the ordinary course of business. Supposing a bankrupt, although knowing that he is very likely to stop payment next week, struggles on and makes a payment without being particularly asked; supposing he pays his debts and sends his money to meet his bills on those days on which they become due, and does other things so as to keep himself alive and in good credit for the time; that would not have been undue preference I think, because those payments were not made 'in favour of' certain creditors as against others, but were made in the hope - a desperate hope perhaps - that if he were able to keep himself alive something might turn up in his favour. Nor do I think it would be an undue or a fraudulent preference if there was a demand upon him, and a yielding to that demand, by making a payment which might not otherwise have been made so soon."120 
Here, Lord Blackburn was dealing not with the protective good faith provision of <case> but the opening part which deemed a payment fraudulent and void unless the following protective part applied. (The references in Kinross to "ordinary course of trade" also went to this aspect of the corresponding New
Zealand section.[121]) 
Lord Blackburn's example supposes the case of a debtor making a payment to a creditor knowing that it might have the effect of preferring the creditor, but hoping it will not, because still desperately trying to avert bankruptcy, and so making it not for the purpose of preferring the creditor but for the purpose of carrying on his business. Those facts would negate voluntariness and would also attract the description of ordinary course of business. The negation of voluntariness would decide the second of the two settled issues for decision as discussed earlier, in regard to which, in cases where because the facts permitted either the inference that the real reason for the payment was the intention to prefer or the inference that the intention of the debtor, although knowing the likely effect of the payment, was, not to prefer, but to make an ordinary business payment, it was left to the jury or other fact finding tribunal to draw the one conclusion or the other. In his example of the struggling trader, Lord Blackburn was assuming the fact that the debtor's intent was to make a business payment and not to prefer: once a court reached that point in its fact finding, the answer had to be that the payment was not an undue or a fraudulent preference. Further, under the
English <case>, once the point was reached that the payment was not voluntary, because of pressure (which logically included the business pressure to make due payment in the ordinary course of business), then there was no fraudulent preference, and the defensive question of good faith did not arise.

As it happened, in Tomkins Lord Blackburn thought the payment had been voluntarily made with "the view to give certain creditors ... a preference".[122] So it became necessary to consider whether there was good faith protection; in his view the case did not support this because the creditor was "aware of the greater part of the circumstances and elements which would, in fact, bring this case within the operation of the statute".[123] 
In this part of his opinion, Lord Blackburn did not mention "ordinary course of business". He stated the "circumstances and elements" as being: that the creditor knew that the debtor was unable to pay his debts out of his own means; knew the money was paid for the very purpose of preferring the creditor to general creditors, if any; there in fact were some general creditors; and the creditor who turned out to be the preferred creditor, although told by the debtor there were no general creditors, had some reason to be suspicious of that, and took the chance - that is, if what the debtor said was true, there could be no risk to the payment under the statute - if not true, the payment would be void under the statute. In Lord Blackburn's view this meant that the creditor had not been a payee in good faith.[124] 
Thus, in the passage presently being commented on, Griffith CJ seems to have taken Lord Blackburn's use of the ordinary course of business concept in determining whether the payment was void under the opening part of <case> as being relevant to the question whether the payee was a payee in good faith under the later protective part.

In doing this, whether consciously or not, he was using the ordinary course of business concept for the purpose for which it had been used by 19 G 2 c.32 and not for the different purpose for which it had been occasionally used by Lord
Mansfield and others either as a way of describing a conclusion about the subjective intent of a debtor who had made an objectively preferential payment before bankruptcy or as material relevant to what that conclusion should (not must) be.

The way the creditor's counsel had used what he called "the ordinary way of business"125 would, if accepted as factually accurate, have been an answer to the payments being caught by the opening words of the English <case>, but, in the way the Queensland <case> was being interpreted, would, if the debtor had been aware of impending insolvency, not have prevented the pressure proviso bringing the payments into the opening part of <case>, and the submission would only have been relevant to good faith.

Griffith CJ: "From this point of view pressure may be very material, not however, as affording conclusive proof that the payment is made with a view to give a preference, (which was the view of the learned Judges in Russell
Wilkins & Sons Ltd versus Outridge Printing Co, [1906 St R Qd 172)], but as affording material evidence on the question whether the transaction was made in good faith. To this extent I am unable to agree with the judgment in that case, though I think it was rightly decided on the whole facts." 
Comment: Here the Chief Justice is first of all repeating that in his view the construction in the Russell Wilkins case was wrong and the pressure proviso did not have the effect of saying conclusively that the payment was made with a view to give a preference and thus fraudulent and void, the lesser intended payment as he had defined it being sufficient for that purpose, but that pressure by the creditor on the debtor was relevant evidence on the good faith question. Then he says that despite his disagreement with the construction of the pressure proviso by the first instance judge, he thinks the case was rightly decided on the whole facts, that is, necessarily, that he thinks both that the payment had been made with a view to give a preference and that the creditor had not been a payee in good faith.

Griffith CJ: "In my opinion a payment made by a debtor who is unable to pay his debts as they become due from his own moneys, and which is not made in the ordinary course of business, and is made under such circumstances that the creditor has good reason to suspect that he is obtaining a preference from an insolvent debtor, is void under sec 107. That is to say, the case is brought within the first part of the section, and the creditor cannot bring himself with the protective proviso." 
Comment: This paragraph includes the words which were taken directly into s of the 1924 Bankruptcy Act. The paragraph is one of those I earlier referred to as compactly expressed. However, what he meant is made clear in the two parts into which I have divided his following paragraph: 
Griffith CJ: "All these circumstances occur in the present case. The debtor was undoubtedly unable to pay his debts as they became due from his own moneys, and when he paid the money, he must have known that the effect would in all probability be to pay those creditors in full, and leave the others unpaid." 
Comment: This amplifies the opening clause of the first sentence of the previous paragraph: a debtor who is unable to pay his debts as they become due from his own moneys would almost always be aware of that inability at the time he makes a particular payment, which means he is aware that what he is doing will in fact be preferential if he becomes bankrupt. On Griffith CJ's view of intention, it is that which brings the case within the first part of the section. The explanatory paragraph continued: 
Griffith CJ: "The payments were not made in the ordinary course of business; they were made by giving a series of small cheques extending over a period of two months in respect of an old debt which the debtor had been unable to pay for some months. The creditors were aware if all these facts, and they must have had very good reasons for believing that they were getting an advantage over the other creditors." 
Comment: It is the second part of the first sentence of the paragraph commencing "In my opinion" which prevents the creditor bringing himself within the protective provision in the section.

The two parts of the explanatory paragraph, in dealing with the ordinary course of business question, focus on the way in which the ordinary trade debt was agreed to be discharged. There was a variation in the debtor's favour of the debtor's obligation for immediate payment; had there been payment at or about the time it was due, according either to the contract or the usual way in which it was paid, there could have been no question but that it was made in the ordinary course of business. This would have been so even if there had been some delay in payment and the creditor had had to chase the debtor to obtain the payment in accordance with the debtor's original obligation to pay.
It was the changing of the way in which the debtor could discharge the obligation, the contractual variation to the ordinary course, which was likely to have been referable to the debtor's inability to pay his debts as they fell due, that took the payment out of the ordinary course.

This same point was made by Griffith CJ in another case, also from Queensland and involving what had been said in Stewart & Walker, some seven months later. This was Gow versus White, (1908)[126]. The creditor had agreed to accept payment of a debt by instalments more than six months before the insolvency.
Griffith CJ said this made the agreement unimpeachable. He also thought that it had been made at a time when the debtor was in apparently prosperous circumstances so far as the creditor was aware. The question in the case was not whether the agreement was saved under the protective provision of <case> but whether the payments were, which had occurred within the six months period. Griffith CJ said "The agreement ... being unimpeachable, payments ...
in accordance with it were ... in the ordinary course of business ... the payments impeached were simply payments made in pursuance of a lawful, binding obligation".[127] 
Williams versus Dunns Assignee (1908). A further indication of the views of Chief
Justice Griffith on the matter of preferences was given in a case in the following year on the New South Wales Act: Williams versus Dunns Assignee.128
This case dealt with a line of authority that had grown up in New South Wales following the introduction there in 1887 of a new Bankruptcy Act, which continued the concept of the de facto preference. This was continued in what became <case> of the subsequent 1898 Act which the High Court was considering.
The protective section had been restrictively interpreted so that any transaction of the bankrupt which was an act of bankruptcy (which included a de facto preference) was void as against the official assignee. The restrictive interpretation was based on the view that <case> of the 1898 Act (and its 1887 predecessor) had repealed the successor of the protective section introduced in 1861. This was so even where the creditor had "acted with perfect honesty, straightforwardly and in good faith" (per Manning J in re Glynn (1895)).[129] 
This position had become established despite a possible interpretation of ss to 58 which would have protected preferential payments received in good faith. This latter interpretation was adopted by the High Court on the appeal to it in Williams. Griffith CJ wrote the leading opinion, holding that notwithstanding the words in <case>, which had given rise to the view appealed against, the words in <case> did protect a preferential payment if, in the words of that section, "(1) the payment ... [had taken] place before the date of the sequestration order; and (2) the person ... to whom the payment ... was made ... [had] not ... notice of any available act of bankruptcy committed ... before that time." (Section 57 put proof of these matters upon the creditor). To hold otherwise, he said, would mean that the New South Wales legislature had decided in 1887 to revert "to the old and barbarous system under which a man who had received a payment in all honesty was compelled to pay it back".[130] Barton, O'Connor and Higgins JJ each wrote brief reasons agreeing with Griffith CJ. Isaacs J dissented.

All the judges discussed the rather intricate questions of construction involved in the case with considerable care, as well as dealing in detail with one particular "rule" of construction. Each judge's reasons have a distinct technical and formalistic flavour. However, it would appear that the disagreement of Isaacs J with the others had a strong policy element in it. In apparent answer to Griffith CJ's statement that to construe the relevant provisions as had been done by the New South Wales judges would be an acknowledgment of what he called a "barbarous system", Isaacs J said he thought it had been the intention of the New South Wales legislature to protect some bona fide dealings by third persons with a bankrupt but still "to see that, so far as we can, there shall be a rateable distribution among the creditors of the property of a bankrupt which would otherwise be distributed by available acts of bankruptcy. It may be hard upon one particular creditor who has taken under a fraudulent preference, considered from the standpoint of the creditor, to have to refund it. 
But the legislature has thought it still harder upon a number of others who, having equal rights with the particular creditor, ought to share equally with him. He has no greater claim upon that money than they have, and, therefore, upon the whole it seems to me that we need not attribute injustice or absurdity or reversal of intention to the legislature in order to apply, if the words will properly lend themselves to it, the meaning which I am now suggesting."131 
From 1908 to 1925. The result in Williams in effect settled, for New South
Wales, one policy question in regard to preferential payments: namely, whether once a transaction fell within <case>, it could ever be protected. The answer was that it could, if it fell within the protective provisions of <case>. By a different route, this brought about a position very similar to that which the
High Court had said obtained in Queensland, in Stewart & Walker versus White.

Muntz versus Smail (1909)[132] should be mentioned here. It was a preference case from Victoria, decided in the High Court, on a preference section the same as the Queensland <case> dealt with in Stewart & Walker versus White. Its relevance for present purposes is that Griffith CJ and Barton J maintained what had been said in Stewart & Walker depending on Griffith CJ's distinction between motive and intention, and, although no mention is made of ordinary course of business, the causal explanation of the differentiation between voluntary (fraudulent) and non voluntary preferences is the basis on which the judges proceed.

The similarity between the positions reached in New South Wales and Queensland was recognised by Street J in Re Macadam in 1913.[133] He said that although
Stewart & Walker versus White and Gow versus White[134] dealt with the
Queensland Insolvency Act, the judgment of Griffith CJ gave valuable assistance in considering what was necessary to constitute good faith in a transaction coming within <case> of the New South Wales Act. He then examined the facts of the instant case in the same way as Griffith CJ had done in
Stewart & Walker versus White. In the course of doing this he said: "The mere fact that in the result a transaction comes within <case> does not deprive a creditor of protection where he acts innocently and in the ordinary course of business, but the position is different where so far from having no reason to suspect his debtor's insolvency, he knows the position of affairs, and where, though his dominant motive is to protect himself, he knows, or has good reason for suspecting, that he can only do so at the expense of and by gaining a preference over other creditors."135 
The position as it obtained in New South Wales after the High Court decision in Stewart & Walker versus White seems to have been accepted by the New South
Wales legislature; there was no amendment to restore the position as it had been under the New South Wales cases overturned by the High Court. It may be that the New South Wales legislature held its hand because at about the time
Macadam was decided, a proposed Federal Bankruptcy Bill was put in circulation.[136] This adds weight to Sir Robert Garran's remark (see p 4 above) that the Act of 1924 was a long time in preparation. However that may be, the law concerning preferences, as understood and explained by Street J in
Macadam appears to have remained in force until the commencement of the operation of the Bankruptcy Act 1924 (Cth) in 1928. That it was the intention of the draftsman of the Commonwealth Act to adopt the New South Wales approach was made clear in a Commonwealth Government paper published in June 1924, entitled "Comparative Statement Of The Leading Features Of The English And
States Bankruptcy Acts (Prepared Under The Direction Of The Attorney-General, the Honourable Sir Littleton E Groom, In Connexion With The Bankruptcy
Bill)". At page 11 of this document there is a heading "Avoidance of fraudulent preferences" and the numbers of the relevant sections of the
English and each of the State Acts are given. The English Act then in force was that of 1914, which had fraudulent preference provisions much the same as those in the 1869 Act. The document then commented: "The principle is the same in each case, but there are some variations in the language of the sections, Vict <case> and ss 107 and 109 of the Queensland Act contain a proviso that pressure by a creditor shall not be a sufficient ground to exempt any transaction from being a fraudulent preference. The Bill follows the provisions of the New South Wales law." 
The next paragraph is headed "Protected transactions". It notes that this subject is dealt with in <case> of the 1914 English Act[137] and that the principles are the same in all the State Acts, which are then briefly referred to. The comment is then made: "The Bill follows the English Act but provides the additional condition that the transaction must have been in the ordinary course of business, and contains a provision as to the burden of proof."[138] Amendment to the Bankruptcy Act 1924. The last relevant matter which happened before the 1924 Bankruptcy Act came into operation was the addition to the Act of <case>, by Act No 3 of 1927. This dealt with payments etc to a person subsequently made bankrupt and provided that they should be a good discharge if made before the date of the sequestration order and "without notice of the presentation of a bankruptcy petition, and ... either pursuant to the ordinary course of business or otherwise bona fide." In the 1966 Act this provision, in somewhat different form became <case>. The word "otherwise" which had connected "good faith" and the "ordinary course of business" in <case> was omitted.

Conclusions on ordinary course of business as at 1928. (1) At the time the Bankruptcy Act came into force, the meaning of the expression "the ordinary course of business" depended on case law and the ordinary understanding of words. No help as to its meaning was available in any relevant statute.

A substantially similar expression had been in use in England from 1745 to in a provision protecting certain categories of payments otherwise void because caught by the doctrine of relation back.

While the expression was in statutory use it had been interpreted as meaning (i) the kind of payment that would be made in accordance with ordinary trading practice between parties each acting on the basis the other was solvent, and (ii) not such a payment as to raise in the mind of an objective observer a suspicion that the payer was insolvent.

The expression had played a minor part in the developing case law on fraudulent preferences, that is, in regard to pre bankruptcy transactions.

At the same time as fraudulent preferences became acts of bankruptcy the expression ceased to appear in the English bankruptcy legislation.

The expression "in the ordinary course of business" never appeared in any English or Australian statutory provision relating to preferences until the 1924 Commonwealth Act.

In the case law concerning fraudulent preferences, the expression had been used in two ways (i) as a description of a state of affairs which, when found to exist by reference to a debtor's intention, was the statement of a conclusion that the debtor's part in a transaction had not been voluntary, and as a matter of evidence relevant to the question whether or not the debtor's action had been voluntary in the sense that the debtor had decided of his own free will, as a matter of choice, to pay that creditor knowing and wanting that the creditor would be preferred to other creditors if the debtor's bankruptcy followed.

In its second use, however, (as a matter of evidence), the ordinary course of business test was not conclusive, because a transaction which objectively was an ordinary business transaction, might be voluntary, depending on the debtor's subjective intention.

Putting (8) slightly differently, payments received in the ordinary course of business from a creditor's point of view, might nevertheless be found void because, notwithstanding their having apparently been in the ordinary course of business, they were in fact motivated (in Sir Samuel Griffith's sense) by the debtor's intention to prefer the creditor.

In view of the coincidence between expressions used by Sir Samuel
Griffith in Stewart & Walker versus White and appearing in <case>, it seems reasonably likely that the draftsman of the 1924 Commonwealth Bankruptcy Act had adopted "the ordinary course of business" from Sir Samuel Griffith's reasons in that case.

Sir Samuel Griffith had used the expression in Stewart & Walker v
White not in either of the ways mentioned in (7) above, but as something whose absence was relevant to good faith; good faith was already recognised as negated by notice. It is not at all clear whether he was using the expression as describing something additional to good faith, or as a species of it; if he meant it to describe something additional, he must have had in mind a meaning to the effect of (3)(i) above, so that the payee would lose the benefit of the protective provision if there was some out of the ordinary course feature of the transaction which, although falling short in itself of giving notice of insolvency, made doubtful the state of solvency normally assumed by traders.

The idea that Sir Samuel Griffith may have been using ordinary course of business merely as an aspect of good faith is consistent with the concluding words of <case>, inserted in the 1924 Bankruptcy Act in 1927, although, because of the greater likelihood of good faith in payments to an insolvent person, than in receipts from him, the consistency is not of great weight.

Once the two expressions "in good faith" and "in the ordinary course of business" were used in <case>(b), it was highly likely that the ordinary rules of construction would lead to the second expression being given a meaning distinct from and added to the first.
 "Ordinary course of business" in bankruptcy law, in the High Court cases.

The meaning question. I will first consider whether what I have called the meaning question is authoritatively decided by the High Court cases. This is the question which has been most discussed in the High Court.

The first case there to consider the meaning of the phrase was Robertson v
Grigg <case>; [(1932) 47 CLR 257.] The issue in that case relevant for present purposes was that one of the claims made by the Trustee in Bankruptcy was that payments made on behalf of the bankrupt to a particular creditor were preferences within the meaning of <case> of the 1924
Bankruptcy Act.

Six judges sat; three opinions were delivered; all agreed that the appeal from
Northmore CJ, who had held at first instance that no preference was involved, should be dismissed.

In their joint opinion Gavan Duffy CJ and Starke J were tentatively of the view that the attacked payments were not preferences so that the protective provisions of <case> need not be considered. However, they appear to have reached their conclusion on the footing that the attacked payments were, in any event, within <case> and in the ordinary course of business, the aspect of <case> which was principally in dispute.

In arriving at their conclusion on ordinary course of business they referred to what Lord Mansfield had said in Alderson versus Temple and Rust versus Cooper, set out above at pp 30-32 and 34-36, to what Lord Blackburn had said in
Tomkins versus Saffery and what he had said about the man struggling on and making payments to keep his business going (see p 68 and 69 above) and to a passage in Nunes versus Carter (see p 59 above). They then said: "Therefore, the test under sec 95 of the ordinary course of business is not whether the act is usual or common in the business of the debtor or of the creditor, but whether it is 'a fair transaction, and what a man might do without having any bankruptcy in view'."139 
Dixon J, with whom Rich J concurred, was of the view that no preferences were involved in the attacked transactions, and abstained from any discussion of the protective provisions of <case>.

Evatt J, like Gavan Duffy CJ and Starke J, decided the bankruptcy point on the basis that the charge that had been taken by the creditor was the source of the relevant rights of the creditor and had been obtained "in the ordinary course of business". He did not consider the past history of the words (although it had been extensively argued) but indicated a view of their meaning similar to that of Gavan Duffy CJ and Starke J: "The 'ordinary course of business' is not, I think, to be related to any special business carried on by either debtor or creditor but is concerned with the character of the impeached transaction itself."140 
He went on to say that in his view the charge taken by the lender had been "an ordinary business precaution" and the assignments were "ordinary business transactions".[141] 
McTiernan J agreed with Dixon J.

Thus three of the six judges decided the case on the footing of a meaning ascribed to "the ordinary course of business" which appears to be supported both by the meaning of the words themselves in their statutory context in <case> and also by the whole preceding history of the use of the words in connection with preferential payments. The other three judges expressed no opinion on the matter.

The next case was S. Richards & Co Limited versus Lloyd (1933).[142] In the
Federal Court of Bankruptcy the judge at first instance had held that an equitable assignment to secure a debt was void as a preference. He had not found that the debtor spontaneously, voluntarily, or intentionally gave the preference. It was contended that the true construction of <case> required such a finding. Each member of the court rejected this contention, saying that the words of <case> clearly adopted a de facto test for preferences as opposed to the English subjective one.[143] Each member of the court also rejected the appellant's second submission which was that the assignment was protected by <case>(b).[144] In joint reasons Rich and Dixon JJ said the judge's conclusion that good faith was not established should not be disturbed. They did not discuss the meaning of "the ordinary course of business".[145] Starke took the same view[146] although, via a footnote, he indicated that in reaching his conclusion he was bearing in mind the meaning that Gavan Duffy CJ and he had ascribed to the words in Robertson versus Grigg.

Only Evatt J of the four judges explicitly based his rejection of the appellant's protection submission on the view that what had happened had not been in the ordinary course of business. Again, he did not discuss the meaning of the expression, contenting himself with a repetition of what he had said in
Robertson versus Grigg and saying that the absence of any pressure or demand by the creditor was significant.[147] 
This case also, like Robertson versus Grigg did not produce a majority of judges joining in the one view of the meaning of ordinary course of business.

The next case was Burns versus McFarlane,148 (1940). Four judges sat. The case was one in which, once good faith had been found in favour of the creditor, as it was, it seemed inevitable that the other ingredients of the protective provision would be made out. However, in their joint reasons Rich,
Dixon and McTiernan JJ gave some consideration to "the ordinary course of business". They said, "Under sub-s 2(b) itself the issues are (1) good faith, (2) valuable consideration, and (3) ordinary course of business. There is adequate material to support the finding of good faith, and there can, of course, be no doubt that the payment was for valuable consideration. That it was made in the ordinary course of business is a finding upon which we have felt more difficulty. But the expression as used in the Bankruptcy Acts is a wide one:
See Sievwright versus Hay & Co Ltd [(1913) 50 Sc LR 313];
Robertson versus Grigg (1932) 47 CLR at 267, per Gavan Duffy CJ and Starke J.
Unlike the expression found in the bills-of-sale legislation, viz, 'transfers of goods in the ordinary course of business of any trade or calling,' it does not require an investigation of the course pursued in any particular trade or vocation and it does not refer to what is normal or usual in the business of the debtor or that of the creditor: See Robertson versus Grigg (1932) 47 CLR at , per Evatt J, and cf Halsbury's Laws of England, 2nd ed, vol 3, p 20.
Possibly the application of the expression in bankruptcy is not so wide as in relation to floating charges: Cf Halsbury's Laws of England, 2nd ed, vol 5, p , and Palmer, Company Precedents, 13th ed (1927) Part III, Debentures, p
But that meaning has more analogy.
 
The transaction considered as a whole presented the appearance of a perfectly fair and honest attempt to place the finances of Woon's business on a sound basis by raising money on free assets, giving an ample security, for the purpose of paying off unsecured creditors and providing a small surplus for current expenses. On the whole, therefore, we think that the finding that it was in the ordinary course of business ought not to be disturbed."149 
Starke J repeated what he had said in Richards & Co versus Lloyd and
Robertson versus Grigg[150]. 
Burns versus McFarlane thus seems to me to have made authoritative the formulation of Gavan Duffy CJ and Starke J in Robertson versus Grigg. As I have already indicated, that formulation seems to me to be substantially consistent with the way in which Griffith CJ had used the expression in Stewart &
Walker. A question arises whether there has, since Burns versus McFarlane, been an authoritative departure from that formulation.

The expression was considered next in Downs Distributing Company Pty Limited v Associated Blue Star Stores Pty Limited (In liquidation) <case>; [(1948) 76 CLR 463.] The transaction attacked in this case under <case> was the settlement of a debt between traders by the re-delivery of goods sold together with other goods subject to an arrangement that the debtor might again purchase the goods for cash. The liquidator of the debtor company succeeded at first instance in having the arrangement declared void. The trial judge held that the circumstances led to the inference that the creditor had reason to suspect the debtor was unable to pay its debts as they became due and that the transaction would give a de facto preference to the creditor over other creditors. In the High Court (Latham CJ, Rich and Williams JJ) Latham CJ agreed with the basis on which the trial judge had decided the case and found it unnecessary to deal with the precise meaning of "in the ordinary course of business", being of the view that on any approach the transaction did not fall within those words.[151] 
Rich J also was of the view that the appeal should be dismissed, but confined himself to holding that the transaction had not been "in the ordinary course of business". He referred to what had been said in Burns versus McFarlane (the passage at [64 CLR 125], set out above at pp 87 and 88) and went on to say that what the expression required was something additional to good faith and valuable consideration and then continued with a passage very frequently relied on since: "It is, therefore, not so much a question of fairness and absence of symptoms of bankruptcy as of the everyday usual or normal character of the transaction.
The provision does not require that the transaction shall be in the course of any particular trade, vocation or business. It speaks of the course of business in general. But it does suppose that according to the ordinary and common flow on transactions in affairs of business there is a course, an ordinary course. It means that the transaction must fall in place as part of the undistinguished common flow of business done, that it should form part of the ordinary course of business as carried on, calling for no remark and arising out of no special or particular situation."152 
Unfortunately, in the subsequent constant repetition of this passage considerable attention has been given to its last sentence. Without the last sentence, what Rich J said was fully consistent with the earlier cases.
Further, when understood in the light of the history and the earlier High
Court decisions it may still be read consistently with them. Why it seems to me to be unfortunate for this sentence to have been so frequently referred to, is that it has been taken by itself, and as suggesting that anything done differently from usual between creditor and debtor can not be something done in the ordinary course of business. Such a view is far from the realities of commercial life. New or variant ways of transacting business between traders are constantly being devised, many for tax purposes. From the point of view of the traders concerned these transactions are business transactions in every sense of the word and fall into the course of the trader's business. Taken too literally, Rich J's sentence can be read as qualifying what he, Dixon J and
McTiernan J had said in Burns versus McFarlane, namely that the expression "does not refer to what is normally usual in the business of the debtor or that of the creditor"; and I do not think the qualification is justified.

Another problem with the passage is that it is not really very much help in the usual situation where it needs to be considered, namely payment of a debt incurred in business. In such cases the question necessarily becomes whether the payment was received in the ordinary course of business, which in turn means looking at the terms on which the payment should have been made by the particular debtor to the particular creditor.

Williams J referred to what had been said by Rich, Dixon and McTiernan JJ in
Burns versus McFarlane with apparent approval, and then went on: "It seems to me, therefore, that the expression refers to a transaction into which it would be usual for a creditor and debtor to enter as a matter of business in the circumstances of the particular case uninfluenced by any belief on the part of the creditor that the debtor might be insolvent."153 
The use by Williams J of the words "it would be usual for" in this sentence needs to be carefully considered. He seems to be saying, on one possible reading, (by dint of the "therefore") that his proposition necessarily follows from the passage in Burns versus McFarlane to which he was referring.
This would be right, in my respectful opinion, either if the words "it would be usual for" were left out or if "usual" were to be read as meaning "business like" or some equivalent. It is apparent from the whole paragraph from which the passage is taken that Williams J considered the creditor intended to obtain a preference by the transaction and that it was essentially this that caused the creditor to fail. I do not think the word "usual" in the passage was intended to carry its full ordinary meaning, in view of what his Honour had said just before. In my view it may be read, and should be read, to be consistent with the history and the case law from which the expression came, as if the word "usual" is understood as meaning "business like" or "sensible business" or some equivalent expression.

In the following part of his reasons Williams J went on to explain why the transaction in question did not in his opinion fall within the expression "in the ordinary course of business". The explanation would require the same conclusion if "usual" were read as "business like".

In any event, I do not think there can be obtained from the reasons of the different judges in this case either a deliberate or authoritative statement of the interpretation of "in the ordinary course of business" altering the binding adoption in Burns versus McFarlane of the formulation in Robertson v
Grigg.

The last in the series of High Court decisions usually regarded as particularly relevant to "the ordinary course of business" is Taylor v
White[154] (1964).

Mr Taylor and his wife were the only directors and shareholders in a company which had been in the business of a building contractor until it went into liquidation. Mrs Taylor took no part in the management of the company. Mrs
Taylor's mother, Mrs Quinn, through the agency of her daughter lent [sterling]4,000 to the company. The winding up of the company commenced on 17
August 1959. A payment of [sterling]160 as interest was made by the company in
March, part repayments of [sterling]500 in April, June and July and the balance of [sterling]2,500 on 30 July. Mrs Quinn died in 1960. The liquidators sought to recover from her estate as preferences the payments totalling 4,000.

Gibbs J, then a judge of the Queensland Supreme Court, found that the three payments in June and July were made without any request from Mrs Taylor, but that in July Mr Taylor knew the company was insolvent. He also found that it was not until 3 August 1959 that Mrs Taylor knew the company was insolvent; before that date she knew the company was experiencing difficulties although she hoped it would be able to surmount them. Because of the agency role played by Mrs Taylor the trial judge approached the matter on the basis that her knowledge and state of mind should be imputed to Mrs Quinn. The question became whether there had been any lack of good faith on Mrs Taylor's part. The trial judge found that she neither knew nor ought reasonably to have suspected the company's insolvency on the relevant dates. He also held the payments were made in the ordinary course of business. The claim by the liquidator therefore failed. The Full Court of the Queensland Supreme Court reversed the trial judge's decision in regard to the three payments in June and July on the ground that such payments could not be regarded as having been made in the ordinary course of business.

An appeal to the High Court by Mrs Quinn's executors was dismissed, (Dixon CJ,
Taylor, Menzies and Windeyer JJ, Kitto J dissenting). Dixon CJ said he agreed with the Full Court but added that he was inclined to think that on the facts
Mrs Taylor had reason to suspect the company was insolvent at relevant times and the effect of them would be to give her mother a preference over other creditors. He then returned to ordinary course of business and said: "I do not doubt that 'in the ordinary course of business' refers to 'business' as a general conception and is not restricted to the conduct of any particular business such as the business carried in a shop or merchant's office or the like, but is referring to the transaction of business as a known and recognised activity pursued by anybody engaged in an attempt to win or earn or 'make' money or a living in a systematic or regular way."155 
To this point what Dixon CJ says is, I think, completely consistent with what had been said in Robertson versus Grigg and Burns versus McFarlane. Dixon CJ then went on to state in a summary way his view of the transaction; this summary statement seems to be the basis of his conclusion: "But this seems to me to have been a family transaction in which a son-in- law, with the help of his wife, decided to borrow money from his mother-in-law for his company and then attempted to effect its repayment in the face of approaching disaster."156 
He then added a sentence which, when taken with the sentences from Downs
Distributing which I have discussed, could be taken as suggesting that anything at all that might occasion comment as being different from usual might indicate departure from the ordinary course of business. He said: "The time honoured phrase 'in the ordinary course of business' is meant to refer to transactions regularly taking place in a sustained course of activity or some usual process naturally passing without examination."157 
Dixon J then went on to refer to the history of the matter in Lord Mansfield's time, in a way not making any clearer his own understanding of the phrase. He added that something more than good faith must have been meant to be added to the protective requirements by the introduction of the phrase to the protective provision and that in what had happened between Mr and Mrs Taylor and Mrs White he could see no ordinary course of business.

I do not think there is anything here indicating any intention on the part of
Dixon CJ to make any change of substance to the Robertson versus Grigg formulation. To state this concretely by reference to the words which arguably would narrow the test, I refer to the facts of the present case. One of the factual aspects relied on by the appellant liquidator, and one of the reasons why he was pressing the submission that in considering whether something was in the ordinary course of business the court should take into account what was passing in the corporate mind of the creditor, was that, on the liquidator's view of the evidence, there was unusual concern within the corporate creditor about the creditworthiness of the debtor company. These facts would obviously be relevant to the question of good faith (although in this, for the reasons given by Clarke JA I would not interfere with McLelland J's finding of good faith after he had taken into account that evidence in his consideration of the factual situation), but I would not read what Dixon CJ said as looking to any such evidence. "Transactions regularly taking place" seems to me to indicate two things, both an objective view of transactions taking place in business and also, by virtue of the word transactions, an objective view of what is happening in business between business persons or entities. It is what is happening between creditor and debtor in the way of payment, when a payment is being considered, which is being looked at to see whether it is in the regular or usual course. What is passing in the mind of the creditor, if an individual, or in the minds of those in charge of the various departments of a corporate entity, if the creditor is one, is not to the point. It is sufficient for the ordinary course of business if the payment is made in the regular way as between the parties. (This, of course, is relevant also to the subjective question.) 
Kitto J, on the meaning question, said that - "the payee must have taken the money not only in good faith ... but also without there being, in his taking it, anything unusual or remarkable to make it other than an ordinary business transaction."158 
There does not seem to me to be anything in this formulation inconsistent with the Robertson versus Grigg formulation.

I will come back to what he said on the subjective question after seeing what the other judges said as to meaning.

Taylor J went through what had been said in the earlier High Court cases about ordinary course of business without saying anything that I would read as intended to alter the authority conferred by Burns versus McFarlane on the
Robertson versus Grigg formulation of the meaning of the expression "in the ordinary course of business".

Nor did Menzies J, on my reading of his reasons, express or join in any view of the meaning of the words which would alter the authoritative formulation I have been referring to. He made the pertinent observation that <case>(a), by treating a payment "in good faith" as different from one "in the ordinary course of business" required a construction of each phrase leaving some room for the other and that he had "not found much help from decisions in cases where this distinction did not have to be observed". He said nothing about the subjective question.

Windeyer J did not depart from the Robertson versus Grigg formulation either, although he did state the test in his own words as requiring the questioned payment to be one "that would be made by the payer and received by the payee in the ordinary course of a business transaction between them".[159] 
My conclusion therefore is that there is no authoritative decision which prevents this court from acting on the Robertson versus Grigg formulation; put more accurately, the position seems to be that this court is bound to apply that formulation. It is a broad one, and I think the conclusions I earlier stated about the position as it was in 1928 can be used consistently with it.

I think this is also borne out by another authority not usually referred to in this connection. This is Fairway Estates Pty Limited versus Federal Commissioner of Taxation,160 (1970), an income tax appeal to a single judge of the High
Court (Barwick CJ). It became necessary for Barwick CJ to consider the meaning of a provision in the [Income Tax Assessment Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/itaa1936240/) which used the words "in respect of money lent in the ordinary course of the business of the lending of money by a taxpayer who carries on that business".
In his reasons, Barwick CJ made it clear that the bankruptcy decisions on the expression "in the ordinary course of business" could have no decisive weight on the meaning of the similar expression in the [Income Tax Assessment
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/itaa1936240/). However, he found it useful to refer to Downs Distributing Co. He said: "In requiring the lending to be in the ordinary course of the business, however, the section, in my opinion, does not require that the advance must conform to the usual or ordinary transaction currently carried out by the taxpayer in carrying on the business of lending money. It is the ordinary course of such a business of which the section speaks. The advance may be of a new type or kind so far as the taxpayer's business is concerned and yet be in the ordinary course of that business.
 
I have come to the conclusion that the decisions involving the expression 'in the ordinary course of business' found in bankruptcy legislation have no direct bearing on the construction or application of [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/itaa1936240/s63.html)
Accordingly, I find no need to discuss them. However, the remarks of Rich J in
Downs Distributing Co Pty Ltd versus Associated Blue Star Stores Pty Ltd, <case>; [(1948) 76 CLR 463] at 477, are of use in that they emphasize the notion of a common course in the conduct of a business. The requirement that the transaction be in the ordinary course of the business excludes transactions which are made for purposes other than the carrying on of the business or to achieve ends disparate from those of the business activity." (at 162) 
At a later stage of his reasons he came to deal with the application to the facts of the case of what he had said about the meaning of the expression in the [Income Tax Assessment
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/itaa1936240/).
 "The last question is whether the loan of money to Jubilee was in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's business of lending money. In this connexion it was submitted that there had not as yet developed at the date of the loan any ordinary course in that business. Only one loan had been made: thus it is said no course of business which in the respondent's submission entails repetition and continuity. But this submission misconceives the significance of the expression 'course of business' in the section. I have already indicated what in my opinion the ordinary course of business for present purposes involves. Further, in my opinion, there can be a course of business although as yet there is nothing more than an intention to carry on the business and a single transaction carried out in pursuance of that intention.
The lending in this case was not for any purpose other than the carrying on of the appellant's business of lending money.
 
But the respondent's counsel submitted that the presence of the stipulation for a share in the equity capital of Jubilee and of representation on the board of that company took the lending of the money outside the ordinary course of the taxpayer's business. But again, it seems to me, this submission misconceives the significance of the expression 'in the ordinary course of business'. It may well be that the transaction was unusual even for the taxpayer. It may also be that it may be a transaction of a kind which it might not thereafter have repeated or repeated in the precise form of the transaction with Jubilee. But the unusual quality of a transaction does not mean that it is of necessity a transaction entered into outside the ordinary course of business. Here, everything points in the opposite direction. The transaction is made by the appellant with another company in which it has no interest prior to the carrying out of the transaction itself, the money was actually advanced, the consideration was real and there were no circumstances by reason of which, in my mind, it could be said that the transaction was outside the ordinary course of business of the taxpayer. All that can be said the respondent does say, when he calls attention to what he calls the unusual features of the loan. However, it may be remarked that the evidence placed before me through Mr Barnett would indicate that the transaction was not even unusual in the field of money-lending in which it took place." (at 166-167) 
Barwick CJ's whole approach seems to me to support the view that the passage from Rich J's reasons in Downs Distributing often relied on as imposing a more stringent test than the Robertson versus Grigg formulation, does not, read in context, take that formulation any further.

The subjective question. The question whether the payee's state of mind should be taken into account in deciding that he, being a payee in good faith, was also a payee in the ordinary course of business was only touched on in passing in some of the High Court cases. They nevertheless give some help.

In Burns versus McFarlane, Rich, Dixon and McTiernan JJ spoke of "the appearance" of "the transaction considered as a whole" (see p 88 above).
They also referred to the Scottish case of Sievwright versus Hay & Co Ltd with apparent approval. In that case also, it seems that it was the appearance of the transaction that was considered.[161] 
In Taylor versus White, Kitto J was mainly concerned with the question whether the debtor's state of mind at the time of payment was relevant to a decision on the ordinary course of business. He thought not, after a review of some of the historical authorities. I respectfully agree with his conclusion. I should note however, that in his historical survey, one matter on which he did not consider all the authorities was the mental element in the fraudulent preference. He emphasised Lord Mansfield's sentence from Rust versus Cooper which
I have discussed above, that the ordinary course of business is not to be affected by what passes in the mind of the bankrupt (see p 34-6 above). He did not refer to the various cases which explain that observation nor, if taken literally, the theoretical problem with it, nor the fact that, so understood, it would in some cases be essentially question begging. However, I need say no more about this for present purposes than that if anything should turn upon this part of Kitto J's reasons in some future case, they will require close consideration.

Kitto J referred only briefly to the state of mind of the payee. After mentioning Gavan Duffy CJ and Starke J's discussion in Robertson versus Grigg he quoted their question "whether it is a fair transaction and what a man might do without having any bankruptcy in view" and said it must "mean that if the payee is to be protected by [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/itaa1936240/s95.html) the payment must have presented itself to him as a fair payment to accept and what a debtor might offer who was uninfluenced by any prospect of bankruptcy."[162] 
Kitto J said this as part of his argument that the debtor's state of mind could not be relevant; he was not then concerned to examine whether the "what a man might do" concept referred to a business man in the particular circumstances, or the actual payee. The former seems to me the more likely reading, and fits in much better with all the preceding matter I have surveyed. That Kitto J was not directing himself to the precise point now in question is shown I think by his reference to "what a debtor might offer" (my underlining) which fits the objective theory which in my view is to be preferred. I would not regard the passage as intending to indicate a considered opinion on the point now in question.

Taylor J was concerned, like Kitto J, with the debtor's subjective intentions, and came to the opposite conclusion to Kitto J. Despite the reservations I have expressed about one aspect of Kitto J's reasoning, I think he undoubtedly had the better of this argument, if for no other reason than that on Taylor J's view an examination of the debtor's mental state about preferring the creditor, so painstakingly precluded by the defacto preference approach, would be reintroduced by reference to the ordinary course of business. Taylor J appears to have had no High Court support for his view, and it need not be further discussed here. As I read his reasons he said nothing explicit about the motivation of the creditor.

Windeyer J said that the expression "ordinary course of business" in its context raised the question whether the payment was "one that would be made by the payer and received by the payee in the ordinary course of a business transaction between them".[163] This seems to me to invite objective scrutiny rather than looking into the mind either of the debtor or the creditor.

Conclusions on "good faith" and "in the ordinary course of business in s ".

So far as High Court decisions since 1928 are concerned, my conclusion on the two questions which I stated at the beginning of these reasons is that the
High Court has settled the answer to the meaning question, but not to the subjective question.

The meaning question. For the reasons I have given, in my opinion the formulation of Gavan Duffy CJ and Rich J in Robertson versus Grigg is established as the binding formulation. It has a degree of amorphousness, but within it, I think it is possible, in cases such as the present, to concentrate on what would be the usual manner of payment in the circumstances of the particular transaction, and ask whether anything about that manner of payment could, on the approach of the businessmen concerned in the transaction, be realistically regarded as something other than an ordinary business payment. In nearly all the cases concerning whether a particular payment was in the ordinary course of business, although the course of business has been spoken of in the general terms typified by the formulation in Robertson versus Grigg, attention has been paid to whether the payment was received in accordance with the terms the parties understood to be required; either by specific contract or custom of the business. The cases that have been said to be outside the ordinary course are those where a creditor, on not being paid in accordance with contract or custom, the ordinary course, has agreed to change the terms of payment, in a way that, although it does not go so far as to indicate possible insolvency, nevertheless suggests that in order to increase the probability of payment it is necessary to make the terms of payment easier for the debtor to comply with.

The subjective question - as concerns the payee. The content of good faith in <case> appears to be authoritatively established. I will not repeat the discussion of this point in the reasons of Clarke JA, with which I agree.
There is no doubt, in my opinion, that good faith looks to the actual knowledge and suspicions of the creditor; equally, it seems to me that what is passing in the mind of the debtor is irrelevant, unless it happens to furnish some evidence as to the mental state of the creditor. The point of the adoption in the Commonwealth Bankruptcy Acts of the New South Wales objective approach to preferences was to get rid of the need to consider the debtor's subjective motives and intentions. I do not think there is anything in the history of the matter or in the statutory provisions to warrant the reintroduction of consideration of the debtor's state of mind in the application of provisions protective of the creditor. It is what is known to the creditor that is material to good faith.

Although some of the matters relevant to good faith will also be relevant to the ordinary course of business, and although that means it is sometime difficult to keep separate the discussion of the two concepts, they are stated cumulatively in <case>(b) and both observations in the High Court and conventional rules of construction indicate that each should have a separate area of operation. When this is taken into account with the adoption by Gavan
Duffy CJ and Starke J in Robertson versus Grigg of Lord Mansfield's words that a transaction is in the ordinary course if it is what a man might do without having any bankruptcy in view and Evatt J's statement that it is the character of the impeached transaction itself which must be considered, together with what was said in the joint opinion of Rich, Dixon and McTiernan JJ, in Burns v McFarlane and the other slighter matters I have mentioned, it seems to me the better view is that in its context the ordinary course of business raises the question would an objective observer, knowing the actual business facts of how the particular payment came to be made, regard it as one in the ordinary course of business.

Thus the question raised by the ordinary course of business test in s (2)(b) is whether someone watching from outside the way a particular payment was effected would conclude the payment was being made outside the ordinary terms of payment and in such a way outside those ordinary terms as to suggest that the probable reason it was happening that way was because the creditor although not having enough information to warrant a suspicion of the debtor's insolvency must nevertheless have been sufficiently concerned about the position to take steps to make it easier for the debtor to pay. The question would be not whether the creditor was actually thinking those things, but whether the nature of the changed form of payment was such as to make the objective observer think that was the probable reason for the transaction moving into an unusual course.

The appellant's submissions drew the court's attention to a number of cases where courts appear to have taken what was passing through creditors' minds in receiving payment into account in deciding whether it fell outside the ordinary course. In each of these cases it seems to me that that motivation of the creditor was more readily to be taken into account in looking at the question of good faith, which would have achieved the same result in the cases. Once the creditor's motivation is taken into account on the ordinary course of business question it becomes difficult if not impossible to define any barrier lying between good faith and the ordinary course of business and it would become impossible to differentiate between them.

The facts in this case.

The appellant criticised aspects of the trial judge's fact finding. I agree with the reasons given by Clarke JA for accepting those factual findings untouched.

Conclusion on "good faith" and "ordinary course of business". Applying the views I have come to about the meaning and operation of "the ordinary course of business" in <case>(b) and its interaction with good faith in that paragraph I reach the same conclusion as the trial judge.

The appellant's other arguments.

In regard to the appellant's other arguments, I agree with what has been said by Clarke JA.

Conclusion.

In my opinion the appeal should be dismissed with costs.

Afterword.

Anyone who has gone through the materials I have collected will be able to form an opinion on whether the addition of the "ordinary course of business" requirement to the "good faith" requirement, first in [s (2)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/itaa1936240/s95.html) and then in <case>(a), has been of any noticeable usefulness in preference law. [Part .7B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/itaa1936240/index.html#p5.7b) of the Corporations Law, stating the company law on unfair preferences since June 1993, does not use the expression. The [Bankruptcy Legislation
Amendment Bill ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/bill/blab1996344/), which became law on 16 December 1996, retains it.
 
ABADEE AJA: I agree with the reasons for judgment of 
Clarke JA.
 [1] At 148-149.
 [2] See 19 G 2 c.32, <case> and text at pp 12 and 24 following; it was also used in the Cape of Good Hope Insolvency Act in an interesting way - see later at pp 54-55.
  <case>; [5 CLR 110.] Text taken from the version printed in The Bankrupt Laws by William Cooke, 8th edn, 1823, vol 1, pp 1-6.
 [6] Levinthal [(1919) 67 University of Pennsylvania Law Review 1] at 14-15.
 []  May, 3rd ed 1908 at 6-8.
 [8] 3 W & M c.14.
 [] By 1 Jac I Chapter 15 (1604) and 21 Jac I Chapter 19 (1623); the three statutes provided the bankruptcy law for a considerable period thereafter: see Holdsworth, A History of English Law, 6th edn vol 1 at 470; vol 8 at 236 and following.
 [10] Precise details of the changes in the system of commissioners and assignees are set out in The Origin, Progress and Present Practice of the
Bankruptcy Law by Edward Christian, 2nd ed London, 1818, vol 1 pp 597, 598; (hereafter simply referred to as Christian).
 [11] 13 Eliz c.7 <case>; "... to every of the said creditors a portion, rate and rate like, according to the quantity of his or their debts".
 [12] 13 Eliz c.7 <case>; The case of Bankrupts: Smith versus Mills <case>; [(1584) Co Rep 25a]; [76 ER 441]; explained in A Practical Treatise on the Bankrupt Law, by the Hon Robert Henley Eden, one of the Masters in Chancery, 2nd edn, 1826,
London, (from here on simply called Eden) at 258; see also Christian at vol 1, -599.
 [13] Eden 1viii.
 [14] Eden at 258-9, Dedication, iii. The six statutes were the 1 Jac I c.15 s , (1603), 21 Jac I c.19 <case> (1623), 19 Geo 2 c.32 (1745), 46 Geo 3 c.135 s (1806), 49 Geo 3 c.121 <case> (1809) and 56 Geo 3 c.137 <case> (1816).
 <case>; 1 Burr 20; [97 ER 166.] [17] He had been Solicitor General when it was enacted in 1745; Biographical
Dictionary of the Common Law, ed A W B Simpson, London 1984, p 380.
 1 Burr 20 at 32; 97 ER at 172.
 Ibid at 33, 173. The sheriffs were held not to be within the protection of 19 G 2 c.32, apparently because they were thought to be on notice of bankruptcy or insolvency, although this is not at all clear from the report.
  <case>; [1 Burr 467]; 97 ER 407.
 At 475; 411.
 [22] At 483; 416.
 A subsidiary argument in this case was that after resolving to commit an act of bankruptcy a trader might, before committing it, lawfully make a preferential payment to a creditor. Lord Mansfield did not then decide the point, but clearly foreshadowed the reasons he gave in later cases for holding that such a payment would be void: at 478-480; 413-414.
  <case>; [(1801) 2 Bos & P 398] At 406; 1354.
 At 408; 1354.
 <case>; , <case>; , <case>; [2 Bos & Pul 401], 126 ER 1350.
 [30] 2 Bos & Pul 98. [126 ER 1349.] At 401, 1350.
 [32] Which, on substantially similar facts, was in the creditor's favour.
 At 402, 1351.
  <case>; [2 Bos & Pul 401], 126 ER 1350.
 [35] Then Chief Justice of Common Pleas; later Lord Chancellor.
 At 408, 1355.
 [37] At 408, 1355; this sentence again assumes the ordinary basis of trading I discussed earlier (at pp 14-18).
 At 410-411, 1356. In 1819 Christian said "... it is according to usage of trade upon a dishonoured bill to compel payment immediately by legal coercion;" at 613.
 At 412, 1357.
 <case>; [11 East 127], 103 ER 953.
 [41] At 131, 954.
 <case>; 2 Camp 313, [170 ER 1167.] At 314, 1167.
 <case>; [1 M & S 338], [105 ER 127.] [45] At 350, 131.
 At 350, 131.
 At 351, 132.
 At 354, 133.
 [49] Christian, see n 10, at 597.
 [50] See n 20.
 [51] 1 Jac I c.15; see n.9.
 <case>; [(1768) Burr 2235], [98 ER 165.] [55] Here the text gives a footnote referring to 1 Jac I, c.1 <case>.
 [56] Ibid, at 2239; 167.
 Ibid, at 2239-40; 168.
 Ibid, at 2240; 168.
 Ibid, at 2241; 168.
 1 Cowper 117; <case>; [98 ER 998.] At 124-125; 1001-1002.
 2 Cowper 629; <case>; [98 ER 1277.] [63] At 633; 1279.
 At 634-635; 1280.
 At 635; 1280-1281; it is interesting to see that the doctrine which Lord Mansfield had first foreshadowed by way of obiter dictum in Worsley versus Demattos then used as the basis of his opinion in Harman versus Fisher but without the concurrence of the other members of the court, had now become accepted as the basis of decision.
 [1 TR 156] [67] At 156; 1027.
 <case>; <case>; 1 Stark 89, <case>; [7 Bing 438]; [131 ER 169.] At 444, 171-2.
 [72] At 446, 172.
 [73] At 447, 173, and referred to the facts of various similar cases in which the jury's verdict had been in favour of the creditor.
 [74] At 448-9, 173.
 At 449-450, 173-174.
 [[1899] AC 419.] This appears in the report of the Court of Appeal decision in [1897] 2 QB at 27.
 [78] These cases were Thompson versus Freeman, <case>; [(1786) TR 155]
Cosser versus Gough, already cited: Smith versus Payne, <case>; [(1795) 6 TR 152]; [101 ER 484:] Ex p Scudamore <case>; , [(1796) 3 Ves Jun 85]; [30 ER 907:] Crosby versus Crouch, (1808) 2 Campbell 166; [170 ER :] Fidgeon v
Sharpe, <case>; [(1814) 5 Taunt 539]; [128 ER 800:] De Tastet versus Carroll, <case>; [(1815) Stark 88]; [171 ER 410:] Abell versus Daniell, (1829) M & M 370; [173 ER 1192:]; [(1831) 7 Bing 438]; [131 ER 169.] [79] See previous note.
 [80] Later Lord Eldon.
 [81] At 87-908.
 At 88; 908.
 [83] This creativity of Lord Mansfield has recently been referred to in the
High Court, with less indignation: see Nelson versus Nelson (1995) 184 CLR at .
 At 168; 1118.
 At 444; 171.
 At 484-5.
 Memoirs of Sir Samuel Romilly, vol II (1840) at 150-151.
 [88] See n 12.
 [89] At liii.
 At lvii, lviii.
 [] Loc cit Appendix p 7.
 [92] p.26.
 [93] p.26.
 At 31, 32. [95] At 33.
 [96] See Berry Bankruptcy: Law and Practice, London (1987) at 239 and following; the state of mind of the debtor is still relevant however, in a somewhat less difficult way for the trustee.
 [97] At the time of writing I only have available an 1843 Consolidation of this Statute. I assume, without knowing for sure that the sections I next refer to were in the 1829 Statute. My immediate point is substantially unaffected if they only came into the Act in 1843: the reference is Cape of
Good Hope Statutes, Revised, 1652-1886 vols 1-2, pp 877 and following.
 Revised Statutes (see last note) at 916.
 [99] These matters can be traced through the comments in Salusbury Law and
Practice in Bankruptcy in New South Wales, 2nd ed, 1899, with Supplement, at 171 and following and through the cases referred to in Humphery v
McMullen [(1868) 7 SCR 84], as to the earlier position.
 [100] See Minutes of Evidence printed with the Report of the Progress of the
Sub-Committee of the Legislative Council on the Insolvent Debtors' etc Bills, July 1838: eg the evidence of Sydney Stephen at 65. Burton J, the principal draftsman of the Act, in 1842 published the Insolvent Law of New South Wales in which he said the Act adopted ideas from the Insolvency Statute of the
Cape of Good Hope, to the drafting of which he had contributed. In evidence to the select committee, Stephen J said also that features of it came from the
Tasmanian Insolvency Statute which he had drafted when Attorney General there, and that he had used the Cape of Good Hope Statute as a source.
 Williams versus Dunn's Assignee <case>; [(1908) 6 CLR 425] at 433.
 [102] At 442.
 [2 Legge, 997.] At 999.
 [105] Although the same result seems to have been achieved by a different route in Jamaica: see Nunes versus Carter, discussed under the next subheading.
 <case>; [15 Moore PC 116]; [15 ER 437.] [107] Humphery versus McMullen [(1868) 7 SCR 84], where the
New South Wales position is explained at some length.
 Williams versus Dunn's Assignees (1908) 6 CLR at 434.
 <case>; [(1932) 47 CLR 257], at 267.
 [110] [LR 1 PC 342.] At 348.
 [112] Joyce, Samuel Walker Griffith, UQP, 1984, at 41.
 5 CLR at 110.
 [1906 St R Qd 172.] [115] At 115.
 [116] Section 23(2) of the Criminal Code 1899; and also see Draft of a Code of Criminal Law, Queensland Parliamentary Command Paper C.A. 89-1897; in the explanatory letter in this Command Paper, Sir Samuel explained the distinction in what became <case> of the Criminal Code as being that between "an intention to cause a specific result" and "actual knowledge of the probable effect of the act" (at VIII).
 [117] At 8 NZLR 230.
 [118] At [5 CLR 113.](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=5%20CLR%20113 "View LawCiteRecord" )
 [119] At 111.
 (1877) 3 App Cas at 235.
 [121] See 8 NZLR, at 226, judgment of Prendergast CJ; at 228, 230 counsel for the assignee; at 233, the reasons of Richmond J, where he was using the ordinary course of trade idea, like Lord Blackburn, in deciding whether the payments were in the first part of the section, not whether the protective part applied, and where he says that what takes a payment out of the ordinary course is some feature of an unusual character, which shows of itself that the debtor must have had bankruptcy in view; see also at 234; at 236 per Williams
J; at 241 per Denniston J, where he recognises that some receipts apparently in the ordinary course of business may be fraudulent preferences.
 [122] At 236.
 [123] At 236-7.
 [124] At 236-7.
 At 111.
 <case>; <case>; [6 CLR 425.] [129] Reported in Salusbury Law and Practice in Bankruptcy in New South
Wales 2nd edn, 1899, Appendix Cases p 400.
 [130] At 442.
  6 CLR at 457-458.
 <case>; <case>; [(1905) 5 CLR 865.] 13 SR at 208.
 [136] See the preface, dated January 1914, to Salusbury's Supplement to the
Second Edition of his Law and Practice of Bankruptcy in New South Wales, first published in 1899, and apparently republished in 1914 with the extensive
Supplement.
 <case>; [49 CLR 49] [143] Rich and Dixon JJ at 60; Starke J at 62; and Evatt J at 64.
Incidentally Mr Maughan KC, who appeared for the Official Receiver, is recorded as having submitted that in drafting <case> of the Bankruptcy Act 1924, the draftsman utilised words used by Griffith CJ and Isaacs J in Stewart & Walker versus White (see 49 CLR at 55). In regard to Griffith CJ this submission accords with what appears in McDonald Henry & Meek's first edition, but I have been unable to see any supporting words in the reasons of
Isaacs J.
 [144] Section 122(2)(a) of the 1966 Act.
 [145] At 60-61.
 <case>; <case>; <case>; [123 CLR 153.] [161] See (1913) 50 Sc LR at 316, 317; (note also, on the meaning question, that at 319 Lord Salvesen accepted that the circumstance that a transaction is unique in a debtor's business does not necessarily take it out of the ordinary course of trade.) [162] At 142.
 [163] At 161.
 * * * 
