

Woodruff versus De Marchi and Ors Matter No 20541/95 [1997] NSWSC 365 (2
September 1997) 
Last Updated: 27 February 1998 ` 
John Phillip Woodruff versus Suze De Marchi & Ors` ` 20541/95` `2 September 1997` `Graham AJ` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division` /95 - JOHN PHILLIP WOODRUFF versus SUZE DE MARCHI & ORS 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: These proceedings concern alleged breaches of contract by the defendants. 
The plaintiff carried on business as an artist's manager and as such, managed the musical group known as "The Baby Animals" of which the first four defendants were members. The plaintiff seeks to recover moneys said to be due by way of commission totalling in excess of $200,000 and also damages which are unspecified for other breaches of the contracts.

The issues in the proceedings will include the construction of, amongst other clauses, clause 8 of the contracts and subparagraphs (ii) and (v) of Appendix
A thereto.

The plaintiff contends that commission is payable to him in respect of moneys which have been classified as "tour support" and the claim in this regard comprises, so I understand, the principal claim of the plaintiff.

The Statement of Claim was filed on 16 June 1995 and the defence on 20 October
The bulk of the plaintiff's affidavits were filed in late 1996 and the bulk of the defendants' affidavits in mid 1997.

The Notice of Motion presently before the court seeks orders under Part 72 of the rules for the reference-out of the matter for determination in its entirety by the Hon Raymond Reynolds QC, a former Judge of Appeal of this court.

Mr Drummond of counsel who appeared for the plaintiff/applicant, informs me that the matter is unlikely to be allocated a hearing date until mid 1998. The plaintiff has asked for the proposed reference to commence on 15 September , that is to say, 13 days from now, unless otherwise ordered by the
Referee.

Mr Drummond says that the plaintiff wants to get on with it; that there have been numerous indulgences afforded to the defendants which have resulted in the proceedings being more protracted than otherwise they would have been and that claims now made by the defendants for access to certain primary source documents, which are presently unavailable, have only been made since June when they could have been made much earlier.

The problem which I see with the application is that there is nothing about the case which relevantly warrants its consideration by a Referee rather than by a Judge hearing the matter in the normal course. The fact that a reference- out may result in a speedier hearing and earlier determination of the proceedings does not, to my mind, indicate that a reference-out should be ordered.

Whilst time constraints may, on some occasions, justify the use of the procedure laid down in Part 72, it does not seem to me that time constraints alone should dictate that such a course be followed.

Miss Adamson of counsel who appeared for the defendants/respondents to the motion has drawn my attention to the fact that the case will involve construction issues, evidentiary issues as to the admissibility of certain material proffered by way of proof of the tour support expenses incurred and factual issues in relation to the expenses incurred. She urges that this is not a case where it would be appropriate to have a reference where regard was not paid to the rules of evidence. She submits that it is not a case where a
Referee with specialist skills in a discipline outside the law would be able to deal with the issues which arise more efficiently and effectively than a
Judge could deal with the issues. She submits that it is not a proper case where the extra costs associated with the reference ought properly to be visited upon the parties and ultimately, the unsuccessful party. She draws attention to the procedures which would apply if the case were conducted by the court and those which would apply if a reference-out was made and a report was received where later consideration would be directed at the desirability of the adoption by the court of the report and not at other issues.

I should mention that the defendants, or some of them, have instituted proceedings in the Industrial Relations Commission seeking relief in respect of the subject contracts under section 275 of the Industrial Relations Act. As presently advised, I cannot see any reason why one set of proceedings ought to be given preference, in terms of the designated hearing date, to another. It seems to me that at the end of the day it matters not whether one action is heard before or after the other.

Another relevant consideration is the availability of evidence and witnesses if a reference-out were to be ordered at this stage. The evidence before me suggests that the principal defendant will be unavailable to participate in a reference fixed to commence in mid September. I use the expression "principal defendant" to refer to the first defendant whom Mr Drummond says is the defendant of some financial substance. That defendant, Suze de Marchi, apparently resides in Boston, Massachusetts in the United States of America and apart from professional engagements which she has in September and
October, has a young child who is only 19 months old.

The other evidentiary problem relates to the primary records which justify the claims made as to the amount expended on tour support. These records appear to be stored in the office of Imago Recording Company in New York and as yet have not been the subject of a subpoena issued by either the plaintiff or the defendants. I infer that, with the consent of the defendants, Imago Recording
Company will readily make these records available so that they can be used in the hearing of the current proceedings in this court. Even if they were produced promptly, it remains for the parties to digest same and consider their relevance to the issues in the proceedings. Until they are produced it is difficult to estimate how long it will take for competent professionals to digest and consider same but it would seem to me that the process would probably require up to two weeks consideration by people with appropriate accounting qualifications.

As I see it, Part 72 ought not to be invoked merely to allow a trial to be conducted by a former judicial officer of this court and thereby enable a speedier conclusion of the proceedings where the application for reference-out is opposed.

If, as Mr Drummond submits, the case may end up being drawn-out and tedious because of a nitpicking approach which may be adopted in relation to financial records, that on its own does not seem to me to justify a reference-out when the proposed Referee would have no reasonable likelihood of being able to dispose of the matter more expeditiously than would a judge hearing the case in the normal course. The costs of references-out are not inconsiderable insofar as they require payment of not only the Referee's fees but also charges for transcription services and not infrequently, room hire charges as well.

In my opinion, this is not a proper case for a reference-out pursuant to Part of the rules. Accordingly, I order that the notice of motion filed 21
August 1997 be dismissed.

I order the plaintiff to pay the defendants' costs of the motion.

Mr Glynn, the solicitor for the plaintiff, has sought my leave for the issue of a subpoena by the plaintiff directed to Imago Recording Company in the
United States for the production to the court of the primary records to which
I have earlier referred. It seems to me quite clear that leave ought to be granted to the plaintiff, if required, or to the defendants, if required, for the issue of a subpoena for service in the United States of America requiring the production of these records but I think it preferable for a formal grant of leave to be left for consideration by a Registrar of the court when confronted with a specific form of subpoena and affidavit in support.
 * * * 
