

S J McGee and Anor versus R Bishop [1996] NSWSC 243 (1 July 1996) 
Stephen John McGEE & ANOR versus Raymond BISHOP /95; DC152/95 July 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
CLARKE JA, HANDLEY JA, COLE JA 
CATCHWORDS:EXTENSION of time - trial judge's decision upheld.

EX TEMPORE/RESERVED:Ex tempore 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED:Dismissed 
COLE JA 
JUDGMENT 
COLE JA: This is an appeal from a decision of Judge Twigg given 7 August 1995 in which his Honour granted leave to commence proceedings under the Motor Accidents Act, although out of time.

The appeal comes to this Court pursuant to leave granted to appeal on 4
September 1995.

The principles to be considered in such an application are not in dispute and are set forth in Salido versus Nominal Defendant[1]. Judge Twigg was aware of those principles and considered the matters raised by the parties as relevant to such principles and reached a decision having regard to his perception of what was just in the circumstances.

On this appeal, it has been suggested that inadequate weight was given to two factors, namely the consequences of obtaining legal advice and the consequences of an intervening accident. I shall briefly refer to some factual matters in those two respects. The relevant accident occurred on 18 November
In December 1989, the plaintiff/respondent sought legal advice and again sought advice in January 1990. When he sought that advice, the evidence disclosed that he was not given any indication that there were time limitations concerning the bringing of a claim. However, nothing was done about the claim until about December 1992. In the intervening time according to the statutory declaration and affidavit of the plaintiff, he was under the impression the matter was being left in the hands of his solicitors and that as there were considerable delays in litigation of this type, his solicitor would, at some future time, get back to him in relation to future conduct or perhaps in relation to his obtaining a least repayment of lost wages.

In December 1992 he had a discussion with his solicitor. The content of that discussion is not at all clear. In a statutory declaration, the plaintiff respondent said: "About two years ago in 1992, I rang the solicitor and he informed me that he didn't pursue it as it wasn't worth his while. I was under the impression that he would advise me when my settlement or court date was to occur as the last time I spoke to him he had said that he was going to get my wages back. I was under the impression that I had done everything because I had left it to the solicitor. I was under the impression that this type of case took years to settle or go to court. Never at any time did the solicitor inform me of the time limits and other requirements under the Motor Accidents Act. The only thing he said other than the above was he'd get my wages back and we'd take it from there. I never heard from him further."[2] 
Those paragraphs in that statutory declaration are unclear. It is not at all clear whether the plaintiff respondent was speaking in relation to an understanding prior to December 1992 or whether he was speaking of his understanding after he had had his discussion with his solicitor in about
December 1992.

The matter was explored to some extent in cross-examination; the following evidence was given.

Q. "What were you told then?" 
A. "He said he didn't pursue the case because it wasn't worth the thought." 
Q. "And that being the fact, you decided not to do anything about it, is that the situation?" 
A. "Yes, at that time, yes because I wasn't quite sure what time limits there was on there." 
Q. "Well forgetting time limits for the moment, you decided at that time not to do anything about it, that's right isn't it?" 
A. "That's right." 
As Mr Elkaim, counsel for the appellant fairly conceded, that material is capable of two interpretations. One is that as at December 1992, the plaintiff/respondent had decided not further to proceed with this claim. The second possible interpretation is that he had decided, as at December 1992, not to proceed further with his claim at that time. If the former were the correct interpretation, then that would be a significant factor to be weighed in the exercise of discretion concerning an extension of time and would mitigate strongly against the grant of an extension of time. However, if the latter interpretation be correct, then the plaintiff's position would not be quite so bad.

The trial judge in his judgment in two passages said: "The plaintiff is very frank about his approach, very honest in his evidence and he says in his affidavit that he was aware of his rights to take proceedings. He was not aware of any time limits. He said he left the matter with his solicitor and was aware that there were long delay in actions of this kind." And later "He certainly was aware of his rights, he certainly did nothing for a long while but in my view that is not because he did not think he had a case but simply because he was leaving it for the solicitor to get back in touch with him." It seems to me that it is probable that the learned District Court Judge interpreted the material to which I have referred in cross-examination in the second of the two manners to which I have referred. If he did, then it is clear that in exercising his discretion, he took into account the circumstance that the plaintiff respondent had been guilty of significant delay in bringing the proceedings but that occurred in circumstances where he never intended to abandon his claim but to press it at some point of time but not then and that occurred in circumstances where he was unaware that there were time limits affecting his claim. If that be so, then it cannot be said that the trial judge has inappropriately neglected to take into account a material consideration, namely whether or not the plaintiff respondent had determined to abandon his claim. That being so, in my opinion, there has not been shown any error in the exercise of the judicial discretion sufficient to justify this Court, or entitle this Court, to intervene. For those reasons, in my opinion, the appeal should be dismissed with costs.

CLARKE JA: I agree.

HANDLEY JA: I also agree.

CLARKE JA: The order of the Court is that the appeal is dismissed with costs.
 [1] [(1993) 32 NSWLR 524.] [2] Appeal Book, p.25.
 * * * 
